



Network Working Group                                           A. Atlas
Internet-Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Intended status: Best Current Practice                     C. O'Flaherty
Expires: May 2, 2018                                                ISOC
                                                            H. Chowdhary
                              National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI)
                                                              S. Bradner
                                                        October 29, 2017


                 Geographically-Focused IETF Activities
                 draft-atlas-geo-focused-activities-01

Abstract

   The IETF has a variety of activities beyond those that are part of
   the standards process.  IETF activities that aren't part of the
   standards process are still quite useful for the IETF mission.  Some
   of these activities, such as IETF hackathons, tutorials, and
   mentoring, occur at in-person meetings.  There has been and continues
   to be interest in having such activities located in different
   geographical areas.

   The document defines how the IETF organizes our Geographically-
   Focused Activities.  It is intended for eventual publication as a BCP
   but this is currently an initial strawman proposal based upon the
   existing variety of experience with the experimental activities in
   this space over the past several years.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 2, 2018.






Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Organization of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities  . . .   5
     3.1.  IETF Local Communities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Repeating Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Remote Participation Hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  One-Time Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.5.  Appointment, Term of Service, and Transitions for
           Coordinators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.6.  Support for Coordinators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  IETF Policies Applied to Geographically-Focused IETF
       Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Open and Professional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Localization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Use of IETF Name and Logo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       4.3.1.  Not Official IETF Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Use of IETF Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Social Media and Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Feedback Loop: Metrics and Surveys  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     11.3.  URIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13







Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


1.  Introduction

   The IETF has a variety of activities beyond those that are part of
   the standards process [RFC2026].  IETF activities that aren't part of
   the standards process are still quite useful for the IETF mission.
   Some of these activities, such as IETF hackathons, tutorials, and
   mentoring, occur at in-person meetings.  There has been and continues
   to be interest in having such activities located in different
   geographical areas.  There is a wide variety of such activities that
   are supported by different motivations and objectives.  The following
   list is illustrative - not restrictive.

   1.   IETF Days supported by the Internet Society

   2.   View-only of a Working Group Session with IETF introduction

   3.   RFCs We Love technical talks meeting

   4.   Open physical meetings with technical talks on topics of IETF
        interest

   5.   Remote Participation Hubs

   6.   Hackathons to build IETF awareness and encourage developers
        towards practical implementations of IETF standards

   7.   Panels, seminars and tutorials at academic events, NOG meetings,
        IXP meetings etc.

   8.   Open social informal meet-ups (over lunch, dinner, etc.)

   9.   IETF Newcomers presentations at NOG meetings and other technical
        gatherings

   10.  Introductory sessions about the IETF and participation at
        workshops.

   Some of the motivations and objectives include: 1. increasing the
   awareness of the IETF's role in the Internet ecosystem, 2. providing
   feedback and exposure to potential new IETF work and providing
   mentoring and support to help authors bring that work into the IETF,
   3. outreach to encourage new potential IETF participants, 4.
   increasing IETF diversity 5. increasing cross-area learning, 6.
   strengthening professional and social connections between IETFers, 7.
   providing feedback and discussion on early work & mentoring to newer
   IETFers, 8. reducing financial barriers to low-volume new
   participants and show advantages from face-to-face interactions, 9.
   reinforcing the importance of technical generalists and multi-



Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   disciplinary leaders in fostering the sustainability, robustness,
   security, stability and development of the Internet, 10. raising the
   visibility of IETF participants to support greater impact and
   collaboration, 11. and connecting university researchers into the
   IETF community to better connect research to IETF work and broaden
   modern networking knowledge in developing regions.

   These objectives can be summed up as increasing awareness of the
   IETF, doing outreach to encourage new IETF participation, and
   increase technical discussions and cross-learning to encourage faster
   and better technical output.  These are objectives that are in the
   best interest of the IETF.

   The IETF works well when motivated people self-organize and the IETF
   can provide support and minimal oversight.  The IETF has an
   Education, Mentoring, and Outreach Directorate that provides
   oversight of outreach-related activities which are part of that
   Directorate's charter.  The members of the directorate are selected
   by the IETF Chair.

   The activities overseen by the Education, Mentoring, and Outreach
   Directorate are not part of the standards process.  An internet-draft
   author may choose to use feedback learned during such a meeting set
   up by the Education, Mentoring, and Outreach Directorate exactly as
   an author may choose to use feedback from a private conversation.

   The IETF Trust holds trademarks that are used by the IETF for our
   activities.  This document discusses how outreach activities can be
   organized and managed to the extent required not to dilute the IETF's
   name and to protect its processes.

2.  Terminology

   Geographically-Focused IETF Activity:  An IETF related Activity that
      is centered in a specific geographic area.  Examples include, b
      but are not limited to, IETF Local Communities, Remote Awareness
      Hubs, IETF Awareness Events, and Remote Participation Hubs.
      Necessary attributes are being geographically-focused and open for
      participation.

   IETF Local Community:  A persistent geographically-focused local
      group of IETF participants and those interested in IETF work.  An
      IETF Local Community may do a variety of different activities,
      including Remote Participation Hubs.  The necessary attributes are
      persistence and a focus on technical discussions related to the
      IETF.  The focus is on growing a local group of people
      participating in the IETF and strengthening the professional and
      social relationships between them to encourage collaboration.



Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   Remote Awareness Session:  An event which might focus on a speaker
      who might show a video from one or more IETF Working Group or
      Plenary sessions.  There may be additional introductory
      presentations or other activities.  Necessary attributes are focus
      on an event and viewing of a live or recorded IETF WG or Plenary
      session.  The focus is on holding an event to raise awareness of
      what happens at an IETF meeting.

   IETF Awareness Activity:  An activity where "what the IETF is and
      does" is presented to raise awareness of the IETF.  Content might
      include speakers presenting or leading discussions about the IETF,
      about IETF technical work or other technical work that might be
      related to IETF work.  Necessary attributes are focus on an
      activity and on discussing the IETF.

   Remote Participation Hub:  An activity that is connected to a
      particular IETF Working Group or Plenary session such that
      interactive participation in the session at the IETF is possible.
      Necessary attributes are focus on a specific activity and the
      potential for interactive participation in the primary session.
      All attendees register as regular remote attendees to the
      particular session via a standard IETF tool such as MeetEcho.

   Outreach Coordinators:  The individuals responsible for coordinating
      and running a Geographically-Focused IETF Activity.  These are
      recorded by the IETF Outreach lead and added to the outreach-
      coordinators mailing list.

   Local Coordinators:  For some awareness activities which are a single
      activity, those interested in organizing may serve as the Local
      Coordinators while an Outreach Coordinator, who helps with such
      events, may provide the IETF experience and support.  The Local
      Coordinator might also be the speaker at an activity.

   Repeating Activity:  An activity may be sufficiently successful in a
      particular geography so that there is interest in having it
      repeat.  This might be Remote Participation Hubs, Remote Awareness
      Sessions, or other activities.  When there is a desire and
      expectation for a series of repeating activities, then it is
      useful to have Outreach Coordinators and manage the series
      similarly to an IETF Local Community.

3.  Organization of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities

   These activities can be focused on a single activity, repeating
   activities or creating an IETF Local Community.  It's desirable to
   have at least 2 Outreach Coordinators for a Geographically-Focused
   IETF Activity.  The coordinators should be accepted by the Outreach



Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   lead and added to the outreach-coordinators mailing list.  The
   Outreach lead and recognized Outreach Coordinators form the Outreach
   Coordinators Group.  This group will regularly share experience,
   plans, and advice.  In extraordinary circumstances, the Outreach
   Coordinators Group may recommend that a local community or repeating
   activity be ended or that an Outreach Coordinator be removed from the
   list.

3.1.  IETF Local Communities

   An IETF Local Community is expected to be a persistent group with
   periodic activities.  Each IETF Local Community must have at least 1
   Outreach Coordinator.  It is recommended that a Local Community have
   at least two Outreach Coordinators to share the work of defining the
   activities and schedule and organizing to make the activities happen.

3.2.  Repeating Activities

   If successful, it is likely that some one-time activities, such as a
   Remote Participation Hub, may become repeating.  Such a stream of
   activities in a fixed geography should have at least one Coordinator
   who is part of the Outreach Coordinators Group.  This will allow the
   Coordinator to share experiences and to easily get advice.

   The Internet Society and other organizations periodically organize
   workshops across the world where one or more session is focused on
   the IETF and how to participate.  If the organizer of such a series
   of repeating sessions in one geography wishes to connect more closely
   to the IETF for support and guidance, then an Outreach Coordinator
   may be accepted for that repeating activity.  It may also be
   desirable to have one or more specific Outreach Coordinators to help
   with this type of session and the local organizers.

3.3.  Remote Participation Hubs

   A Coordinator may organize a physical location for individual
   participants to gather and participate individually in a remote
   session at the IETF.  All the individual participants should be
   registered as remote attendees to that IETF session using the usual
   IETF remote participation tools, such as MeetEcho.  Individuals will
   be subject to the normal policies that apply to remote participants
   at an IETF session.  By having individual registration, an individual
   can also participate via instant message (e.g. jabber) and chose to
   be individually added into the remote microphone queue.







Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


3.4.  One-Time Activities

   Some Geographically-Focused IETF Activities may be one-time activity.
   There still needs to be oversight and support for such activities.
   Ideally, at least one Coordinator will volunteer to provide support
   for such one-time activities.  A Geographically-Focused IETF Activity
   in a particular geography that do not yet have an Outreach
   Coordinator identified fall under the One-Time Activity Coordinators,
   even if that activity has or is repeating.  There may be a period
   where it isn't clear that the activity will continue to repeat and
   thus whether a persistent Outreach Coordinator is needed.

   The One-Time Activity Coordinators should recognize a Local
   Coordinator for any activity that the none of the One-Time Activity
   Coordinators will be attending and running.

3.5.  Appointment, Term of Service, and Transitions for Coordinators

   In general, a Coordinator should be familiar with the IETF and
   preferably be or have been an active participant.  For a new Local
   Community or a Repeating Activity, it is likely that there are good
   candidates for Coordinators.  If not, that may be a sign that the
   health of the activity is in question and more support is needed.

   It is not appropriate to assume that a Coordinator will serve for an
   infinite amount of time.  At this time, it is not clear whether a
   fixed term would be useful. at a minimum, the Outreach Lead should
   verify interest to continue every two or three years.  To ensure
   smooth transitions between Coordinators, the IETF Secretariat or
   Outreach Lead should have the ability to change ownership and
   administration of resources used by the Geographically-Focused IETF
   Activity or smoothly migrate to new resources.

3.6.  Support for Coordinators

   The Outreach Coordinators Group is one mechanism to provide support
   for Coordinators and allow them to learn from each others'
   experiences.  Different geographies may find different ideas and
   structures work better.  This also provides a way to bring up common
   administrative issues and concerns so that the Outreach Lead can
   facilitate resolving them.

4.  IETF Policies Applied to Geographically-Focused IETF Activities

   Geographically-Focused Activities are specifically NOT part of the
   IETF Standards Process.  It is not necessary to either keep and
   preserve attendance nor to show the Note Well used at normal IETF
   Working Group meetings to remind attendees of their obligations under



Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   the IETF's IPR policy.  But, that said, under IETF rules, any IPR
   that makes it into an Internet Draft or RFC must be disclosed by
   whoever suggested adding the IPR when the Internet Draft is
   published, even if the suggestion was during one of the
   Geographically-Focused Activities.

   It is recommended to request RSVPs for logistical reasons, to have a
   sign-up sheet for the associated mailing list, and optionally to
   request other participant information to understand and track how
   well an activity is doing compared to its objectives.  These records
   do not become part of the records of the IETF.

   In Geographically-Focused IETF Activities, there are likely to be
   participants new to the IETF for whom it would be useful to mention
   that the IETF does have an IPR policy and if ideas are included in an
   internet-draft, there are IPR disclosure requirements.  A common
   slide or very short write-up may be helpful to create.

4.1.  Open and Professional

   Since a purpose of the Geographically-Focused IETF Activities is
   outreach and since the IETF is open, it is expected that
   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities are open to all participants.
   Participants are expected to behave according to professional
   standards.  [RFC7154] is a BCP defining guidelines for conduct in the
   IETF; [RFC7776] defines Anti-Harassment procedures and creates an
   Ombudsteam to handle issues.  These documents can serve as references
   for Geographically-Focused IETF Activities.

4.2.  Localization

   Since Geographically-Focused IETF Activities specifically happen in
   widely varying localities, there can be language and other location-
   specific considerations.  While the IETF works only in English, there
   may be some types of events where using the local language is
   preferable.  Mailing lists for a geographically-focused IETF Activity
   MAY primarily use a local language; it is expected that the Outreach
   Coordinator will help in handling questions in English sent to the
   mailing list.  There may be other localization accommodations that
   are appropriate to consider.

4.3.  Use of IETF Name and Logo

   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities may use the IETF logo and IETF
   name, with suitable oversight.  Outreach Coordinators will be
   informed about the IETF Trust policies and basic acceptance and can
   ask questions on the associated mailing list.  In general, not using




Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   a misleading name and not modifying the IETF logo or name is
   sufficient, but specific approval by the IETF Trust is required.

4.3.1.  Not Official IETF Activities

   Even though the IETF supports and encourages the organization of
   activities aimed to increase participation, when they're not official
   IETF activities, careful care of IETF name and logo usage should be
   taken.  In order to obtain permission to use or display any IETF logo
   or name, you must first complete and send, to iad@ietf.org, the form:
   http://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF_General_TM_License.pdf [1] Please
   include a description of your activity, contact information,
   referrals inside the IETF community and any other information that
   can be used for approval.  As a general guideline, as long as you're
   not using a misleading name for your activity (avoid using names that
   can be confused with official IETF activities) and you haven't
   modified any IETF Trust logo or name, you will receive a positive
   response.

   IETF logo files can be found in the IETF site (https://ietf.org/logo/
   [2])

5.  Use of IETF Resources

   The IETF can provide resources such as mailing lists, wikis, and
   calendars.  When a new resource is needed, the Outreach Lead is
   responsible for forwarding on an appropriate request to the
   Secretariat.

   The following is a proposed structure for IETF mailing-lists to be
   used by the Geographically-Focused IETF Activities.

   1.  outreach-coordinators mailing list: This list has at least the
       Outreach Coordinators accepted by Directorate and interested
       Directorate members, but has an open archive.

   2.  ietf-hub-[geography]: For Repeating Events and IETF Local
       Communities, there is an associated mailing list.  Another
       possible name is ietf-local-[geography]; currently there are
       ietf-hub-boston and ietf-hub-bangalore.

   3.  vmeet: for discussion of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities
       as well as virtual meetings, since that is where the conversation
       has been happening.

   4.  ietf-community-[large-geography]: To coordinate across the Local
       Communities and for other Geographically-Focused IETF Activities.
       A current example is ietf-community-india.



Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   5.  outreach-discuss: For discussion of outreach activities around
       the IETF Community.

   It is useful to have a wiki that allows a persistent URI for sharing
   events, storing information about past events, and brainstorming/
   organizing new ones.  With the proposed structure where all of the
   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities are related to Outreach, a
   wiki for outreach, that can then be self-organized, is needed.  The
   top level of this wiki is currently at
   https://trac.ietf.org/trac/edu/wiki/Outreach; appropriate links and
   visibility will be needed and need to be periodically re-evaluated.

   A well-publicized on-line calendar that at least Coordinators can add
   events to is needed.  This will provide a single place to check when
   and where various activities are happening.  Given that many IETFers
   travel for business, it also makes it easy for IETFers to discover if
   there is a local activity happening that is of interest.  Events
   should also be announced to the ietf discussion list.

6.  Social Media and Communications

   Most of the current IETF communications activities are coordinated
   and accomplished by ISOC staff.  For Social media, industry media and
   other communication needs the Coordinator should contact
   comms@ietf.org for appropriate messaging.  Through ISOC's support,
   the activity will be better promoted and aligned with IETF
   expectations.  There is an ongoing revision of IASA activities that
   can affect how future IETF communications are managed.

   Once the basic requirements and a template for the communication are
   understood by Coordinators, it is expected that only unusual
   communications will need discussion.  Sharing of the information is
   still desirable so that events can be better promoted.  Coordinators
   will need to work on promoting the activities and reaching out to the
   relevant communities.

7.  Feedback Loop: Metrics and Surveys

   The breadth of objectives and activities covered by Geographically-
   focused IETF activities makes it very hard to have a single set of
   metrics or appropriate surveys.  Having geographically-focused IETF
   activities is an experiment.  It is useful to know how the various
   activities are doing and what changes or tuning might be desirable.
   There is useful information to collect from Coordinators and from
   attendees.

   Here is a list of possible questions for Coordinators.




Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   1.  What types of events are you holding?  How frequently?  What is
       the attendance?

   2.  What types of communication & outreach are you using?  What seems
       effective?

   3.  What WGs and Areas are of interest?

   4.  How could the IETF make holding events easier?

   5.  What kinds of events are you interested in holding in the future?

   6.  Would mentors or remote speakers be helpful?

   7.  What objectives do you have for your events?

   8.  What is the mixture of folks attending in terms of IETF
       experience, affiliation, technical interests, and active
       participation?

   9.  What advice would you give other Coordinators?

   Here is a list of possible questions for attendees.  Some may be
   primarily useful in IETF awareness and others primarily in IETF Local
   Communities.:

   1.   What is your knowledge of and experience with the IETF before
        attending?

   2.   Did this event meet your expectations?  Was it interesting or
        productive?  Would you attend another similar event?

   3.   What types of events would be interesting?  Technical
        discussions, social/informal discussion, remote hubs,
        hackathons, joint draft or RFC review and discussion, other?

   4.   How did you hear about the event?

   5.   Are you aware of the following ways to learn about future events
        and IETF-related activities?

   6.   What technical areas would you be interested in working on in
        the IETF?

   7.   Do you feel prepared to engage on IETF Working Group mailing
        lists and review drafts?  What type of support would help?





Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


   8.   Does your affiliation/day-job understand the benefits of
        participating in the IETF?

   9.   How might the IETF make participating easier?

   10.  What WG sessions have you attended?

   11.  What could be done better?

   12.  What IETF topics would inspire you to participate?

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no impact on IANA registries.

9.  Security Considerations

   The policies in this document provide support and oversight of
   geographically-focused IETF activities so that the IETF name and logo
   are not misrepresented.  References for expected community conduct
   are given.  These activities are not part of the standards process,
   which reduces the policies that need to apply.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Alvaro Retana, Karen O'Donoghue, John
   Levine, Dave Crocker, and John Klensin for useful discussions.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC7154]  Moonesamy, S., Ed., "IETF Guidelines for Conduct", BCP 54,
              RFC 7154, DOI 10.17487/RFC7154, March 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7154>.

   [RFC7776]  Resnick, P. and A. Farrel, "IETF Anti-Harassment
              Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 7776, DOI 10.17487/RFC7776, March
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7776>.

   [RFC8179]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Intellectual Property
              Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 79, RFC 8179,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8179, May 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8179>.







Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities     October 2017


11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, DOI 10.17487/RFC2026, October 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2026>.

11.3.  URIs

   [1] http://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF_General_TM_License.pdf

   [2] https://ietf.org/logo/

Authors' Addresses

   Alia Atlas
   Juniper Networks

   Email: akatlas@juniper.net


   Christian O'Flaherty
   ISOC

   Email: oflaherty@isoc.org


   Harish Chowdhary
   National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI)

   Email: harish@nixi.in


   Scott Bradner

   Email: sob@sobco.com
















Atlas, et al.              Expires May 2, 2018                 [Page 13]
