
Network Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                                 D. Black
Document: draft-black-newtrk-proposals-00.txt           EMC Corporation
Expires: November 2004                                     B. Carpenter
                                                                    IBM
                                                               May 2004
   
   
                Proposals for a New IETF Standards Track
   
Status of this Memo
   
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
Abstract
   
   Discussions in the IETF's "problem" working group reached consensus
   that the current IETF 3-stage standards track, as implemented, is not
   working.  This draft proposes various alternative multi-step
   standards tracks for debate in the "newtrk" working group.
   
Table of Contents
   
   1. Introduction                                                   2
   2. Some Proposals for New Standards Tracks                        3
      2.1 No More Mr. Nice Guy - make the current system work        3
      2.2 Prune                                                      4
      2.3 Slash and Burn                                             4
      2.4 Placeholder for another idea...                            5
      2.5 Snapshot                                                   5
   3. Discussion of Pros and Cons                                    5
   4. Security Considerations                                        5
   5. Acknowledgements                                               5
   6. Appendix 1: Summary of Current IETF Standards Track            5
   7. Appendix 2: Specific example of "Prune"                        8
      7.1 Alternate Standards Track Maturity Levels                  9
      7.2 Stable Snapshot                                            9
      7.3 Proposed Standard                                         10
      7.4 Internet Standard                                         12
      7.5 Minimum time in each stage.                               13
   8. Informative References                                        13
   9. Authors' Addresses                                            13
   
   
1.   Introduction
   
   By way of preamble, note that this is a discussion document and not a
   firm or fully worked out proposal. Once the "newtrk" working group
   reaches consensus on the general direction to follow, this document
   will have served its purpose and a revision or update of [RFC2026]
   will be needed.
   
   The consensus in the "problem" working group was that the current
   IETF three stage standards track, described in RFC 2026 [RFC2026] and
   summarized below in Appendix 1, is not working as originally
   intended.  The problem statement document [RFC3774] says:
   
      The current hierarchy of Proposed, Draft, and Full Standard
      maturity levels for specifications is no longer being used in the
      way that was envisioned when the stratification was originally
      proposed.  In practice, the IETF currently has a one-step
      standards process that subverts the IETF's preference for
      demonstrating effectiveness through running code in multiple
      interoperable implementations.  This compresses the process that
      previously allowed specifications to mature as experience was
      gained with actual implementations:
   
   The document then goes on to list various observations including:
   
      1/ Few documents actually progress after being published as
         Proposed Standard (PS).
   
      2/ There is a perception that the IESG raised the quality
         requirement for approval as PS beyond the intention of
         [RFC2026].
   
      3/ In spite of the raised quality requirement, running code is not
         required to achieve PS status.
   
      4/ There seems to be a reinforcing feedback loop involved: vendors
         implement and deploy PS specifications, so increasingly the
         IESG tries to make the PS documents better.
   
      [RFC3774] concludes that the three-stage process is excessive.
   
   An alternative interpretation of these observations is that a three-
   step standards process still operates, but the existing standards
   levels have been shifted upwards so that PS is no longer the initial
   step.  Vendors will often implement, and their customers deploy,
   technology based on Internet Drafts as soon as they seem to be
   stable.  Thus, Internet Drafts have, in effect, replaced PS as the
   first stage of the IETF standards process, PS has become the second
   stage, and Draft Standard (DS) the hard-to-achieve third stage.
   
   But there are significant problems with using Internet Drafts as
   standards documents.  Most importantly, Internet Drafts are not
   stable, and their actual degree of instability varies widely.
   Internet Drafts have short lifetimes with most of them being replaced
   by new versions or expiring within a few months.  If a vendor decides
   to implement from an Internet Draft they have to be sure that they
   are implementing the same version of the Internet Draft as other
   vendors with whom they want to interoperate.  Many examples show that
   this is far from being the normal case.  Also, of course, Internet
   Drafts tend to have bugs and gaps by their very nature.
   
   Objectively, over time, the IESG has raised the bar for the
   publication of Proposed Standard documents.  The current level of
   review, except for not having a requirement for interoperable
   implementations, is close to what is described for Draft Standard in
   [RFC2026]. Thus PS has, in effect, replaced DS as the second stage in
   the IETF standards process, with the first stage being an ill-defined
   choice of Internet Draft.  So few specifications are now advanced to
   final Internet Standard status that this stage has been, in practice,
   removed.  Few specifications are promoted to the level requiring
   interoperability (Draft Standard) and any revision of the IETF
   standards process should try to correct that.
   
2.   Some Proposals for New Standards Tracks
   
   This section gives a short summary of a number of possible proposals
   to resolve the above issues by tuning or changing the standards track
   process. More suggestions are welcome. The following section
   discusses pros and cons.
   
2.1   No More Mr. Nice Guy - make the current system work
   
   This proposal would confirm the intention of [RFC2026] and implement
   strict operational procedures to make it work.  This would mean:
   
      * reducing the strictness of IESG review for PS to a defined
         minimum,
      * enforcing the two year "dwell time" at PS by automatically
         demoting PS documents to Historic if no interoperability
         evidence is offered after two years or unless active work on a
         revised specification is under way, and
      * introducing a similar "dwell time" for DS to be considered for
         Internet Standard status or die (back to PS for another two
         years?).
   
   The dwell time could be adjusted from its current value of two years.
   
2.2   Prune
   
   The number of standards levels is pruned to two (we could call them
   Proposed Standard and Internet Standard). The threshold for PS would
   be roughly as today (stricter than in [RFC2026] but not requiring
   proof of interoperability). The threshold for IS would be a minimum
   period at PS, plus evidence of interoperability and reasonable
   deployment experience.
   
   This could be combined with some form of Snapshot (Section 2.5) to
   provide an initial level with better stability than an arbitrary
   Internet-Draft.
   
   Specific proposals can be found in Appendix 2 (with Snapshot) and
   [TSS] (without Snapshot, but the [WGS] Snapshot proposal is intended
   to be complementary to [TSS]).
   
2.3   Slash and Burn
   
   The number of levels is reduced to one, called Internet Standard.
   The threshold would be roughly the same as for Proposed Standard
   today (roughly what is described in [RFC2026] for Draft Standard, but
   *without* the interoperability requirement).
   
   In addition, a separate "Interoperability and Deployment Register"
   would be maintained by the IETF Secretariat. This would be a public
   record of demonstrated interoperability and deployment experience.
   Either the IESG, or better perhaps a special IETF Interoperability
   Committee, would approve the publication of such a record.  An
   Internet Standard would get a gold star when it had such a public
   record.
   
   This could be combined with some form of Snapshot (Section 2.5) to
   provide an initial level with better stability than an arbitrary
   Internet-Draft.
   
   
2.4  Placeholder for another idea ...
   
2.5  Snapshot
   
   It seems inevitable that there will be a noticeable time lag from
   when a working group believes that a specification is done until it
   gets finally published, whatever changes are made to the standards
   track. Mechanically, the processes of IETF Last Call, IESG review,
   IANA action if needed, and RFC Editor action will take time, even if
   no issues are found that need to be referred back to the WG. During
   this wait, early implementers need to know which version of the
   document to work from. Also, WGs may reach intermediate stages in
   developing a complex specification when it is useful for all trial
   implementations to be using the same version. For these two reasons,
   a snapshot mechanism has been suggested, in at least two variants:
   
   a) Working Group Snapshot. In this model WGs are authorized to
      declare (by WG rough consensus) that a particular draft is a WG
      Snapshot.  No IESG or even Area Director approval would be
      required - this would be a simple statement to the world that the
      WG has declared a snapshot, along with a statement of the purpose
      for which the snapshot was declared. As far as implementers are
      concerned, 'caveat emptor' applies. The only procedural issue is
      that an Internet Draft that has been declared a WG Snapshot could
      get a life extension beyond the normal six months, even if a later
      version number is published.  A specific proposal is in [WGS].
   
   b) IETF Stable Snapshot. Similar, but AD or IESG approval is
      required.  A lightweight cross-area technical review (lighter
      than [RFC2026] intended even for PS) would be made.  A specific
      proposal is in Appendix 2.
   
   There are a variety of options in the possible level (depth and cross-
   area breadth) of technical review that could be part of declaring a
   Snapshot; the required level could vary based on the stated purpose
   of the snapshot.
   
   None of the current Snapshot proposals contain new measures for
   retiring snapshots.  It is unclear whether allowing Snapshots to
   expire (as Internet Drafts do) is an effective impetus for
   implementers to move on to a subsequent stable version (which may
   contain significant technical improvements).  Higher levels of
   approval (e.g., IESG) for a Snapshot may make this more difficult to
   accomplish.
   
3.   Discussion of Pros and Cons
   
   This section will be filled in after initial discussion on the
   working group mailing list.
   
4.   Security Considerations
   
   This document relates to IETF process, not any particular technology,
   thus it raises no particular security concerns.
   
5.   Acknowledgements
   
   Substantial text was taken directly from an earlier draft by Scott
   Bradner. Ideas were lifted from mailing list discussions. Comments
   and contributions were made by <your name could be here>.
   
6.   Appendix 1: Summary of Current IETF Standards Track
   
   Section 4.1 [RFC2026] defines the stages on the IETF standards track
   as follows:
   
   4.1 Standards Track Maturity Levels
   
      Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
      and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these
      stages are formally labeled "maturity levels".
   
   
      This section describes the maturity levels and the expected
      characteristics of specifications at each level.
   
   4.1.1 Proposed Standard
   
      The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
      Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
      specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
      level.
   
      A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has
      resolved known design choices, is believed to be well-understood,
      has received significant community review, and appears to enjoy
      enough community interest to be considered valuable.  However,
      further experience might result in a change or even retraction of
      the specification before it advances.
   
      Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
      required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
      Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
      usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed
      Standard designation.
   
      The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
      prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
      materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
      behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
      Internet.
   
      A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
      respect to the requirements placed upon it.  However, the IESG may
      waive this requirement in order to allow a specification to
      advance to the Proposed Standard state when it is considered to be
      useful and necessary (and timely) even with known technical
      omissions.
   
      Implementors should treat Proposed Standards as immature
      specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to
      gain experience and to validate, test, and clarify the
      specification.  However, since the content of Proposed Standards
      may be changed if problems are found or better solutions are
      identified, deploying implementations of such standards into a
      disruption-sensitive environment is not recommended.
   
   4.1.2 Draft Standard
   
      A specification from which at least two independent and
      interoperable implementations from different code bases have been
      developed, and for which sufficient successful operational
      experience has been obtained, may be elevated to the "Draft
      Standard" level.  For the purposes of this section
      "interoperable" means to be functionally equivalent or
      interchangeable components of the system or process in which they
      are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology is
      required for implementation, the separate implementations must
      also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing
      process.  Elevation to Draft Standard is a major advance in
      status, indicating a strong belief that the specification is
      mature and will be useful.
   
      The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
      implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
      specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
      have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
      implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft
      Standard level only if those options or features are removed.
   
      The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the
      specific implementations which qualify the specification for Draft
      or Internet Standard status along with documentation about testing
      of the interoperation of these implementations.  The documentation
      must include information about the support of each of the
      individual options and features.  This documentation should be
      submitted to the Area Director with the protocol action request.
   
      A Draft Standard must be well-understood and known to be quite
      stable, both in its semantics and as a basis for developing an
      implementation.  A Draft Standard may still require additional or
      more widespread field experience, since it is possible for
      implementations based on Draft Standard specifications to
      demonstrate unforeseen behavior when subjected to large-scale use
      in production environments.
   
      A Draft Standard is normally considered to be a final
      specification, and changes are likely to be made only to solve
      specific problems encountered.  In most circumstances, it is
      reasonable for vendors to deploy implementations of Draft
      Standards into a disruption sensitive environment.
   
   
   4.1.3 Internet Standard
   
      A specification for which significant implementation and
      successful operational experience has been obtained may be
      elevated to the Internet Standard level.  An Internet Standard
      (which may simply be referred to as a Standard) is characterized
      by a high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held
      belief that the specified protocol or service provides significant
      benefit to the Internet community.
   
      A specification that reaches the status of Standard is assigned a
      number in the STD series while retaining its RFC number.
   
7.   Appendix 2: Specific example of "Prune"
   
   Scott Bradner originally proposed this alternate IETF standards track
   with a new stage inserted before Proposed Standard, combining Draft
   Standard and Internet Standard and retaining Proposed Standard as it
   has evolved over the years.
   
   Part of the problem we have been seeing with getting timely
   publication of IETF specifications is that once people start
   implementing the technology it often seems counterproductive to
   dedicate effort to finishing off the documents.  If implementations
   of Internet Drafts achieve success in the marketplace, as they did
   with MPLS, it may seem that it is not worth spending time tweaking
   successive generations of Internet Drafts in order to get something
   the IESG is willing to publish as a Proposed Standard then, if that
   achieves widespread success in the market, fiddle with the document
   again and do the bookkeeping needed to get it published as a Draft
   Standard.  The prerequisites for getting something published as an
   Internet Standard seem to many people to be fuzzy at best.  In
   addition, the current standards track steps did not do much to
   encourage early implementations, which are the best way to check to
   see that a specification is clear enough for implementers to use.
   This alternate set of stages tries to encourage vendors to implement
   specifications and the comments with the descriptions of each stage
   attempt to provide guidance for the IESG in implementing reviews for
   each stage.
   
   RFC 2026 would have to be revised in order to put any change of this
   type into effect.  That could be done by replacing RFC 2026 itself
   with a whole new document or by writing a short document that updates
   the standards track part of RFC 2026.
   
   
7.1   Alternate Standards Track Maturity Levels
   
   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "maturity levels".
   
   This section describes a set of alternate maturity levels and the
   expected characteristics of specifications at each level.
   
7.2   Stable Snapshot
   
   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Stable
   Snapshot".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Stable Snapshot"
   level.
   
   A Stable Snapshot specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it advances.
   
   A Stable Snapshot should have no unknown technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  Any such omissions must
   be noted in the document.  No such omission can endanger the security
   or stability of the Internet or of networks where the technology
   might be used.
   
   Implementers should treat Stable Snapshots as immature, pre-standard,
   specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
   experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
   However, since the content of Stable Snapshots will be changed if
   problems are found or better solutions are identified, and will be
   changed as the technology is finalized, deploying implementations of
   such technologies into a disruption-sensitive environment is not
   recommended.
   
      Commentary:
   
      This stage is designed to institutionalize and encourage the
      current practice of vendors implementing from Internet Drafts
      while providing a way that a working group can indicate that
      they feel that a technology is stable enough to be so implemented
      and to provide a long-lived, unlike Internet Drafts, snapshot that
      the vendors can implement.  Having vendors implement technology is
      an important quality check and meets the "running code"
      requirement of our motto.  We want to encourage implementations
      whenever we can but this does need to be balanced with some level
      of maturity and stability of the    protocol.
   
      This is almost the same definition as RFC 2026 has for Proposed
      Standard.  The major difference is that some of the technical
      requirements might not have yet been met.  This is OK as long as
      any such holes in the specification are carefully noted in the
      document, except that there needs to be a complete enough security
      component so as to not endanger the networks where the technology
      is to be used, and that the technology not endanger the wellbeing
      of the network it will be run on.  The exact guidelines for
      the level of security required for a Stable Snapshot will evolve
      over time.
   
   
      In reviewing an Internet Draft for publication as a Stable
      Snapshot the IESG only needs to be sure that the working group has
      a reason to think that the technology is at a mature enough level
      that implementers can start to play with it and that the minimum
      security and 'health of the net' requirements have been met.  The
      IESG should not try to ensure that the text is clear and
      unambiguous, the vendors will find that out while implementing and
      provide feedback to the working group. The IESG should not do a
      careful technology review as a precondition for publication as a
      Stable Snapshot.  This process should be lightweight, not taking
      too much time on the part of the IESG or effort on the part of the
      working group and authors.
   
      The name, "Stable Snapshot" was chosen to clearly indicate that
      this is a pre-standard stage and to ensure that marketing people
      cannot easily misrepresent the status but there may be a better
      name that accomplishes the same goals.
   
7.3   Proposed Standard
   
   A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.
   
   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.
   
   Generally some documented level of implementation and/or operational
   experience is required prior to granting Proposed Standard status.
   However, the IESG may waive this requirement in order to allow a
   specification to advance to the Proposed Standard state when it is
   considered to be useful and necessary (and timely) even without any
   known implementations.
   
   A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.
   
   Implementers should treat Proposed Standards as stable, but perhaps
   not final, specifications.  A Proposed Standard must be well-
   understood and known to be quite stable, both in its semantics and as
   a basis for developing an implementation.  A Proposed Standard may
   still require additional or more widespread field experience, since
   it is possible for implementations based on Proposed Standard
   specifications to demonstrate unforeseen behavior when subjected to
   large-scale use in production environments.
   
      Commentary:
   
      The requirements for publication as a Proposed Standard are mostly
      the same as currently in RFC 2026 for Proposed Standard with the
      addition of a requirement for at least some implementation
      experience.
   
      The IESG review for Proposed Standard could stay just like it is.
      The IESG should do the same careful technical review and a review
      to ensure that the language of the document is clear and precise
      as it has been doing for quite a while.
   
      Because most specifications for which publication as a Proposed
      Standard is requested will have been implemented I would expect
      that the IESG review will generally take less effort since the
      implementers experience will have uncovered unclear language and
      some or all technical issues, at least for the parts of the
      specification that had been implemented.
   
      There should be some documentation to show that there has been at
      least one implementation of a specification before the IESG
      authorizes the publication of the specification as a Proposed
      Standard.  But the documentation does not need to be so detailed
      that it shows which individual options have been implemented.  A
      list of the names of people or companies who have said they had
      implemented the specification should be sufficient.
   
      Before adoption of a new description of Proposed Standard the IPR-
      related aspects should be revisited in list of the work in the IPR
      working group but I have not done that here.
   
   
7.4   Internet Standard
   
   A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations from different code bases have been developed, and
   for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
   obtained, may be elevated to the "Internet Standard" level.  For the
   purposes of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally
   equivalent or interchangeable components of the system or process in
   which they are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology
   is required for implementation, the separate implementations must
   also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.
   Elevation to Internet Standard is a major advance in status,
   indicating a strong belief that the specification is mature and will
   be useful.
   
   The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to the Internet
   Standard level only if those options or features are removed.
   
   The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the specific
   implementations which qualify the specification for Draft or Internet
   Standard status along with documentation about testing of the
   interoperation of these implementations.  The documentation must
   include information about the support of each of the individual
   options and features.  This documentation should be submitted to the
   Area Director with the protocol action request.
   
   A Internet Standard (which may simply be referred to as a Standard)
   must be well-understood and known to be stable, both in its semantics
   and as a basis for developing an implementation.  An Internet
   Standard is characterized by a high degree of technical maturity and
   by a generally held belief that the specified protocol or service
   provides significant benefit to the Internet community.
   
   An Internet Standard is considered to be a final specification, and
   changes should only be made to solve specific problems encountered.
   
   
      Commentary:
   
      The description here is a combination of the descriptions of Draft
      Standard and Internet Standard in RFC 2026.
   
      One issue we have had over the years is just what does a working
      group chair have to do to show multiple implementations of the
      base specification and all of the features.  I have always felt
      that a simple spread sheet showing each feature, how many vendors
      claim to have the feature, and a checkbox to indicate that two or
      more vendors claim that they have tested implementations of the
      feature, would be just fine.  But this turns out to be quite
      complex in some cases (see the Implementer's report for http 1.1
      as an example).  It is not cleare if this turns out to be actually
      too much of an effort or just seems like too much of an effort.
      It still seems like about the right thing but the barrier to
      reach Internet Standard should be just as high as it needs to be
      but no higher.
   
   
      Since, in reality, there was little difference between the
      requirements in RFC 2026 for Draft Standard and Internet Standard,
      mostly a need to show market acceptance in some way, there seems
      to be no technical reason to preserve the different labels.
   
7.5   Minimum time in each stage.
   
   It seems that there needs to be a minimum time that a document must
   sit at a stage before it can move onward (as is the case in RFC 2026)
   just to be sure that any problems are uncovered.
   
   It is unclear how to figure out the ideal time so it is suggested
   that 6 months would be enough (as long as the rest of the
   requirements for the next level have been met).
   
   
8.   Informative References
   
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S. Ed., "The Internet Standards Process --
      Revision 3," October 1996, RFC 2026
   
   [RFC3774] Davies, E. Ed., "IETF Problem Statement," May 2004,
      RFC 3774
   
   [TSS] Dawkins, S., et. al., "Two Stage Standardization," work in
      progress, draft-dawkins-pstmt-twostage-02.txt
   
   [WGS] Dawkins, S., et al, "Working Group Snapshot (WGS)," work in
      progress, draft-dawkins-newtrk-wgs-00.txt
   
   
9.   Authors' Addresses
   
   
      David Black
      EMC Corporation
      176 South Street
      Hopkinton, MA 01748
      Email: black_david@emc.com
   
      Brian E. Carpenter
      IBM Zurich Research Laboratory
      Saeumerstrasse 4 / Postfach
      8803 Rueschlikon
      Switzerland
      Email: brc@zurich.ibm.com
Intellectual Property Statement
   
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.
   
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
   
Disclaimer of Validity
   
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
   
Copyright Statement
   
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.
   
Acknowledgment
   
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.
   

