


Network Working Group                                        B. Sarikaya
Internet-Draft                                                    F. Xia
Expires: December 5, 2008                                     Huawei USA
                                                            June 3, 2008


           Proxy Mobile IPv6 Inter-Technology Handover Issue
                     draft-sarikaya-netlmm-itho-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 5, 2008.


















Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


Abstract

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) is a mobile node agnostic mobility
   management protocol, that is, a mobile node does not take part in any
   mobility signaling.  In inter-technology handovers, mobile node input
   is required in moving IP sessions from one interface to the other.
   This document discusses the impact of the mobile node involvement
   during inter-technology handover.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Proposed Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Multi-homing Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10


























Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


1.  Introduction

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 [I-D.ietf-netlmm-proxymip6] supports multi-homing
   and therefore enables inter-technology handovers.  Prefixes assigned
   to the mobile node (MN) on one interface can be transferred to the
   other interface thus achieving session continuity is only possible if
   the new Mobile Access Gateway (MAG) sets the handoff indicator (HI)
   parameter in the Proxy Binding Update (PBU) correctly.  So far two
   approaches have been proposed in order to help MAG set the parameter
   correctly: MAG gets the link layer support during handover and MN
   directly signals its willingness to move its sessions to the new
   interface.  However there are concerns that MN signaling which is
   needed for MAG to do this contradicts PMIPv6 design principle of no
   MN involvement.

   Link layer support proposals include using the same interface
   identifier in [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if] and handover extensions to
   PMIPv6, e.g. using Fast Mobile IPv6 in [I-D.yokota-mipshop-pfmipv6].

   [I-D.premec-netlmm-intertech-handover] proposes a solution for MN
   signaling to enable session continuity in inter-technology handovers.

   [I-D.soliman-netlmm-harmful] states that the use of one technology
   over the other is a policy decision and MN should make such a
   decision.  Since PMIPv6 singles out any MN involvement, PMIPv6 can
   not help MN to use the different technologies properly.

   Issues related to supporting IPv4
   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-pmip6-ipv4-support] during inter-technology handover
   are discussed in [I-D.premec-netlmm-intertech-handover].


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The terminology in this document is based on the definitions in
   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-proxymip6], in addition to the ones specified in
   this section:

   Single-Radio MN:  Consider MN with two interfaces.  These interfaces
      are implemented in such a way that MN can keep one radio module on
      at a given time.






Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


   Dual/multiple-Radio MN:  Consider MN with two interfaces.  These
      interfaces are implemented in such a way that both radio modules
      can receive and transmit simultaneously.
   Inter-technology handover:  Sometimes called vertical handover.  A
      multi-homed MN communicates with one interface at any time to
      conserve power.  Each interface can support different access
      technology.  Inter-technology handover occurs when MN moves out of
      coverage of one technology and moves into the coverage area of
      another technology which will result in switching of the
      communicating interface on MN [I-D.irtf-mobopts-mpa-framework].


3.  Problem Statement

   When MN does an inter-technology handover, the new MAG sends a Proxy
   Binding Update (PBU) message to the local mobility anchor (LMA) to
   register the new care-of address.  In the PBU, MAG sets the access
   technology type (ATT) and handoff indicator (HI) values.  If ATT is
   different from the one stored in the existing binding cache entry for
   this MN and if HI is set to 2 (Handoff between two different
   interfaces of the mobile node), LMA concludes that an inter-
   technology handover happened and assigns the same home network
   prefix(es) to MN which enables IP session continuity.

   Setting the access technology type correctly might prove easier for
   MAGs that are connected to a single technology.  Currently this could
   be the most popular case.  However with the advent of fixed mobile
   convergence this is likely to change.  MAGs in the future are
   expected to serve more than one access technologies.

   Setting the handoff indicator correctly is also not so easy.  Most
   MAGs would tend to set HI to 1 (Attachment over a new interface)
   which would result in LMA setting new prefix(es) to MN.


4.  Proposed Solutions

   There are two categories of solutions: link layer input and MN input.

   One of the link layer based solutions suggests using the same
   interface identifier, i.e.  MAC address on the new interface.
   Previous MAG (PMAG) can then send MN's interface identifier to the
   new MAG using context transfer.  Also the access technology type
   could be sent by the previous MAG.  This together with the access
   technology type being different enables the new MAG to conclude that
   MN is capable and has intention to move its IP sessions to the new
   interface.  NMAG then sets the parameters correctly enabling IP
   session continuity [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if].



Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


   Using the same interface identifier on a different interface means
   changing the MAC address of that interface.  MAC addresses in some
   technologies like WiMAX [802.16e] are tied to certificates and thus
   can not be changed.

   In [I-D.yokota-mipshop-pfmipv6], the new MAG (NMAG) can receive MN
   interface identification (IID) information and based on the values
   received NMAG sets correctly the handoff indicator parameter.  Fast
   Mobile IPv6 allows MAGs to receive link layer data about the MN
   during handoff from the access nodes (AN) such as base stations.
   NMAG receives MN IID on the new interface.
   [I-D.yokota-mipshop-pfmipv6] defines context transfer from PMAG to
   NMAG which includes MN IID of the previous interface.  This value is
   compared with IID value received of the new interface and set HI
   value to 2 if the two values are different.

   The values could be different but MN may be connecting simultaneously
   to another network.  This case is detected by NMAG if there was no
   context transfer because no handoff happened.  In this case NMAG sets
   HI to 1.  This scenario is valid for a dual-radio MN.

   This link layer input based solution does not require any changes on
   the link layer addresses.  However an additional handover protocol
   needs to be used in order for MAGs to receive the link layer data for
   MNs during handover.  The use of a different handover protocol could
   invalidate the solution.

   MN input based solution is proposed in
   [I-D.premec-netlmm-intertech-handover].  Router solicitation (RS)
   message is modified to include two bits, C flag which is set by MN to
   indicate that MN is capable of performing itw own mobility management
   and P flag which is set by MN to indicate that MN is willing to move
   its IP sessions accross interfaces.

   MAG first waits until it receives an RS message from MN and then
   sends an initial PBU message.  If P flag is set in RS, MAG will set
   HI to 2.  This will result in LMA assigning the same prefix(es) to MN
   which are returned in PBA.  MAG will advertise the same prefix(es) in
   its router advertisement message to MN.  MN will move its IP sessions
   to the new interface.

   MN input-based solution is better than link layer input based
   solutions because MAG knows what MN wants and acts accordingly.
   However the requirement for MN input defeats the purpose of PMIPv6
   which is a mobility solution that does not involve MN in any mobility
   signaling.  Also the solution is based on a single bit input from MN.
   As discussed later in Section 5 such a simple input is hardly enough
   for MN to convey its needs in case of multi-homing.



Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


5.  Multi-homing Issues

   Multiple/dual radio MNs require simultaneous operations of radios
   which is more complex than single-radio operation.  When the radio
   frequencies are close to each other single-radio could be the only
   mode of operation due to the interference.  However in other cases
   multiple/dual mode of operation increases MN's capabilities to
   communicate.

   For single-radio MNs or when the coverage of two radios is not
   overlapping the inter-technology handover is simpler to handle.  It
   is clear that IP sessions need to be moved to the new interface.

   [I-D.soliman-netlmm-harmful] points out several deficiences of netlmm
   (in this document called PMIPv6) in case of multiple/dual radio
   operation.

   If the networks are operated by different companies, i.e. inter-
   domain handover and both networks support PMIPv6 then in case of
   inter-technology handover the current network will try to keep IP
   sessions rather than moving them to the next network.  In case of
   link layer input solutions discussed in Section 4 PMAG can simply
   refuse to context transfer the required interface identifier and
   access technology type information to NMAG.  Only MN input can enable
   NMAG to move IP sessions to the new interface.

   For multiple/dual radio MNs, inter-technology handover brings the
   possibility of partially moving IP sessions to each interface even in
   intra-domain handover where the networks are operated by the same
   company.  MN should be able to use different links for different
   applications depending on link quality/capabilities.  Recent work,
   e.g.  [I-D.ietf-monami6-multiplecoa] and [I-D.ietf-mext-flow-binding]
   shows how this can be done.  The main component of these solutions is
   that MN input is required which is singled out in PMIPv6.

   For multiple/dual radio MNs, in inter-technology handover the use of
   one interface or the other becomes a policy decision.  Leaving this
   decision to MN is the right thing to do because MN knows the
   applications that it wants to run and MN can best decide which link
   layer is best to run each application.  Using PMIPv6, such a
   possibility would totally disappear.

   PMIPv6 protocol operation will not encounter any difficulties if MN
   has a single interface or if MN is single-radio and the coverage of
   different radios is not overlapping.  For multiple/dual mode MNs it
   is better to use host mobility protocols [RFC3775] in order to fully
   utilize its interface capabilities to run the applications and manage
   the flows by itself.  Using PMIPv6 even if MN input is allowed, the



Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


   amount of data that can be passed to MAG will be very limited.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document is informational and does not define any new messages.
   PMIPv6 security procedures apply.


7.  IANA considerations

   None.


8.  Acknowledgements

   TBD.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-proxymip6]
              Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6",
              draft-ietf-netlmm-proxymip6-18 (work in progress),
              May 2008.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [I-D.yokota-mipshop-pfmipv6]
              Yokota, H., Chowdhury, K., Koodli, R., Patil, B., and F.
              Xia, "Fast Handovers for PMIPv6",
              draft-yokota-mipshop-pfmipv6-02 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if]
              Laganier, J., Narayanan, S., and P. McCann, "Interface
              between a Proxy MIPv6 Mobility Access Gateway and a Mobile
              Node", draft-ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if-03 (work in progress),



Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


              February 2008.

   [I-D.premec-netlmm-intertech-handover]
              Premec, D. and T. Savolainen, "Inter-technology handover
              in netlmm domain",
              draft-premec-netlmm-intertech-handover-00 (work in
              progress), April 2008.

   [I-D.irtf-mobopts-mpa-framework]
              Dutta, A., Fajardo, V., Ohba, Y., Taniuchi, K., and H.
              Schulzrinne, "A Framework of Media-Independent Pre-
              Authentication (MPA) for Inter- domain  Handover
              Optimization", draft-irtf-mobopts-mpa-framework-02 (work
              in progress), February 2008.

   [I-D.soliman-netlmm-harmful]
              Soliman, H., "Network-based mobility considered harmful",
              draft-soliman-netlmm-harmful-00 (work in progress),
              May 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-monami6-multiplecoa]
              Wakikawa, R., Devarapalli, V., Ernst, T., and K. Nagami,
              "Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration",
              draft-ietf-monami6-multiplecoa-08 (work in progress),
              May 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-mext-flow-binding]
              Soliman, H., Montavont, N., Fikouras, N., and K.
              Kuladinithi, "Flow Bindings in Mobile IPv6 and Nemo Basic
              Support", draft-ietf-mext-flow-binding-00 (work in
              progress), May 2008.

   [802.16e]  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer,
              "Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers
              for Combined Fixed  and Mobile Operation in Licensed
              Bands",  IEEE 802.16e/D12.

9.2.  Informative references

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-pmip6-ipv4-support]
              Wakikawa, R. and S. Gundavelli, "IPv4 Support for Proxy
              Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-netlmm-pmip6-ipv4-support-03
              (work in progress), May 2008.








Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Behcet Sarikaya
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 500
   Plano, TX  75075

   Phone: +1 972-509-5599
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org


   Frank Xia
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 500
   Plano, TX  75075

   Phone: +1 972-509-5599
   Email: xiayangsong@huawei.com

































Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       PMIP Inter-Technology Handovers           June 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Sarikaya & Xia          Expires December 5, 2008               [Page 10]


