 



OPS Area                                                         L. Deng
INTERNET-DRAFT                                              China Mobile
Intended Status: Informational                                  R. Huang
Expires: September 22, 2016                                       Huawei
                                                                 S. Duan
                                                                    CATR
                                                          March 21, 2016


     Problem Statement and Use-cases for Collaborative Measurements
                  draft-deng-lmap-ps-collaboration-00

Abstract

   This document presents the problem statement and use-cases for cross
   domain collaborative measurement practices, where multiple autonomous
   measurement systems collaborate together in performing various
   connectivity or performance measurements to help with QoE enhancement
   by ICPs, network performance monitory to guide ISP/Regulator
   coordination between autonomous network domains and/or regulatory
   policies and cross-boundary troubleshooting for complaints from end
   consumers.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1 IPPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2 LMAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3 Gap Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3 Motivations for Collaborative Cross-Domain Measurements  . . . .  7
   4 Use-cases for Collaborative Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1 Use-cases for Regulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.1.1 within a regulator's own region  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.1.2 peering performance between ISPs . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2 Use-cases for the ISP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.2.1 measurements within a single domain  . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.2.2 measurements for multi-domain ISP networks . . . . . . . 10
     4.3 Use-cases for the ICP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.3.1 QoE-oriented performance enhancement . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.3.2 Trouble-shooting initiated by end consumers  . . . . . . 11
   5 Derived Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     10.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15









 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


1  Problem Statement

1.1 IPPM

   The IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) Working Group develops and
   maintains standard metrics that can be applied to the quality,
   performance, and reliability of Internet data delivery services and
   applications running over transport layer protocols (e.g. TCP, UDP)
   over IP. 

   It also develops and maintains protocols for the measurement of these
   metrics. These metrics are designed such that they can be used by
   network operators, end users, or independent testing groups. 

   The WG will seek to develop new metrics and models to more accurately
   characterize the network paths under test and/or the performance of
   transport and application layer protocols on these paths. 

   However,  Specifying network or lower layer OAM mechanisms, including
   measurement task management and result aggregation, is out of scope
   of the IPPM charter.

1.2 LMAP 

   With the rapid development of Internet technology and the increasing
   complexity of broadband network architecture, it is becoming
   difficult to do large scale network measurements due to the lack of
   the unified measurement system and cooperative protocols. Therefore,
   the Large-Scale Measurement of Broadband Performance (LMAP) working
   group is formed to standardize a large scale measurement system for
   the performance measurements of all kinds of broadband access
   methods.

   There are 3 types of entities proposed in the LMAP architecture: [I-
   D.ietf-lmap-framework]

   o  Measurement Agents (MAs), implemented in network to perform
   measurement tasks; 

   o  Controller, responsible for creating and assigning the measurement
   tasks; and 

   o  Collector, in charge of collecting and storing measurement
   results.


   LMAP's current focus is to specify the information model, the
   associated data models, the control protocol for the secure
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   communication between Controller and MA, and the report protocol for
   the secure communication between MA and Collector.

1.3 Gap Analysis 

   For a large network, collaboration between multiple Controllers may
   also be needed for performing local measurement tasks, either because
   there is a practical limit on the number of MAs a single Controller
   can manage simultaneously for scalability considerations, because
   that a local task may involve multiple MAs that are speaking
   different languages (i.e. different control/report protocols), or
   because different organizations want to interconnect their
   measurement systems.

   Current LMAP protocols are designed under the following assumptions. 

   o  All the involved entities are under the control of a single
   organization.

   o  An MA can only be controlled by a single controller at any given
   time.

   o  There is no communication between Controllers, between Collectors,
   or between a Controller and a Collector. 

   However, cross-organization collaborations are increasingly common.
   For example, accurate troubleshooting for mobile services usually
   involves two or more organizations, and end-to-end performance
   measurement may be conducted across multiple ISPs. 


                                                       +---------+ 
                                                      1|         |
                +--------------------------------------+-----+   |
                | Cross-Domain Measurement Management System <---+
                +--------------------+-----------------------+  1..n
                                    1|
                                     | 1..n
                +--------------------v-----------------------+
                | Local Measurement Management System (LMMS) |
                +--------------------+-----------------------+  
                                    1|
                                     | 1..n
                        +------------v--------------+
                        |   Management Entity (ME)  |
                        +---------------------------+     

                Figure 1 Collaborative Measurement Architecture
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   As shown in the above figure, it is straight-forward to use a multi-
   level management architecture here, in which the bottom level uses
   single-domain measurement systems, e.g. LMAP, for coordinating and
   managing local measurement tasks, and the upper level uses a cross-
   domain management system for initiating and orchestrating global
   measurement tasks.  

   In the following, this document first discusses the use-cases,for
   collaborative measurement practices, where multiple autonomous
   measurement systems collaborate together to help with QoE enhancement
   by ICPs, network performance monitoring to guide planning for network
   infrastructure and cross-boundary troubleshooting for SLA complaints
   from end consumers, as well as performing regulatory supervision by
   national regulators; and further summarizes requirements and security
   considerations for global measurement system.

2  Terminology 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   The following acronyms are used extensively in this document.

   o ICP, Internet Content Provider.

   o QoE, Quality of Experience.

   o QoS, Quality of Service.

   o ISP, Internet Service Provider, or shortly Operator.

   o SLA, Service Level Agreement.

   o UE, User Equipment.

   o MAN, Metro Area Network.

   o WAN, Wide Area Network.

   o ME, Measurement Entity (as defined later in this section).

   o LMMS, Local Measurement Management System (as defined later in this
   section).

   o MD, Measurement Domain (as defined later in this section).

   The following definitions are borrowed from LMAP framework [I-D.ietf-
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   lmap-framework], and used to describe the corresponding entities
   within a participating LMAP system.

   o Controller: A function that provides a Measurement Agent with its  
   Instruction.


   o Collector: A function that receives a Report from a Measurement  
   Agent.

   o Measurement Agent (MA): The function that receives Instruction
   Messages from a Controller and operates the Instruction by executing 
    Measurement Tasks (using protocols outside the initial LMAP work  
   scope and perhaps in concert with one or more other Measurement  
   Agents or Measurement Peers) and (if part of the Instruction) by  
   reporting Measurement Results to a Collector or Collectors. 


   o Measurement Method: The process for assessing the value of a
   Metric; the process of measuring some performance or reliability
   parameter associated with the transfer of traffic.

   o Measurement Task: The action performed by a particular Measurement
   Agent that consists of the single assessment of a Metric through
   operation of a Measurement Method role at a particular time, with all
   of the role's Input Parameters set to specific values.

   o Measurement Result: The output of a single Measurement Task (the
   value obtained for the parameter of interest or Metric).

   o Metric: The quantity related to the performance and reliability of 
    the network that we'd like to know the value of.


   The following definitions are used in this document to describe
   corresponding entities for a collaborative performance measurement
   among multiple measurement systems.

   o Region, a geographical area or administrative domain under the
   regulation of a single regulator.

   o Domain, a collection of network devices and their interconnections
   under the operation of a single administrative entity.

   o LMMS, Local Measurement Management System, the collection of
   entities, residing in a participating domain, in charge of local
   measurement tasks management and result aggregation. For example, the
   Controller, the Collector and the group of lcoal MAs form the LMMS
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   for a domain using LMAP for local measurement management.

   o Measurement domain: One Measurement domain is equal to one local
   measurement system, e.g. a LMAP system as specified in [i.d-ietf-
   lmap-framework], where all the measurement entities (e.g. MAs) are
   controlled by a single controlling entity (e.g. LMAP controller).

   o ME, Measurement Entity, the entity, residing in a participating
   domain,  executes Measurement Tasks and reports Measurement Results
   as instructed by the local Measurement Managing System. For example,
   an MA is an instantiation of an ME, in a participating domain using
   LMAP for local measurement management. 




3 Motivations for Collaborative Cross-Domain Measurements

   End-to-end performance measurement and trouble-shooting are important
   for multiple parties, including: (1) Internet Service Providers, in
   solving end user's QoE issues by better managing and optimizing their
   networks, (2) Internet Content Providers, for enhance its service
   logic and application design, (3) regulators in examining the status
   of and guiding future regulation.

   From ISP's perspective, the importance of supporting measurement
   system (e.g LMAP) for its own network construction and operation is
   without doubt. But taken into account the potential impact of
   introducing third-party measurement entities (e.g. LMAP MAs) into key
   network entities, a sensible ISP would prefer to build its own local
   measurement (e.g. LMAP) system based on measurement entities (e.g.
   MAs) embedded into its local network devices.

   It is hence expected that the majority of end-to-end performance
   measurements will be conducted in a collaborative manner involving
   multiple autonomous measurement systems, for the following reasons:

   On one hand, for the regulator, in order to stimulate network
   development, it is necessary to have a clear picture of ISPs' peering
   performance for interconnection points in addition to their own local
   network construction. Considering the prohibitive cost of a unified
   third-party deployment for measurement entities (e.g. LMAP MAs) at
   various peering links among ISPs for a large geographic area, it may
   be more practical to make use of ISPs' autonomous LMAP systems for
   collaboration.


   Let us take the example in China for instance. China's networks are
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   complex, with more than 31 provinces and 300 regions come to
   hierarchical networks deployments. There are 3 ISP giants (CMCC,
   CTCC, CUCC) in mainland China, managing nationwide hierarchical
   networks, each is consisted of 3-4 national center points for
   interconnecting on the top, more than 30 provincial backbone networks
   in the middle, and more than 300 regions' local networks on the
   bottom. In other words, the national regulator must know the network
   status of the 3 networks in each region of a province, of a province,
   and finally the whole country. It would be prohibitive for the
   national regulator authority, MIIT to deploy its own dedicated probes
   nationwide(900+).

   Furthermore, regulators in different countries may want to
   interconnect their measurement systems to perform cross-border
   measurements.

   On the other hand, for the ICP or user, it does not help much for
   service optimization or trouble shooting if the end-to-end
   performance measurement is conducted via a simple client-server model
   while treating the network as a black box. In the meantime, for the
   purpose of providing more value-added service to the ICPs as well as
   subscribers, there is motive for an ISP to open its LMAP system to
   some extent and collaborate with the ICP/user in understanding the
   bottleneck and exploiting better network servicing for end-to-end
   QoE.

   In the following sections, more specific use-cases and derived
   requirements of collaborative measurement practices for end-to-end
   performance measurement are presented.

4 Use-cases for Collaborative Measurements

   As stated above, there are motivations from the regulator, ISP/ICP
   and users to conduct collaborative measurements at the different
   levels in order to know if the current network conditions meet the
   expectations from the regulator policy, the ISP's resource provision
   agreement or the ICP's service provision agreement. In particular,
   the following usecases are identified.

4.1 Use-cases for Regulators

   A regulator may want to monitor the current status and the future
   deployment of network construction and operation of its region. In
   order to promote network development, the regulator needs to monitor
   the status of interconnection between different ISPs as well as the
   overall network status. 

4.1.1 within a regulator's own region
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   Understanding the current situation of its own region is necessary
   for a regulator to form guiding policies for stimulating further
   growth in high-speed networks. In order to get a clear picture of a
   large geographic area, the regulator may choose to not deploy a
   dedicated local measurement (LMAP) system on its own, while it's
   necessary to deploy a large number of measurement entities (e.g.
   MAs). The regulator may achieve this goal by means of the ISP's local
   measurement systems and the third-party measurement systems. 


   In that case, multiple organizations would simultaneously deploy
   their dedicated measurement entities for private local measurement
   systems within their network boundary in the same region, and by
   combining them together a cross-domain measurement system can mainly
   cover the whole region's network infrastructure. Through
   collaboration, measurement entities from multiple organizations can
   perform comprehensive measurement for the whole regional network in
   great depth, which can reflect the network's operational state.


4.1.2 peering performance between ISPs

   Low performance of peering links between different ISPs not only has
   great impact on ICP services, but also on an access ISPs relying on
   transit ISPs for Internet connectivity. For example, a mobile
   operator lacking access to an Internet resource will have to pay
   interconnections to other operators. The regulator can formulate
   policies to promote information sharing between ISP networks and
   investigate the user QoE problem by understanding the interconnection
   performance. For the same reason, an ISP/ICP can also benefit from a
   more clear understanding of the performance of the interconnection.


   For example, the data flow for a service request from a mobile
   terminal to an ICP first goes through the access ISP network and then
   into the Internet via a transit ISP network. Similarly, before
   entering the ICP's own private data-center, it may traverse another
   transit ISP network. As shown in Figure 1, the measurement can be
   implemented between a measurement entity in ISP#1 and another
   measurement entity in ISP#2 to understand the interconnection
   quality.  

   UE<=>access ISP<=>transit ISP #1<=>Internet<=>transit ISP #2<=>ICP

           Figure 2 Cross-Domain data flow path


   In a single administrative domain, there are also scenarios for
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                  [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   collaborative measurement.


4.2 Use-cases for the ISP

4.2.1 measurements within a single domain

   For one side, if the network scale is large enough, with many
   measurement entities, scalability of the Controller may become an
   issue [I-D.ooki-lmap-internet-measurement-system]. It would be a
   simple and scalable manner to construct an effective measurement
   system by dividing the huge number of measurement entities into
   groups, and assign a Controller separately to manager each subset of
   measurement entities. The size of the measurement entity groups are
   dependent on the number of measurement entities that a single
   Controller can manage at a time during the real deployment.


   On the other hand, even the network scale is small, if there are many
   heterogeneous network devices as functioning measurement entities,
   the corresponding measurement protocols/interface may be diverse. For
   example, browser built-in measurement entities can be conveniently
   implemented as HTTP clients, the CPE devices usually support TR.069
   as their management protocol and network devices residing in the core
   network generally support and runs SNMP protocol by default. In other
   words, different Controllers speaking different local measurement
   protocols may be needed to respectively manage different groups of
   measurement entities in the real deployment. 


   If a measurement task involves measurement entities that belong to
   different groups, collaboration among corresponding controlling
   entities is needed for instructing the measurement entities with the
   task configuration and data collection.




4.2.2 measurements for multi-domain ISP networks

   For a large ISP, it is common practice to divide its global network
   into several autonomous domains, each operated and managed by a
   regional branch. It is therefore, very likely that separate local
   measurement systems would be deployed into these autonomous domains,
   resulting in a call for collaborative measurement scenarios even
   within the same ISP's network. 

   Take the case in China for instance, there are multiple nationwide
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   ISP networks. Within these ISPs, relatively independent local
   branches, separated by physical territorial scope such as the
   province, operate their local network which has an autonomous domain
   or multiple autonomous domains. Each Provincial branch can deploy its
   own LMAP system to monitor its local network states.

4.3 Use-cases for the ICP

4.3.1 QoE-oriented performance enhancement

   New applications or updated applications with newly-added
   functions/features are being pushed to the end user every day, with
   an increasing requirement for constant performance optimization based
   on realistic network utilization resultant from application dynamics.
   It is important to understand the practical performance and impact of
   various network segments (e.g. access network, transit network and
   Internet) on the end-to-end traffic path. For the design,
   experimental and operational phases of a new feature/technology
   introduction to an application is also of great importance. However,
   it is expensive and non-economic for each ICP to build its own
   dedicated local measurement system into various ISPs' networks.


   At the same time, with the transition of ISPs' mindset from
   subscriber-centered charging for network access to ICP-centered
   charging, ISPs are motivated to offer assistance to ICPs' exploration
   for better QoE through more efficient usage of network resources
   provisioned under the guidance of real-time performance measurements
   and optimization to accommodate application dynamics.

   With ISPs' cooperation, various network segments are no longer hidden
   behind the black box to end-to-end performance measurements. By
   combining inputs from both its own end-based LMAP system with ISPs'
   measurement data, it is possible for an ICP to identify the
   bottleneck of service provision and develop corresponding enhancement
   via better guided technology introduction to the application as well
   as more targeted SLA negotiation with ISPs.

4.3.2 Trouble-shooting initiated by end consumers


   With the growing influence of broadband access nowadays, more and
   more traditional ICPs are extending to the market of home gateways,
   as a result of the popularity of intelligent TVs and intelligent
   STBs. The services of end users in their home network are probably
   controlled by ICPs which may collaborate with the broadband access
   service providers to guarantee users the promised QoE. When
   malfunctions influencing user QoE occur in these types of services,
 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


   it is necessary to have a mechanism with which the diagnostic
   measurement can be launched from the user side and identify the
   faulty party.

   Generally the home gateway(such as a home WLAN router) is the border
   between the ISP network and the home network. The ISP network
   includes the access network, MAN and WAN. The home network includes
   home gateway, TV, STB, etc. 

   For a broadband access user who buys a third-party home gateway
   device, the typical service access path is shown in Figure 2. The
   home network between home gateway and UE is private and is not
   controlled by any ISP. However, the user may want to measure the link
   quality between the UE and the home gateway, the UE and the access
   ISP, or the UE to the ICP, separately. Thus in this scenario, it is
   difficult to deploy a single LMAP system which completely covers the
   whole path for accurate end-to-end QoE measurements and assists fault
   identification.

   UE <=>home net<=>home GW<=>access ISP<=>transit ISP<=>Internet<=>ICP

   	Figure 3 Cross-Domain data traffic from home network to ICP


5 Derived Requirements

   This section presents derived requirements for measurement management
   protocols to enable the above collaborative use-cases across multiple
   measurement domains. In particular:



   o Independence of the local measurement system of individual
   participating domainsor the specific measurement protocols or
   metrics. o Global measurement task management. o Cross-domain
   measurement task management.












 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


7  Security Considerations

TBA







8  IANA Considerations

There is no IANA action in this document.

9 Acknowledgements

TBA































 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 13]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


10  References

10.1  Normative References


   [I-D.ietf-lmap-framework] Eardley, P., Morton, A., Bagnulo, M.,
              Burbridge, T., Aitken, P., and A. Akhter, "A framework for
              large-scale measurement platforms (LMAP)", draft-ietf-
              lmap-framework-11 (work in progress), February 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-lmap-information-model] Burbridge, T., Eardley, P.,
              Bagnulo, M., and J. Schoenwaelder, "Information Model for
              Large-Scale Measurement Platforms (LMAP)", draft-ietf-
              lmap-information-model-03 (work in progress), January
              2015.

   [I-D.ooki-lmap-internet-measurement-system] Ooki M., Kamei, S.,
              "Internet Measurement System", draft-ooki-lmap-internet-
              measurement-system-01(work in progress), December 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-lmap-use-cases] Linsner M., Eardley, P., Burbridge, T.,
              Sorensen, F., "Large-Scale Broadband Measurement Use
              Cases", draft-ietf-lmap-use-cases-06(work in progress),
              Feburary, 2015
























 


<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 14]

INTERNET DRAFT <PS and Use-cases for Collaborative LMAP>    Mar 21, 2016


Authors' Addresses


   Lingli Deng
   China Mobile

   Email: denglingli@chinamobile.com



   Rachel Huang
   Huawei

   Email: rachel.huang@huawei.com




   Shihui Duan
   China Academy of Telecommunication Research of MIIT

   Email: duanshihui@catr.cn





























<Deng, et al.>            Expires Sep 22, 2016                 [Page 15]
