Internet Engineering Task Force                                Jaehwa. Lee 
INTERNET DRAFT                  KT Advanced Technology Lab
                                                                        Choong Seon Hong
                                                                  Kyung Hee University
Expires: April 2006                                           October 17, 2005 
    
 Prolonging Network Lifetime via Intra-Cluster Routing 
                     <draft-jaehwa-pnl-00.txt> 
    
    
Status of this Memo
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2006. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 




Abstract

   An important challenge in wireless sensor network (WSN) is that how
   to route data packets from sources to base station energy efficiently.
   Inspiring data fusion feature and multi-hop routing, in this document,
   we introduce a clustering approach called PLIR (Prolonging Network
   Lifetime via Intra-Cluster Routing) for saving energy and
   distributing data dissipation evenly by improving BS cluster formation
   algorithm of LEACH-Centralized and providing 3-hop routing algorithm
   within clusters. Hence, it prolongs the lifetime of WSN. PLIR consumes
   less energy and reduces communication overhead, and extends the
   network lifetime compared with other approaches.
   



Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 1]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



Table of Contents



   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2

   2. Classification of Sensor Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

   3. Sensor Network Model . . . . . . . .... . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

   4. Clustering Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

   5. Algorithms. . . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . .  5

   6. Analysis and Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   
   7. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
   
   8. Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11







Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 2]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



1.  Introduction


   In WSNs, where sensors are deployed densely in inhospitable
   environments, the proximate nodes will sense the identical data.
   Data aggregation from many of correlative data will reduce a large
   amount of data traffic on network, avoid information overload,
   produce a more accurate signal and require less energy than sending
   all the unprocessed data throughout the network. In various literatures,
   clustering approach is addressed as a routing method using the data
   aggregation feature effectively.
   
   The second version of protocol in [Heinzelman] called LEACH-Centralized shows
   a base station (BS) cluster formation approach but the communication
   between sensor nodes is one hop. This causes more interference to
   proximate sensor nodes and the energy dissipation is distributed
   unevenly. In addition, each node sends information about its current
   location and energy level to the BS during the cluster formation phase.
   This causes high delay in network, the amount of overhead transmitted
   in the network will increase significantly. Moreover, after several
   rounds, direct communication from all sensor nodes to BS is unfeasible.
   
   Another method of wireless communication is to use multi-hop approach.
   There has been much work on multi-hop routing protocols for wireless
   networks [Younis][Scott][Meng]. In these protocols, authors discusses strategies for
   choosing multi-hop routes to minimize the power dissipated in the
   sensor nodes along the route and find optimal routes by relying on
   the energy at each node along the route. However they do not take
   full advantage of data aggregation feature in WSNs.

   Inspired by LEACH and multi-hop approaches, this document improves
   BS cluster formation approach of LEACH-Centralized protocol [Heinzelman].
   Then, it provides an intra-cluster 3-hop routing approach for WSN.
   Sensors within each cluster are partitioned into sets of nodes
   based on their location and remaining energy level. Each set of
   nodes has its own task. Then, the Shortest Path algorithm is used to
   determine the best route from sensor nodes to CH node through these
   sets of nodes.
   
   

   The document is organized as follows: Section 2 describes briefly the
   Classification of sensor networks. Section 3 and 4 describe the network and
   clustering model respectively. In section 5, our approach will be
   addressed. We analyze and conclude on this approach in section 6 and 7, respectively.




Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 3]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



2.  Classification of Sensor Networks


    Here, this document presents a simple classification of sensor
    networks on the basis of their mode of functioning and the type
    of target application.


    a) Proactive networks:
       
       The nodes in this network periodically switch on their sensors
       and transmitters, sense the environment and transmit the data of
       interest. Thus, they provide a snapshot of the relevant
       parameters at regular intervals. They are well suited for
       applications requiring periodic data monitoring.


    b) Reactive networks:
       
       In this scheme the nodes react immediately to sudden and drastic
       changes in the value of a sensed attribute. As such, they are
       well suited for time critical applications.












Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 4]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs




3.  Sensor Network Model


    In a typical WSN, the sensor nodes?locations are fixed and the
    instability of cluster due to mobility of sensor is not an issue.
    It means that sensor nodes are mobile but not much and with low rate.
    Hence, in this network model, we assume the sensors are
    quasi-stationary. Each tiny sensor has a sensing module, a computing
    module, memory and wireless communication module. Sensor nodes are
    left unattended after deployment. BS has adequate energy to
    communicate directly with all sensor nodes in the network.
    
    However, the sensor nodes cannot always do this because of their
    limited energy supply and it may be impossible to recharge batteries
    for them. The sensors are homogeneous and begin with the equal
    initial energy. They can use power control to vary the amount of
    transmit power to reduce the possibility of interfering with nearby
    cluster and its own energy dissipation. Also, each node has
    computation power to support different MAC protocols and performs
    signal processing functions. The sensor nodes located close to each
    other sense correlated data and they always have data to send to BS.

    


4.  Clustering Model


    In this model, the sensor nodes are grouped into clusters controlled
    by a BS. Each cluster has a cluster-head (CH) node that aggregates
    all data sent to it by all its members and transmits data to the
    remote BS. Therefore, the CH node must have much more energy than
    the non-CH node(sensor node, relaying node). BS performs cluster
    formation in the network, and informs all sensor nodes of clustering
    information afterwards.

    Network lifetime is divided into rounds. Each round begins with
    cluster formation phase followed by data transmission phase.
    In each frame of data transmission phase, non-CH node is assigned
    its own time slot to transmit data to CH node.







Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 5]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



5.  Algorithms

    The operation of PLIR is depicted in figure 1.
    
                              ------------------------------------
                              | Sensor nodes send information    |
                ----------| (location, energy level) to BS  |
               |               ------------------------------------
               V
    ----------------------------------------
    |  BS forms clusters and creates TDMA  |<--------------------
    |  schedule, then send clustering and         |     Next round      |
    |  routing information to sensor nodes      |                     |
    ----------------------------------------            |
               |                                                      |
               |                  --------------------------------     |
                ----------->| Sensor nodes send data to BS |-----
                                 | (in-clude residual energy)   |
                                  --------------------------------
                   
    Fig 1. Flowchart of PLIR
    
    
    PLIR distinguishes between the first round and the remaining rounds.
    In the first round, all sensors must send information about their
    location and current energy level to BS directly. The BS, based on
    this information, uses a cluster formation algorithm as will be
    described below to choose CH nodes and distribute remaining nodes
    into associated clusters. In subsequent rounds, to form clusters,
    the sensor nodes do not need to resend the information about location
    and residual energy to BS anymore. Instead of this, information will
    be extracted from the INFOR part in the data packets received from
    CH nodes at previous round. The last packet from each node at
    the end of each round is the only one that carries information about
    residual energy level of that node. The other packets carry data
    normally. CH nodes receive data packets from non-CH nodes, perform
    data integration then send data packet to BS directly.
    
    This packet format is depicted in figure 2.
            
    --------------------------------------------
    |  Header |        Data            | INFOR |
    --------------------------------------------
                                          |   
                                          |   
                                         V   
                          -------------------------
        Node Information  | | | | |   ...         |
                          -------------------------
                              
    Fig 2. The Packet format. The INFOR part includes information about
    {ID, energy} of nodes that packet passed.
    
    
Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 6]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs





    
    After having information about location and energy level of all
    sensor nodes in WSN, BS begins determining CH nodes and using the
    simulated annealing algorithm [Murata] to find out associated clusters.
    
    Firstly, BS computes the average node energy (ANE) among all the nodes.
    Whichever nodes have energy more than ANE are candidate for CH nodes.
    After that, BS runs the simulated annealing algorithm [Murata] to find
    out k nodes that are the best to be CH nodes for next round using
    probability Pk.

    Based on this, BS finds associated clusters by determining the minimum
    distance between the set of CH nodes and the set of remaining nodes.
    
    After determining CH nodes and associated clusters, BS performs
    3-hop routing within each cluster as following algorithm:


    AD = average distance from non-CH nodes to associated CH node;
    CAE = average energy for each cluster;
    I1 = {}: set of nodes that are level-1 relaying nodes (relay for J1, J2);
    J1 = {}: set of nodes that are level-2 relaying nodes (relay for K);
    I2 = {}, J2 = {}, K = {}: sets of sensor nodes;
    Ei : Energy of node i;

    If (Di,CH < AD) then	// Di,CH : distance from node i to CH
	     If (Ei >= CAE) then I1 = I1 U i;
	     Else I2 = I2 U i;
    Else If  (Di,CH >= AD and Di,CH < 2*AD) then
	     If (Ei >= CAE) then J1 = J1 U i;
	     Else J2 = J2 U i;
    Else K = K U i;
    
    





Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 7]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs


    Apply the Shortest Path Algorithm to determine the best route from
    CH node to J(J1,J2), K using the set nodes I1, J1 respectively.

    Our routing problem can be considered as determining the shortest
    route (least cost) from one node to a set of nodes. We use Dijkstra
    algorithm [Zhan] for solving this routing approach with the link cost
    Cij for the link between the nodes i and j defined as follows:
    
    Cij = Total (Ck) k=1:5
    
    Where: 
    
    C1 = c1*(dij)2 : data communication cost (energy) from node i to node j
    where c1 is a constant.
    C2 = data sensing cost of node j.
    C3 = c3*dij : delay cost because of propagation between the nodes i
    and j where c3 is a constant which describes the speed of wireless
    transmission.
    C4 = 1/energy of node j.
    C5 = 1/number of connections to node j.
    dij is distance between the nodes i and j.
    
    
    
    
    
    

Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 8]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs
    
    
    
        
    After determining routes for sensor nodes within each cluster, BS
    creates the TDMA schedule for sensor nodes. As such, each cluster
    uses a unique spreading code; each non-CH node assigned its own time
    slot to transmit data to CH node uses this spreading code. The other
    sensors turn of their receivers for saving energy. However, the
    relaying node that is the next hop for the node transmitting data at
    its time slot must be in active mode to receive data from the
    transmitting node. The other nodes are idle to save energy.
 
       
    CH nodes use a fixed spreading code and CSMA approach to send data
    to BS. It means that, when CH node has data to send, it must sense
    the channel to see if anyone else is transmitting using the BS
    spreading code. If so, CH node has to wait. Otherwise, the CH node
    sends data using the BS spreading code.

    Finally, BS informs clustering information to all sensors in the
    network. The sensor nodes perform data transmission according to
    clustering information received. Data packet transmitted to BS will
    be added information about residual energy of nodes that packet passed.
    So, from the second round, sensor nodes will not send any information
    to BS anymore. BS will extract information from data packet received
    at previous round as described above.








Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 9]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



6. Analysis and Conclusion

   In this section, we analyze performance of PLIR compared with
   LEACH-Centralized protocol (LEACH_C) in terms of communication
   overhead, the number of nodes alive, total amount of energy
   dissipated in the system over time.

   PLIR does not allow all non-CH nodes to communicate directly
   with CH node, number of nodes died after each round will be reduced
   significantly. It means that our algorithm optimizes the issue that
   many nodes died early while the other nodes are still alive; hence,
   it prolongs the lifetime of the network.
   
   PLIR does not allow sensors to send information required for
   cluster formation to BS at the beginning of each round, amount of
   overhead will be reduced significantly.
   
   PLIR use 3-hop routing within each cluster, the relaying nodes
   have the capability to aggregate data from sensors which reduces a
   larger amount of the same data passed unnecessarily in the network.
   This is one of the reasons that the total amount of energy dissipated
   in the network is reduced significantly.
    
   Clustering approach in WSNs has more advantages than other approaches
   such as direct transmission or multi-hop routing for saving energy.
   In this document, we improve the BS cluster formation of the second
   version of LEACH and provide a 3-hop routing approach within each
   cluster in order to balance the energy consumption for all sensor
   nodes in the network, extend lifetime of network and reduce the
   number of communication overhead in the network.






Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 10]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs



7. References



    [Heinzelman] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan,
    "An Application-Specific Protocol Architecture for Wireless
    Microsensor Networks" in IEEE Transactions on Wireless
    Communications, October 2002.
    
    [Younis] Ossama Younis, Sonia Fahmy, "Distributed clustering in
    ad-hoc sensor networks: A hybrid, energy-efficient approach",
    IEEE INFOCOM, 2004.
    
    [Murata] T. Murata, H. Ishibuchi, "Performance Evaluation of Genetic
    Algorithms for Flowshop Scheduling Problems" in Proceedings of
    the 1st IEEE Conference on Evolutionary Compu-tation, June 1994.
    
    [Scott] K. Scott, N. Bambos, "Routing and Channel Assignment for Low Power
    Transmission in PCS", 5th IEEE International Conference
    on Universal Personal Communications, September 1996. 
    
    [Meng] T. Meng, R. Volkan, "Distributed Network Protocols for
    Wireless Communication" in Proceeding IEEE ISCAS, May 1998.
    
    [Zhan] F. Zhan, C. Noon, "Shortest Path Algorithms: An Evaluation
    Using Real Road Networks" Transportation Science, 1996.
    
    [Sentech] "Data sheet for the Acoustic Ballistic Module", SenTech Inc.,
    http://www.sentech-acoustic.com/
    
    [USNO] US Naval Observatory (USNO) GPS Operations,
    http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/gps.html.
    
    [ Manjeshwar] A. Manjeshwar, D. P. Agrawal, "APTEEN: A Hybrid Protocol for
    Efficient Routing and Comprehensive Information Retrieval in WSNs"
    in the Proceedings of IEEE IPDPS?2, April 2002.
    
    [ Youssef] M. Younis, M. Youssef, K. Arisha, "Energy-Aware Routing in
    Cluster-Based Sensor Net-works" in the Proceedings of
    IEEE MASCOTS02, October 2002.






Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 11]


Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs


Author's Addresses 
    
   Jaehwa Lee
   1 Woomyun, Seocho, Seoul, Korea
   KT Advaned Technology Lab
   Korea                    Email: lethal@kt.co.kt
    
   Choong Seon Hong
   Dept of Computer Eng.
   Kyung Hee University
   1 secheon, Giheung, Yongin, Gyeonggi,
   Korea                    
   Email: cshong@khu.ac.kr
    
   Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
   Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF 
   Documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Jaehwa Lee, et al.               Expires April 17, 2006              [Page 12]
  Internet-Draft          Prolonging Network Lifetime via     October 17, 2005
                                    Intra-Cluster Routing in WSNs

   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
   Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 


   


