


Network Working Group                                            G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                                   H. Deng
Intended status: Informational                                   B. Zhou
Expires: January 12, 2010                                     CMCC, Inc.
                                                                   M. Xu
                                                                  D. Huo
                                                                  Y. Cao
                                                     Tsinghua University
                                                           July 11, 2009


     An Incremental Deployable Mapping Service for Scalable Routing
                              Architecture
                        draft-chen-lisp-er-mo-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.



Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


Abstract

   This document describes a mechanism of providing mapping service for
   LISP-like architecture.  The mapping service comprises of EID Router
   (ER) mechanism and supplementary DHT Mapping Overlay (MO), in which
   ER mechanism is for reducing forwarding entries in routers while
   driving the packets to the destination through tunnels, and the DHT
   MO serves as a supplement that provides specific mappings to reduce
   the number of tunnels.  The mechanism is flexibly deployable for ISPs
   since it costs little and is easy to progress.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Definition of Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  When an ITR meets packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Utilization of current BGP system  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Automatic Mapping obtainment and storage . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Mapping propagation by BGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  EID Router mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Address aggregation policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  EID Router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  When an ER meets packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Supplementary DHT Mapping Overlay (MO) . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  Mapping Node (MN) and Mapping Server (MS)  . . . . . . . . 11
     7.2.  MNID Assignment and K-bucket Table . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.3.  LOOKUP Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.4.  Security Consideration of Mapping Storage  . . . . . . . . 12
     7.5.  Self-adaptive Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.6.  Dynamic Adjustment of K value and m value  . . . . . . . . 13
     7.7.  Mapping Storing and Exchanging in Multi-homing Scenario  . 13
   8.  Incremental Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19










Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


1.  Introduction

   LISP [I-D.farinacci-lisp] is an architecture for scalable routing.
   It defines two address spaces: Routing Locators (RLOC) and Endpoint
   Identifiers (EID).  LISP uses EIDs as lookup keys for a new EID-to-
   RLOC mapping database, in which way several mapping services are
   built such as [I-D.fuller-lisp-alt] and [I-D.meyer-lisp-cons].  In
   these mapping service solutions, different kinds of overlays are
   designed and built as database for storing mapping information, as
   well as providing mapping lookup results for mapping queries.

   The problem they commonly share is that packets without any caches on
   current ITR have to be waiting for the reply of mapping lookup query,
   or simply be dropped by this ITR as long as no relevant cache exists
   on this ITR.

   One solution to this problem could be that, instead of sending lookup
   queries to the Mapping Overlay (MO), data packet itself is sent to
   the MO as a query (e.g., "Data Probe" in [I-D.fuller-lisp-alt]>) and
   get forwarded in the MO to the final ETR linked to the site in which
   the destination EID resides.  But usually when a packet is going
   through the MO, long latency becomes a remarkable problem then.

   In this draft we describe an incremental deployable mapping service
   for LISP.  This mapping service comprises of EID Router (ER)
   mechanism and supplementary DHT Mapping Overlay (MO).  The ER
   mechanism is designed for reducing forwarding entries in routers,
   while driving the packets to the destination through tunnels.  The
   DHT MO serves as a supplement that provides specific mappings to
   reduce the number of tunnels along the path to the destination.  Note
   that an ER can be deployed unilaterally in an AS for it's own
   benefits and the DHT MO is unitedly built among ASes however whether
   to join the MO is not compulsory to an AS (it can still benefit from
   deploying the ER).

   The remainder of this document is organized as follows: Section 2
   provides the definitions of terms in this document.  Section 3
   sketches an overview of the mapping service.  Section 4 describes how
   an ITR handles the packets.  Section 5 describes how to utilize
   current BGP system in the mapping service.  Section 6 describes how
   the EID Router mechanism works, and Section 7 describes how to build
   the DHT Mapping Overlay and how to retrieve mappings in it.  And
   Section 8 shows the steps for deploying the mapping service
   incrementally.







Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


2.  Definition of Terms

   Mapping:  an EID-to-ELOC mapping.

   EID aggregated prefix:  an aggregated prefix which covers some EID
      blocks.

   EID+RLOC aggregated prefix:  an aggregated prefix which covers some
      EID block(s) and RLOC(s).

   EID Router (ER):  a new introduced router which keeps entries to all
      EID aggregated prefixes.

   Mapping Node (MN):  an entity used for storing a mapping.  Each MN
      holds and can only hold one mapping, and each mapping is related
      to only one MN.  It can be implemented as a process in a MS, which
      has a data structure to store the mapping as well as the ability
      to manage and retrieve the mappings.

   Master Mapping Node (MMN):  a chosen Mapping Node used to be the
      representative among redundant MNs.  It is in charge of initiating
      mapping query and exchanging mappings.

   Mapping Server (MS):  a server specified to physically store
      mappings.  Each MS can hold more than one Mapping Nodes.

   Mapping Overlay (MO):  a DHT overlay, which is designed for storing
      the distributed mapping information.  Only one MO exists among
      ISPs in the Internet.






















Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


3.  Overview

   The mechanism described in this draft aims:

   o  to eliminate all forwarding entries to distant customer ASes in P
      routers;

   o  to eliminate the forwarding entries, targeted to distant customer
      ASes not behind the border routers, in the border routers;

   o  to be deployed incrementally;

   o  to help reduce the number of tunnels.

   To achieve the four aims above, the mechanism described in this draft
   mainly comprises of the following two parts:

   o  EID Router (ER) mechanism for non-cached packets tunneling, and

   o  DHT Mapping Overlay (MO) as a supplement, which provides specific
      mappings to reduce tunneling cost.

   The EID Router mechanism is designed for the first three aims, and
   the DHT MO is designed for the last aim.

   In EID Router mechanism, by manually or automatically setting the
   default route to an ER (each AS at least has one ER), all forwarding
   entries to distant customer ASes in P routers, and a part of
   forwarding entries (targeted to distant customer ASes not behind the
   border routers) in the border routers can be eliminated.

   The current running Border Gateway Protocol [RFC4271] is mainly
   utilized to propagate mappings through the current running BGP
   speaking system.  The most important reason to use the current
   running BGP speaking system is to make the deployment backward
   compatible, so that incremental deployment can be achieved.

   The DHT Mapping Overlay can help reduce the number of tunnels which
   result from deploying the ER mechanism.  It is optional for ISPs and
   only needs a little investment on it.











Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


4.  When an ITR meets packets

   When an ITR receives a packet originated from a customer site, it
   checks whether a copy of mapping exists in its cache first.

   If the mapping exists, the ITR encapsulates the packet in a LISP
   header, putting the RLOC extracted from the mapping onto the outer
   destination address, meanwhile selecting one of the ITR's RLOC as the
   outer source address.

   Else if cache misses (i.e., no relevant copy of mapping exists in the
   ITR), two concurrent events occur:

   o  Data Plane Traffic: the packet simply follows a default route
      preset manually or automatically to an ER in current AS.  Since ER
      knows whole global mapping information, it can forward every
      packet to the right ETR by encapsulating the packet in LISP header
      with the ITR's RLOC in the outer source address and the ETR's RLOC
      in the outer destination address.

   o  Control Plane Traffic: the ITR sends a Mapping Query to its
      default Mapping Server (MS) in the AS.  And then a mapping LOOKUP
      process (details of mapping lookup process are shown in Section 7)
      is launched in the Mapping Overlay (MO) by the Master Mapping Node
      (MMN) of the ITR.  After the MMN receives a copy of queried
      mapping from the MO, it returns the copy to the ITR which
      initiated the Mapping Query, and is cached for a period of time.
























Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


5.  Utilization of current BGP system

   The BGP is an inter-Autonomous System routing protocol.  The primary
   function of a BGP speaking system is to exchange network reachability
   information with other BGP systems.  This network reachability
   information includes information on the list of ASes that
   reachability information traverses.  This information is sufficient
   for constructing a graph of AS connectivity for this reachability, as
   well as inevitable for constructing the mappings from EIDs onto RLOCs
   automatically.  Moreover, especially for incremental deployment
   requirement, which means ASes deployed new mechanism must work along
   with those not deployed ones, it is necessary to design mapping
   service inherently adaptable for the current running BGP system
   (i.e., the BGP system we use for basic routing and forwarding today).

   The BGP in the mapping service has two functions: to obtain the
   mappings automatically, and to propagate mappings to ERs in other
   ASes.  They're both based on current running BGP system.

5.1.  Automatic Mapping obtainment and storage

   When an customer AS advertise an BGP UPDATE message to homed (no
   matter single-homed or multi-homed) provider AS which is deployed the
   DHT mapping server described in Section 7, the provider AS would set
   or update the relevant mapping information according to the
   advertised route to the customer AS.  The announced prefix is treat
   as the EID in the mapping <EID, RLOC> and the address of the ETR
   which directly receives BGP announcement from the customer AS is
   chosen as the RLOC.

   This mapping could be stored both in MN (Mapping Node) and ER (EID
   Router) concurrently.  In the former case, one mapping refers to one
   MN and vice versa as described in Section 7.  However in the latter
   case, the mapping is not only stored in the ER in current provider
   AS, but also propagated to distant provider ASes by BGP
   advertisements and stored in ERs at those ASes.

   Note that the mappings obtained so far are original specific
   mappings.  In DHT MO, these original specific mappings are stored on
   MNs and no changes on mapping granularity.  However in ER mechanism,
   during the mapping propagation by BGP, mapping granularity is changed
   once a prefix aggregation occurs in an AS (details are shown in
   Section 5.2).

5.2.  Mapping propagation by BGP

   BGP speakers work as what they act today, in addition that mapping
   information is affiliated in BGP UPDATE message.  Each BGP speaker on



Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


   the route SHALL keep the originality of the mappings (i.e., the
   mappings stay untouched during propagation), except that it
   aggregates some prefixes into one.  New mapping SHOULD be formed when
   such aggregation occurs, in which case both EID and RLOC in mapping
   <EID, RLOC> are updated, that EID is set to the new aggregated EID
   block which covers more prefixes while RLOC is set to the address of
   either ER (if ER is deployed) or border router (if no ER is deployed)
   in current AS.

   Note that since aggregation is permitted during the mapping
   propagation, the number of mappings stored on the ERs would be far
   more less than the number of mappings stored in the MO.







































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


6.  EID Router mechanism

6.1.  Address aggregation policy

   All addresses from edge customer ASes can be seen as the EIDs.  EID
   prefixes can be aggregated to EID aggregated prefix.  Moreover we
   allow EIDs to be aggregated with RLOCs to EID+RLOC aggregated prefix.
   For example, suppose two EID blocks 166.111.8/24 and 166.111.9/24
   belong to two customer ASes homed to a provider AS which has some
   RLOCs range from 166.111.10/24 to 166.111.11/24, the provider AS can
   aggregate either to an EID aggregated prefix 166.111.8/23 or to an
   EID+RLOC aggregated prefix 166.111.8/22.

6.2.  EID Router

   An EID Router is no particular than a legacy router, except that
   special configuration is applied.  It is configured to act as an eBGP
   speaker, and only loads the forwarding entries to all EID aggregated
   prefixes.  Note that the EID+RLOC aggregated prefixes don't have to
   be loaded in EID Routers, since the RLOCs in the EID+RLOC aggregated
   prefixes are supposed be reachable (i.e., forwarding entries to these
   prefixes should be preserved in the P routers).

   So the ideal situation becomes:

   o  the EID Routers load the forwarding entries to all EID aggregated
      prefixes,

   o  the P routers load the forwarding entries to all RLOCs and all
      EID+RLOC aggregated prefixes, and

   o  the border routers load the forwarding entries to all RLOCs and
      the prefixes (i.e., EID aggregated prefixes and EID+RLOC
      aggregated prefixes) of the distant ASes behind the border
      routers.

   So due to deploying the EID Router mechanism, P routers and border
   routers can get their FIB (Forwarding Information Base) size reduced.

6.3.  When an ER meets packets

   When an ER receives a packet, it matches the destination address with
   entries in its forwarding table (that can be seen as the mapping
   table).  Since the ER holds whole mapping table (from its angle of
   view), this packet can be encapsulated in a LISP header and sent out.
   The tunnel end point may be one of the following four kinds of
   routers:




Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


   o  the border router of the peering AS on the path to the
      destination, in which case aggregation occurs in this peering AS
      or this peering AS didn't pass the mapping information to the
      current AS.

   o  the border router of the non-peering AS on the path to the
      destination, in which case aggregation occurs in this non-peering
      AS.

   o  the EID Router of a distant AS (either peering or non-peering) on
      the path to the destination, in which case the downstream AS
      didn't pass the mapping information to this distant AS so that the
      ER in this distant AS created a new mapping (the ER's RLOC is set
      in the mapping).

   o  the destination ETR, in which case the originality of the mapping
      is maintained.


































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


7.  Supplementary DHT Mapping Overlay (MO)

   The DHT Mapping Overlay (MO) is based on [Kademlia], a highly
   efficient protocol of Distributed Hash Table (DHT) overlay for Peer-
   to-Peer network, which applies XOR as metric to measure distance.
   Here in the MO, it is adapted to meet several requirements below:

   o  MO should be scalable;

   o  MO should have a good ability of redundancy;

   o  MO should be self-adaptive for mapping adding or failure;

   o  MO should be flexible for balancing performance and overhead;

   o  MO should support multi-homing scenario.

   The benefit of deploying the MO is that, it provides specific
   mappings since it doesn't aggregate prefixes (i.e., mappings stored
   in MO are finest-granulated that each mapping refers to one relation
   between a customer AS and one of its provider site).  Due to the
   large number of such fines-granulated mappings, the MO should be
   scalable and capable for redundancy.  So DHT is chosen as the means
   of distributing the mappings.

7.1.  Mapping Node (MN) and Mapping Server (MS)

   As described in Section 5.1, a mapping is automatically obtained from
   the BGP advertisement through the ETR.  Afer that it is sent to a MS
   in current provider AS and then stored in a new created MN (or
   manually set on the MN).  Note that each mapping can only be
   initially stored on one MN in the MO, and each MS can accommodate
   more than one MNs.  For example, an ISP is accessed by 5 customer
   ASes labeled as a, b, c, d, e, whose corresponding EIDs are v, w, x,
   y, z respectively.  These five EID prefixes of customer ASes are one-
   to-one mapped, forming five MNs physically existed on one or multiple
   MSes administrated by the ISP.

7.2.  MNID Assignment and K-bucket Table

   In the MO, each MN is assigned a 160 bit ID.  The DHT MO utilizes the
   highest numerical IP address reserved in customer ASes as a MNID.
   For example, assume a customer AS with a prefix 162.137.2/24 is
   mapped to the RLOC 134.121.3.56.  The lower 32 bits of the MNID of
   the corresponding Master Mapping Node (MMN) is 0xA28902FE (i.e.,
   162.137.2.254), and the rest 128 bits are all 0.  The mapping will be
   stored on this MMN and several (at least one) other MNs whose MNIDs
   are closest to the MNID 0xA28902FE.



Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


   Each MN manages a K-bucket table of its own that keeps the
   information how it can reach other MNs (i.e., the RLOCs of the
   resident MSes of these MNs).  Each MN's reachability imformation is
   stored on a node in K-bucket.  The table of a MN N consists of 160
   rows in which the i-th row (0 <= i < 160) preserves the reachability
   information of some MNs (i.e., the RLOCs of the resident MSes of
   these MNs) which are at a distance range 2^I ~ 2^(i+1) from N. If i
   becomes quite large, the number of nodes that the i-th row preserves
   is limited to K at most.

7.3.  LOOKUP Process

   LOOKUP process needs to call FIND_MAP with MNID of destination MN as
   parameter.  Here describes the FIND_MAP procedure (MN B is the
   destination MN):

   1.  MN A calculate the distance D from A to B (D = A XOR B);

   2.  Fetch m MNs from the right row of K-bucket table of MN A and then
       query them (call FIND_MAP for every one of these m MNs);

   3.  MN A set a timer waiting reply for each MN that a called
       FIND_MAP.  If it expires, then delete information of
       corresponding MN in K-bucket table.

   4.  Each MN who received FIND_MAP call will check if it is one of the
       closest MNs destined to B. If so then return mapping to MN A;
       else like in step 1 and 2, calculates distance D and fetches m
       closer MNs, then return them to MN A.

   5.  MN A continues to send FIND_MAP calls to those returned MNs until
       mapping returned or find K closest MNs (which means no such
       mapping existed).

7.4.  Security Consideration of Mapping Storage

   In native Kademlia, any MN can initiate a STORE call to put the <key,
   value> pair on other K closest nodes.  But for the reason that it
   could probably cause security problem, for instance a malicious MN
   store a wrong mapping in other MNs, a mapping can only initially
   stored on one or more MNs (a MMN is chosen) which are under
   supervision of the ISP who in fact controls this mapping.  And only
   the MMN is authorized to call STORE.  After running for hours, MNs in
   some other autonomous systems could keep cache of the mapping.







Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


7.5.  Self-adaptive Capability

   Comparing to other non-DHT mapping system, the DHT MO is more
   adaptive for MN failure and dynamic MN joining.

   Assume an ISP deploys multiple MSes for the address block of a
   customer AS in one or multiple provider ASes it administrates.  When
   some of MNs go down, as long as at least one MN is healthy, mappings
   service can be normally provided without manually configuration.
   Even if they're all out of health temporarily, mapping information
   cached on other MNs could also be available in a period of time
   (cache updating period).

   When a new customer site accesses to some ISP, a new mapping is
   required to be added in the MO.  It needs to add a new MN u into the
   MO and put this mapping in MN u.  At first, an existing MN w in MO
   should be known and w is put into u's K-bucket table.  Then do a
   LOOKUP process with u's MNID as parameter.  Finally information in
   K-bucket table of MN u can be built up and meanwhile other MNs update
   their K-bucket table as well during the LOOUP process.

7.6.  Dynamic Adjustment of K value and m value

   After one LOOKUP, if the time of this LOOKUP is greater than
   threshold t (manually configured by ISP), which implies that this
   LOOKUP spent too long time, then increase K by 1.  At the same time,
   if 2m < K then m = 2m, otherwise increase m by 1.  Consequently, more
   queries will be sent to MNs during this LOOKUP process.  However if
   the time of this LOOKUP is no greater than t, K value and m value
   stay not changed.

   When congestion occurs in some AS, K value and m value both decrease
   by 1 to suppress number of updates that used to keep in touch with
   other MNs.

7.7.  Mapping Storing and Exchanging in Multi-homing Scenario

   Suppose a scenario that a customer site accesses to more than one
   ISP, which is called multi-homing.  When a new MMN x puts the new
   mapping in the mapping system, another MMN y with the same MNID will
   be probed in the MO.  Different to native Kademlia protocol, no "ID
   Collision Error" occurs.  Instead x tells y this new mapping and
   meanwhile obtains mapping information existed already.  Finally x and
   y both know all mapping information about how to destine for the
   customer AS.  Of course x and y will probe each other to ensure
   availability every period of time.





Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


8.  Incremental Deployment

   This mechanism is practical for incremental deployment, since no big
   changes introduced on existing routers.  Instead of deploying an
   imperative third-party infrastructure over current Internet, an ISP
   only puts one or more MSes in its domain and configures it to join
   the MO if it wants to benefit from deploying the DHT MO.

   An ISP could start from deploying an ER in its domain, through which
   way the number of entries in other routers in this domain could be
   reduced however the length of the intra-domain route grows.  It's up
   to ISPs to decide whether to tolerate such length-stretch to obtain
   decrease of FIB (Forwarding Information Base) size.

   As time goes by, suppose more and more ISPs have deployed ERs.  Some
   of them may then deploy the DHT MO to benefit from specific mappings
   (that can decrease number of tunnels needed in each data
   transmission) by simply putting MSes in their ASes and let them join
   the MO automatically as described in Section 7.

   There're no new particular devices or functions required to support
   backward-compatibility.





























Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


9.  Acknowledgements


















































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


10.  Security Considerations

   The ERs can apply any existing security mechanisms for BGP to enhance
   the security.  And for DHT MO, existing authentication methods for
   DHT (especially for Kademlia) can be adapted to enhance its security.
   Other new security enhancements are expected to design to support the
   mechanism in this draft in future.












































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


11.  IANA Considerations


















































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.farinacci-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-farinacci-lisp-12 (work in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.fuller-lisp-alt]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "LISP
              Alternative Topology (LISP+ALT)", draft-fuller-lisp-alt-05
              (work in progress), February 2009.

   [I-D.meyer-lisp-cons]
              Brim, S., "LISP-CONS: A Content distribution Overlay
              Network Service for LISP", draft-meyer-lisp-cons-04 (work
              in progress), April 2008.

   [Kademlia]
              Maymounkov, P. and D. Mazieres, "Kademlia: A Peer-to-peer
              Information System Based on the XOR Metric", IPTPS'02,
              Boston, 2002.




















Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Gang Chen
   CMCC, Inc.
   53A, Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-1391-071-0674
   Email: phdgang@gmail.com


   Hui Deng
   CMCC, Inc.
   53A, Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-1391-075-0201
   Email: denghui02@gmail.com


   Bo Zhou
   CMCC, Inc.
   53A, Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-1381-194-8723
   Email: zhouboyj@chinamobile.com


   Mingwei Xu
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
   Email: xmw@csnet1.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn








Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                    ER+MO                        July 2009


   Dong Huo
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
   Email: dhuo.thu@gmail.com


   Yu Cao
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
   Email: cyanalyst@126.com

































Chen, et al.            Expires January 12, 2010               [Page 20]


