Internet Engineering Task Force                                 X. W. Zhou 
Internet-Draft                                                 Z. M. Cheng
 <draft-xwzhou-ntwn-00.txt>                                       X. N. Li        
Intended status: Informational                                  U. S. T. B
Expires: November 9 , 2014                                    May 9 , 2014                                                        

                      Network Technology- Wisdom Network
                           draft-xwzhou-ntwn-00.txt

Abstract

   In this paper, a new form of network technology with wisdom, the wisdom 
   network, is presented, defined and described. It is a collaborative 
   network; it can distinguish, judgment;it can process information 
   resources into knowledge, achieve mastery of knowledge; it can self-
   manage, self-repair and self-adapt; it can predict the future changes 
   of network environment and people's emotional state. Network can self-
   learn,self-grow and self-innovate. The network has humanChengke abiChengty 
   of observation,understanding people's emotions and intentions. On the
   base of the definition of wisdom network, we describe the basic 
   characteristics and architecture of it, and detailedly depict wisdom 
   framework of Wisdom network, finally, we propose a method to implement
   wisdom network, namely, multi-agent technology.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   


zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                      May 2014

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 9, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document 
   must include Simplified BSD license text as described in Section 
   4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty 
   as described in the SimpChengfied BSD license.

Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Basic Concepts of Wisdom Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Architecture of Wisdom Network . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Wisdom Framework of Wisdom Network . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Implementation Scheme of Wisdom Network. . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Major Technical Challenges of Wisdom Network . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  IANA Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Conclusion. . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10




zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                  [Page 2]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                        May 2014

 1. Terminology

   Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) [RFC2784] can be used to carry
   any network layer protocol over any network layer protocol.  GRE has
   been implemented by many vendors and is widely deployed on the
   Internet.
   [RFC2784], by design, does not describe procedures that affect
   fragmentation.  Lacking guidance from the specification, vendors have
   developed implementation-specific fragmentation strategies.  For the
   most part, devices implementing one fragmentation strategy can
   interoperate with devices that implement another fragmentation
   strategy.  Operational experience has demonstrated the relative
   merits of each strategy.  Section 3 of [RFC4459] describes four
   fragmentation strategies and evaluates the relative merits of each.
  
2. Introduction  
  
   From the post house and beacon tower of ancient china to the modern 
   information network, we have felt the rapid development of information 
   technology. On the other hand, in order to meet the different needs 
   and effective transmission of information in different environments,
   we hope information network have wisdom like people.

   Now there have been various intelligent networks. For example, in
   2005, based on cognitive radio, Thomas proposed Cognitive Network.
   A cognitive network has a cognitive process that can perceive current 
   network conditions,and then plan, decide and act on those conditions. 
   It has the adaptive capacity of the network environment and learning 
   abiChengty form the evaluation of previous and future decision-making, 
   all while takes into account end-to-end goals-network targets [1].   
            
   Although these information networks are more and more intelligent, 
   the information network has distance for our ideal network which is
   like human beings with wisdom. Then we can not help but ask what is
   "wisdom" of the information network? Information network with "wisdom"
   should be a what kind of network? How to realize the information network
   with "wisdom"? In this article, we give our ideas of these issues.



 
zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                    [Page 3]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                          May 2014


3.  Basic Concepts of Wisdom Network

   Wisdom network, which is a collaborative network, can fast,flexibly 
   and appropriately distinguish, judgment and choose the information 
   of person's emotional state and network status form a lot of sense 
   information, then processes these information resources into knowledge
   combined with the information of the user's application requirement,
   achieves mastery of knowledge, and ultimately finds the right decision 
   to adjust the current network configuration and predicts the future
   changes of network environment and user emotional state. These actions 
   make network flexibly adapt to changes in network environment, properly
   response to the changes of environment that the network will face with 
   and future changes in users emotional state, and in the meanwhile 
   provide innovative services for users. Network in the process can 
   self-learn, self-grow and self-innovate.

  "Wisdom" of wisdom network is that it knows all the "network" capabilities 
   and "network" resources usage condition, performances and security 
   capabilities of "network", and analyzes, judges, predicts changes in 
   the network environment; It uses the most reasonable and best way to 
   co-configure and use the "network",and makes the network adapt the 
   changes in environment; it makes operators obtain highest return from
   the most rationally utilization of resources, and lets users get best
   service from the most reasonable price; in addition, it endows the 
   network with the humanlike ability of observation, understanding people's
   emotions and intentions, reflects ideas of the integration of people 
   and network; meanwhile, it makes the network with the ability of 
   self-learn, growth and innovation.

   Wisdom network has the following characteristics: It has more complete 
   behavioral consciousness, control capability and collaboration capability; 
   It has intelligent perception, context-aware and wisdom ability; It 
   has mature information-knowledge-wisdom conversion mechanism, and 
   capability of judge, analyze and decision make; It has the capability 
   of self-learning,self-growth and self-innovation; Uncertainty of the
   network's living environment comes up with new requests for the 
   



zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                   [Page 4]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                         May 2014

   development of network architecture. The architecture which possesses 
   predictable and adaptive trait is urgently needed, it make the network
   better sustain architecture ability of the self-management, self-repair
   and self-adapt in the changing living environment, that is to say, the 
   network has "future eye", automatically adjusts its parameters to cope 
   with the future changes;  It can perceive,recognize and understand 
   human emotions, and make smart, sensitive and friendly response for 
   human emotions, that is, we endow the network with humanlike ability of 
   observe,understand user emotional characteristics, in the meantime, 
   it can predict the emotional intent behind the change based on trend 
   of changes in the user emotional state.

   Wisdom loop has six parts. There are sense, analyze judge and infer 
   predict,decide, act, learn, grow and innovate, policy. Wisdom network 
   obtains sensing datum of ambient and users emotional state through the 
   sensors, it uses these sensing datum to judge, analyze, infer and 
   forecast, and make future decisions for decision-making module. Based 
   on information, the analysis, judgment and inference and forecasting
   module obtains the signals of physical and behavioral characteristics 
   caused by human emotions, analyzes the relationships among human emotions
   and a variety of sensing signals, establishes emotional model; and this
   module also deals with status information which affect the performance 
   of end to end transmission, namely, the network type, network topology, 
   available resources,interface protocols, network traffic, and network 
   error rate, node residual energy,data rate, end to end delay and network 
   throughput etc; combining with actions that strategic module may take, 
   this module determines whether the current network meets user requirements,
   if not, then it would take appropriate re-configured measures to ensure 
   that the network meets user requirements. Decision-making module decides 
   to take corresponding actions based on the previous study and the result 
   of analysis judgments inference prediction. Action module is responsible 
   for taking actions(reconfiguration) made by the decision-making module.
   Learning, growth and innovation module is the core of wisdom loop, the 
   network can learn, grow, innovate in the dynamic adaptive process of 
   sense-reasoning-predictable-decision-action", gains experiences and 
   knowledge in process of learning, growth and innovation, and uses its
   experiences and knowledge to master knowledge and analyze judge, infer
   and forecast and decision-make in the future.

  
   
zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                   [Page 5]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                         May 2014

   Basic Characteristics and Architecture of the Wisdom Network

   Besides self-perception, self-management, self-learn, self-optimization, 
   self-heal and selfconfiguration[6], wisdom network has following 
   characteristics:

   Perceive of people's emotional state: in addition to actively perceiving 
   its own behavior, condition and environment, wisdom network also acquires 
   signals of physiological and behavioral characteristics caused by the user
   emotions through a variety of sensors, then establishes the "emotional model".
   We hope the wisdom network that has the ability of perception, identify and
   understand human emotions,and can make intelligent, sensitive, friendly 
   response to the users; our goal is to achieve shorten the distance between
   user and network and create a truly harmonious environment for users.

   Self-grow and self-innovate: self-growth is that the network can arm 
   itself with knowledge which is learned from the learning and innovative 
   process and stored in the Knowledge Base; self-innovation is that the
   network provides innovative services for users on the basis of comprehensive 
   analysis of network status, environment,users emotional state and its 
   knowledge.

   Self-predict: According to the trend of changes in environment and 
   people emotional state, the network makes prediction and judgment, so 
   that the network can control impending events. It mainly reflects the 
   network can cognize and grasp the future changes of environment and user 
   emotional, achieve proactively self-management and reduce manual 
   intervention.

   Architecture and Wisdom Framework of Wisdom Network
   

3.1.  Architecture of Wisdom Network

   In this section, we give the architecture of wisdom network.

   User (Data) plane: it has data information transfer logical function, the 
   date information are network environment, network status, application 
   requirements and emotional state.


zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                     [Page 6]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                           May 2014
   
   Control plane: it has signaling control information logic function, the 
   signal of data transmission relate to data information.

   Wisdom plane: it provides a complete view of the information of entire 
   network, and processes data obtained from the user (data) plane into 
   network knowledge in order to guide adaptive control of the control plane;
   it delivers, stores, processes, transmits, analyzes and judges information 
   of perception for network environment, application requirements and user 
   emotional state; it provides adequate reference information for infering 
   and forecasting the decisions and actions taken by network; it analyzes 
   and judges emotional changes according.
   to perceptive information, forms predictions, takes network adjustments, 
   makes real-time feedback to the current operation, at the same time, also 
   forms new prediction for the intent behind emotional changes, activates its
   knowledge base, timely and initiatively provides new information for users; 
   it supplies knowledge for self-learning,self-growth and self-innovation; in 
   addition, it possesses information-knowledge-wisdom sophisticated conversion 
   mechanism, establishes unified protocol description language knowledge 
   representation and efficient integration of business; wisdom is higher 
   than the cognitive, so the wisdom plane possesses more advanced functions, 
   such as analyze, judge, predict, grow and innovate ect, therefore, it can 
   effectively resolve integration of heterogeneity and cooperativity of 
   networks, achieve resource sharing among nodes and make their respective
   advantages complementary to each other, more rationally and efficiently 
   use network resources.

3.2. Wisdom Framework of Wisdom Network

   In this section, we give the wisdom framework of wisdom network.

   Application layer: it is responsible for providing network services to 
   application, and providing perceptive information of user's application 
   requirements and emotional state for wisdom processing layer.

   Wisdom process layer: it has a flexible information-knowledge-wisdom 
   mechanism. After handled by affective computing platform, the perceptive 
   information of user's application requirements and emotional state are 
   delivered to the wisdom processing layer. The wisdom process layer 
   accurately obtains changes of emotional state and application requirement 
   by analyzing, judging and inferring; in the meantime, it accurately knows

zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                     [Page 7]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                           May 2014 
   
   information of network status via network state sensor, including all
   the "network" capabilities and "network" resource usage, "network"
   
   performance and security capabilities. After processing the above 
   information together, it makes decision-making of network configuration, 
   responds to application requirements and changes in emotional state. It 
   processes these successful decision-making information into knowledge, 
   then the knowledge are stored in its knowledge base. In addition, on base 
   of gaining experience and current information of user emotions status and 
   network status, it predicts changes that the network will face, in the same 
   time, processes these information into knowledge, then the knowledge are 
   also stored in its knowledge base for providing reference for the future 
   decision-making and strategy. It can learn during processing, the learned
   knowledge is also stored in the knowledge base for growth and mastery and
   innovation. This layer makes network accurately analyze, judge, infer, 
   forecast, grow and innovate. Learning, growth and innovation are in order
   to provide quality services. It also has automatically filter and abstract
   useful information from a lot of perceptive information, then processes 
   these useful information into knowledge, then combining with its knowledge,
   it masters these knowledge for obtaining optimal decision-making and strategy, 
   at same time stores these knowledge in the knowledge base.

   Software adaptive networks: the functions of this layer are similar to 
   cognitive network, it is no longer introduced .

4.  Implementation Scheme of Wisdom Network

   Multi-agent technology is a very important application field in Artificial 
   intelligence, it has the distributed characteristics. Multi-agent systems 
   can accomplish one or more tasks together, and are commonly used to deal
   with complex environment and non-deterministic problems [7]. As the wisdom
   network has complexity and uncertainty of network environment and user 
   emotional state, so we can implement wisdom network by borrowing ideas 
   from multi-agent technology. Learning from multi-agent technology.

   The above agent model is constituted by observe, perceive, act, analyze, 
   judge, infer, predict and knowledge base. Analysis, judgment, inference,
   prediction combine with the knowledge base achieve reason, grow and innovate.
   We can see that it contains the main part of the wisdom network.


zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                     [Page 8]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                           May 2014
  
   Wisdom processing layer can be considered to be formed by multiple agents. 
   These agents mutually cooperate in the process of analysis, judgment, 
   inference, prediction, learn, growth and innovation, jointly complete the 
    
   "emotional model" of user's emotional characteristics,guide network 
   automatically configure its various parameters and adapt to the changing 
   environment or application.

5.  Major Technical Challenges of Wisdom Network

   Wisdom network, which compares to the cognitive network [1] and ubiquitous 
   network [6], faces the following major technical challenges:

   Affective Computing is the computing that relates to, arises from, or 
   influences emotions. The goal of it is an attempt to create a computing
   system which can perceive, recognize and understand human emotions, can 
   make smart, sensitive,friend response to human emotions, that is, endow 
   computer with humanlike ability of observing, understanding and generating 
   a variety of emotions characteristics[8]. We hope the wisdom network that 
   can have humanlike "brain" thinking and understanding of human emotion, it 
   should be able to identify the user's emotional state and aware of people's 
   feelings changes in the interactive process with human. But people's feelings
   change is fluctuating[9], then how to use perceptive data of people's emotional
   state to build an appropriate "emotional model", and forecast for user's 
   intention of emotional changes, these are the challenges of the wisdom network.

   Predictive self-adaptation technology: it can predict user future behaviors 
   and changes of network environment, adjust system properties to adapt to the 
   new environment. Combining its ability of observations and cognitive, it uses 
   rational policy to achieve adaption. There are two challenges: one is how to 
   build people's emotional model and network environment model which can learn 
   from environment; the other is how to solve potential conflicts, when
   considering  problems of multiple users.
 
   Knowledge representation: the wisdom network should have its own knowledge,
   and knowledge must to be expressed in the form of information which are 
   understood by Wisdom process layer,so that the wisdom network is able to 
   analyze, judge, infer, forecast, learn, grow and innovate. Clark, who first 
   proposed the concept of knowledge plane, believed "Knowledge Plane which 
   dealt with knowledge sharing, a pervasive system within the network that 
   used cognitive information processing to build a self-managing network"[10].
zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                          [Page 9]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                                May 2014

   Wisdom plane possesses local and overall knowledge of network and network 
   elements. Knowledge in different fields are different, and their 
   representations are also different. How to find a unified knowledge 
   representation method is our facing problem.

6. Security Considerations

   Security can not be considered in the emergency command and dispatch 
   communication software.

7. IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any implications for IANA.

8. Conclusion

  This paper has presented, defined and described a new form of network 
  technology with wisdom, namely, wisdom network. It is a collaborative 
  network; it can distinguish, udgment;it can process information 
  resources into knowledge, achieve mastery of knowledge; it can self-manage,
  self-repair and self-adapt in the changing living environment; it can 
  predict the future changes of network environment and people's emotional 
  state. Network in the process can self-learn, self-grow and self-innovate. 
  The network has humanlike ability of observation, understanding people's 
  emotions and intentions. On the base of the definition of wisdom network,
  we describe the basic characteristics and architecture of it, and detailedly
  depict wisdom framework of it, finally, we propose a method to implement it, 
  namely, multi-agent technology.

9. Acknowledgements

  This work is supported by the Project supported by the Foundation for Key
  Program of Ministry of Education, P. R. China(No.311007), National Science
  Foundation Project of P. R. China (No. 60903004, 60902042, 61170014),
  National Science and Technology Key Projects (No. 2011 ZX03003-002-03) 
  and the National Research Foundation for the Doctoral Program of Higher 
  Education of P. R.China under Grant (No. 20090006110014).




zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                     [Page 10]
Internet-Draft             Wisdom Network                           May 2014

10.References

  [1]Thomas. R.W, DaSilva. L.A, MacKenzie. A. B. Cognitive Networks [J]. Proc. 
      IEEE Dyspan2005 [C] , 2005, pp: 352-360.

  [2]Qicui Gan, J. Chris Harreld, Yiwei Jiang, Yuheng Cheng, Jianjun Zhao. The 
      Smart Planet will win in China, 2008.

  [3]International Telecommunication Union UIT. ITU Internet Reports 2005: The 
      Internet of Things [R], 2005.

  [4]Gustavorg Mariom O, Carlos D K, Early infrastructure of all Internet of 
      Things in Spaces for Learning [C]. Eighth IEEE International Conference 
      on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2008, pp:381-383.

  [5]Amardeo C, Sarma J G, Identities in the Future Internet of Things [J]. 
      Wireless Pers Commun, Vol. 49, pp: 353-363, 2009.

Author's Addresses

   Xianwei Zhou

   Department of Communication Engineering

   School of Computer & Communication Engineering

   University of Science & Technology Beijing, Beijing, P.R. China

   E-mail address: zilengqier@sohu.com 












zhou, et al.          Expires  November 9, 2014                [Page 11]