HTTP			                                      Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  	Individual
Expires: Nov 18 2020                         		      May 18, 2020
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Need for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS
                         draft-pradeep-kumar-xplorer-ismirsgps-00


Abstract

   This document describes the need for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jul 17,2016.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Nov 18, 2020            [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS  May 18, 2020

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    This document describes the need for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS

2. Background
     To have one social media service like pesona.com integrating facebook.com google.com twitter.com GPS tools
	
3. General Information of the service
	

      
A model of social media individuality and information retrieval and geolocation tools merged into one.

Is there a need for google and facebook and twitter.

i find twitter a good social media tool to search for news and find travellers although the internet maturity of users is less. To know whats going on in chiangmai i just need to search for chiangmai.

if the individuals in facebook and twitter has indexed articles then a search can bring that out. A search for yoganidrasana can bring out articles video clips the individuals have indexed.

The most accessed indexes or individuals indexes should be shown first. So if everyone in the world is reading or searching my ebook lugimwidnaus then search for meowa should bring meowa as defined by me

Can google be eliminated and facebook and twitter merged.

I am saying if half a billion access my website dhyanayoga.info then it should be automatically indexed. Now search engines shows only manually indexed site and rank chosen by a few

I used a GPS location tool and wanted to find services and WWW users nearby.But there was no feature in that tool.

if i am communicating to a WWW identity then i should have the option to know the location of the user. For eg if i am interacting with facebook.com/orangina then i should know
where that user last logged in from. If i am recieving an email
i should know where the email originated from. 

I am in bali indonesia if i login to facebook.com i should be able to see those in my neighbourhood in terms of recent activity. All WWW identity should have an email also to message
them.
I am driving stuck in the highway i should be able to find location of nearby WWW users if i load the WWW user tool
a merger of facebook google twitter and GPS or its parallels.

	


Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Nov 18, 2020               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    NNeed for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS           May 18, 2020




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com



5.Acknowledgement
	

    

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Nov 18,2020               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for integration of social media information retrieval statistics and GPS       May 18,2020





