





Network Working Group                                         Alex Zinin
Internet Draft                                                   Alcatel
Expiration Date: November 2005                                  May 2005
File name: draft-zinin-microloop-analysis-01.txt


               Analysis and Minimization of Microloops in
                      Link-state Routing Protocols

                 draft-zinin-microloop-analysis-01.txt




Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than a "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   Link-state routing protocols (e.g. OSPF or IS-IS) are known to
   converge to a loop-free state within a finite period of time after a
   change in the topology. It is normal, however, to observe short-term
   loops during the period of topology update propagation, route
   recalculation, and forwarding table update, due to the asynchronous
   nature of link-state protocol operation. This document provides an
   analysis of formation of such microloops and suggests simple
   mechanisms to minimize them.




Zinin                                                           [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


1 Introduction

   Link-state routing protocols, such as [OSPF] and [ISIS] converge to a
   loop-free state within a finite period of time after a topology
   change. Additional changes postpone the convergence, but do not get
   in its way.

   During the period of convergence, however, link-state protocols
   exhibit short-term routing table inconsistencies caused by the
   protocol's asynchronous nature.  These incornsistencies may cause
   short-term packet loops, also known as microloops. For example, see a
   sample network in Figure 1.

                         +--+    1    +--+
                         |A |---------|B |
                         +--+         +--+
                          |  \  10      |
                         5|   ------    |1
                          |         \   |
                         +--+   10   \+--+
                         |E |---------|C |
                         +--+         +--+
                             \_      /
                            5  \    /1 (failure)
                                +--+
                                |D |
                                +--+

                        Figure 1. Microloop example

   We are interested in routers A and B and their best paths towards D.
   Before failure, B's best path to D is B-C-D with cost 2, and A's best
   path is A-B-C-D with cost 3.  When link C-D fails, both C and D
   announce their link state information with link C-D missing. Within a
   finite period of time, both A and B shall receive the topology
   updates and converge on them, installing new best paths: A-E-D (10)
   for A, and B-A-E-D (11) for B.  However, if, due to the timing
   differences, B calculates and installs its new best path through A
   before A has a chance to switch from B to E, a microloop will form
   between A and B for the duration of time required for A to complete
   its routing table update.

   Similar microloops may form when other topological changes happen in
   the network, for example, when a new link or a node is added, a link
   cost is changed, etc. In summary, whenever a topological change in
   the network results in changes of the shortest path three (SPT) for
   more than one node, it is possible for the network to exhibit
   temporary loops.



Zinin                                                           [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   This document provides an analysis of microloop formation.
   Specifically, we categorize different types of reconvergence
   scenarios, and explore their properties. We then show that in certain
   scenaiors microloops do not form, in others they can be eliminated
   using simple techniques described in this document, and define
   scenarios where more sophisticated loop avoidance mechanisms may be
   necessary.

2 Analysis

   To analyse the behavior of a network during reconvergence, we look at
   a given router and its neighbors before failure and during the
   transition to the new routes. More specifically, we analyse whether
   switching to the new routing information can result in loop formation
   or not.

2.1 Terminology

   The following terms are used in the draft.

     Downstream neighbor
          Neighbor N of router S is considered S's downstream neighbor
          for destination D, if Dopt(N, D) < Dopt(S, D)

     Primary neighbor
          Neighbor N of router S is considered S's primary neighbor for
          destination D, if N provides the shortest path to D according
          to the SPF calculation.

     Loop-free neighbor
          Neighbor N of router S is considered S's loop-free neighbor
          for destination D, if Dopt(N, D) < Dopt(N, S) + Dopt(S, D).
          Note that a loop-free neighbor may be, for example, router's
          primary before or after failure.

 2.2 Next hop safety condition

   We start the analysis with the following observation:

     When router X learns about a topology change and starts using
     neighbor Y as its new primary neighbor for a given destination, a
     microloop between X and Y can only form if the topology before
     failure or topology after failure are such that Y uses X as its
     primary neighbor for the same destination.

     Indeed, if the topologies before and after failure are such that Y
     does not use X as it's next hop, then there is no moment in time
     before Y learned about the failure or after it learned about it



Zinin                                                           [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


     when it would forward traffic to X. Hence, at least one of the two
     topologies must be such that Y uses X as its next hop for a
     microloop between X and Y to form.

   Based on the above, we can define a safety condition for neighbor Y
   of router X that has just learned about a topology change. Note that
   the condition must satisfy the topological criteria above, and be
   non-recursive, i.e. not lead to loops if both X and Y follow it.

     Next-hop safety condition:

          For networks with symmetric link costs, after a topology
          change, it is safe for router X to switch to neigbor Y as its
          next-hop for a specific destination if the path through Y sat-
          isfies both of the following criteria:

          1.   X considered Y as its loop-free neighbor based on the
               topology before change AND

          2:   X considers Y as its downstream neighbor based on the
               topology after change.

          The first requirement ensures that Y has not been forwarding
          traffic to X before the change occured and both X and Y used
          old topology. The second requirement makes sure Y does not
          forward traffic to X when Y learns the new topology.

          The difference in the conditions before and after failure is
          there to make sure that X and Y do not recursively consider
          each other as safe next-hops when they learn about the fail-
          ure.

   For networks with asymmetric link costs, the safety condition is mod-
   ified as follows:

          Y is X's downstream neighbor based on the topology both before
          AND after the change.

   Whether a given router uses a the safety condition for symmetric or
   assymetric link costs will affect micro-loop coverage. Generally, the
   stricter condition for asymmetric link costs will result in poorer
   coverage, however using the less strict (symmetric-link) condition in
   networks with asymmetric link costs may result in transformation of
   single-hop loops into multi-hop ones rather than their removal.

   Routers SHOULD use the symmetric-link safety condition by default,
   MAY attempt to dynamically determine the method that needs to be
   applied based on the topological information from the routing



Zinin                                                           [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   protocol, and SHOULD provide the administrator an opportunity to man-
   ually override this setting.



 2.3 Transition types

   Here, we analyse different types of scenarios that a given router may
   find itself in after learning about a topology change.

   For each topological change, the network will have three major types
   of nodes categorized by the degree of safety of their old primary,
   new primary, and other neighbors.


     Type A

          Routers whose new primary next-hops after the topology change
          are safe and transition to them will not create a microloop.
          Two subtypes are recognized:

          A1:  Routers whose primaries haven't changed as a result of
               the topology change

          A2:  Routers whose new primary satisfies the safety condition


     Type B

          Routers whose new primary next-hops after the topology change
          do not satisfy the safety condition, but that have at least
          one other neighbor that does. Note that such a neighbor can be
          the router's old primary (type B1) or a neighbor that is nei-
          ther old nor new primary (type B2).


     Type C

          Routers that have no neighbor that satisfies the safety condi-
          tion.

   It is clear that type-A routers can immediately switch to their new
   primary next hops once they are calculated after the topology change.

   It can also be shown that if type-B routers do not immediately switch
   to their new primaries, but use their safe next-hops for some time,
   switching to the new primaries later will not create loops, provided
   that their downstream routers have also switched to the safe hops or



Zinin                                                           [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   have already switched to the new primaries.

   The following section formally defines the mechanism.

3. Loop prevention mechanism

 3.1 Basic procedures

   For a description of several architectural constants used in this
   document (named as "DELAY_xxx"), refer to section 3.4.

   On receiving a topology update, the router delays its SPF calculation
   by DELAY_SPF time in order to collect the remaining updates that
   relate to the same topological event (e.g. update from the router
   connected to the second end of a point-to-point link).

   Upon expiration of DELAY_SPF, the router calculates the new SPT, the
   new routes, checks the safety status of each neighbor using the con-
   ditions in section 3.1, and applies the following logic for each
   route depending on the type of role it finds itself in:


     Type A:
          The route SHALL be updated with the new primary next-hops
          without an additional delay.

     Type B:
          Without an additional delay, the route SHALL be updated with
          one or more temporary next-hops that satisfy the safety condi-
          tion. These temporary next-hops SHALL be used for the duration
          of DELAY_TYPEB. After DELAY_TYPEB, the route SHALL be updated
          with the new primary next-hops.


     Type C:
          The route's old (primary) next-hops SHALL continue to be used
          for DELAY_TYPEC.  After DELAY_TYPEC, the route SHALL be
          updated with the new primary next-hops.

   If, after expiration of DELAY_SPF, the router receives a topology
   update sooner than DELAY_STABLE after the previous one, the router
   MUST fall back to the regular convergence mechanisms (immediate
   installation of the new primary next-hops) aborting any transition
   processes initiated as part of procedures described here (i.e., if
   DELAY_TYPEB or DELAY_TYPEC timers are still running), MUST recalcu-
   late its routing table as soon as practical, and MUST refrain from
   using the mechanisms described here until it has seen no topological
   updates for at least DELAY_STABLE. This is a safeguard mechanism to



Zinin                                                           [Page 6]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   ensure that procedures described here are applied only when a single
   failure is experienced and that the network converges in a situation
   where multiple topological events or network instabilities are expe-
   rienced.

3.2 Equal Cost Multipath Considerations

   In situations where more than one primary next-hop is available after
   the topology change, there are several possible combination of their
   safety properties:

     1)   All new next-hops satisfy the safery condition (a pure type-A
          situation)

     2)   Some of the new next-hops satisfy the safety condition, some
          of them do not (a combination of type-A and type-B, or type-A
          and type-C)

     3)   None of the new next-hops satisfy the safety condition, how-
          ever, there's at least one other neighbor that satisfies it (a
          type-B situation)

     4)   None of the new next-hops satisfy the safety condition, and
          there is no other neighbor that satisfies it (a pure type-C
          situation).
   For situations 1, 3, and 4 above, the implementation merely follows
   the basic procedures described in section 3.1

   For situation 2 (an A/B or an A/C combination), the implementation:

     1)   SHALL update the route with the new next-hops that satisfy the
          safety condition without an additional delay

     2)   SHALL add the remaining new next-hops after DELAY_TYPEB.

3.3 IP Fast Reroute Considerations

   If the router implements [IPFRR] and performs local failure repair,
   procedures describes in this document still need to be applied in
   order to prevent micro-loops while reconverging on the new topology.

   After initiating the local repair, the router directly attached to
   the point of failure follows the procedures described in this docu-
   ment--it delays its SPF calculation to collect updates from other
   routers, calculates new routes, and classifies the next-hops.

   The difference with routers that learn about the failure from the
   routing protocol updates, is that one or more of the repairing



Zinin                                                           [Page 7]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   router's old next-hops has become unavailable, and hence cannot be
   considered as the temporary safe next-hops for type-B operation.
   Also, if the router was able to locally repair the failure, and the
   new primary next-hops do not satisfy the safety condition, the router
   should consider itself in the middle of type-B operation with the
   temporary safe neighbor engaged as part of IP Fast Reroute operation.

   Another difference is when the router could not repair the failure,
   the new primary next-hops do not satisfy the safety condition, and
   there's no other neighbor that does, i.e. a type-C situation. Unlike
   other routers in the network, the router directly connected to the
   network does not have the old next-hop any more, and cannot continue
   using it. In this situation, the router MUST revert to the regular
   convergence procedures, and update the route with the new next-hops
   with no additional delay.

   As a result, there are the following possible scenarios:

     1)   If the new primary next-hops satisfy the safery condition, the
          router updates the routes without an additional delay.

     2)   Otherwise, if the failure could be repaired locally by IP Fast
          Reroute, the router continues to use the repair path for
          DELAY_TYPEB and updates the routes with the new primary next-
          hops after it expires.

     3)   Otherwise (new next-hops are not safe, and failure couldn't be
          repaired), the router reverts to the regular procedures and
          updates the route with new next-hops without an additional
          delay.

3.4 Architectural Constants

   The following architectural constants have been used in the descrip-
   tion of the algorithm above:

     DELAY_SPF
          The delay between the moment the router receives a topology
          update after a period of stability and the moment it starts
          its routing table recalculation.  This delay is necessary to
          collect multiple updates originated by different routers that
          relate to the same topological event.

     DELAY_STABLE
          Period of time, during which the network topology is consid-
          ered to be stable if the router receives no topological
          updates. When the first update after DELAY_STABLE is received,
          all other updates that fit within DELAY_SPF are considered as



Zinin                                                           [Page 8]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


          related to a single topological event.

     DELAY_TYPEB and DELAY_TYPEC
          Periods of time used by the router to delay installation of
          new primary next-hops after a topology change when the router
          has (type-B) or has not (type-C) a safe neighbor to temporary
          divert the traffic to in the meantime.

   While correctness and effectiveness of the algorithm described here
   does not depend on the actual values assigned to the architectural
   constants, it does depend on the relationship between them, and the
   assumption that all routers in the same network use the same values.

   To satisfy these constrains, and yet allow these delays to be
   decreased as implementations continue to improve towards faster con-
   vergence, this document defines the architectural constants as con-
   figurable, specifies the required relationship between the values,
   and the default values that should be used by the implementations.

   The following equations define the relationship between the constants
   that needs to be maintained in order for the mechanism described here
   to provide desireable results:

    DELAY_SPF > update-propagation-time

    DELAY_STABLE > DELAY_TYPEB > DELAY_TYPEC > fault-propagation-time

   where:

     o    update-propagation-time is the time it is expected to take
          routers in the network to detect the failure, and originate
          and propagate new link-state information.

     o    fault-propagation-time is update-propagation plus the time it
          is expected to take routers in the network to calculate the
          new SPT, check the safety condition of the neighbors, and
          install required FIB entries.

   Because fault-propagation-time includes update-propagation-time, and
   DELAY_SPF (since every router will delay its SPF according to this
   document):

    fault-propagation-time > DELAY_SPF + update-propagation-time

   and hence the equations above can be converted to one:

    DELAY_STABLE > DELAY_TYPEB > DELAY_TYPEC > (DELAY_SPF + update-prop-
   agation-time)



Zinin                                                           [Page 9]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   The implementations SHOULD use the following default values for the
   architectural constants:

        Constant                   Default val
       ----------------------------------------
        DELAY_SPF                   500 msec
        DELAY_TYPEC                   2 sec
        DELAY_TYPEB                   4 sec
        DELAY_STABLE                 10 sec


4 Coverage analysis

   The above algorithm minimizes the probability of loop formation. More
   specifically, loops will only be possible when two neighboring
   routers both experience the type C condition after the topology
   change. Appendix A shows that transitions between A-A, A-B, A-C, and
   B-C routers are loop-free.

   While this mechanism does not remove all possible micro-loops, it
   addresses the majority of them in topologies with a reasonable level
   of physical redundancy.  Topologically, micro-loop coverage provided
   by this algorithm is

5 Security Considerations

   The mechanism described in this document does not modify any routing
   protocol messages, and hence no new threats related to packet modifi-
   cations or replay attacks are introduced. The mechanism changes cer-
   tain delays used in node-local algorithms and introduces partial
   event ordering after a topology change has occured. This, however,
   does not introduce new security risks. For type-B situations, traffic
   to certain destinations can be temporarily routed via next-hop
   routers that would not be used with the same topology change if this
   mechanism wasn't employed. However, these next-hop routers can be
   used anyway when a different topological change occurs, and hence
   this can't be viewed as a new security threat.

Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Don Fedyk, Chris Martin, Mike Shand,
   Alex Audu, Olivier Bonaventure, Stefano Previdi, and other members of
   the IETF RTGWG for their useful comments. Special thanks go to Alia
   Atlas who, among other things, was instrumental in fine-tuning the
   safety condition.

References




Zinin                                                          [Page 10]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   [OSPF] J. Moy. OSPF version 2. Technical Report RFC 2328, Internet
          Engineering Task Force, 1998.

   [ISIS] ISO, "Intermediate system to Intermediate system routeing
          information exchange protocol for use in conjunction with the
          Protocol for providing the Connectionless-mode Network Service
          (ISO 8473)," ISO/IEC 10589:1992.

   [IPFRR] Atlas, A., "Basic Specification for IP Fast-Reroute:
          Loop-free Alternates", Internet Engineering Task Force, Work
          in Progress, draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-spec-base-03.txt

Author's Address

    Alex Zinin
    Alcatel
    701 E Middlefield Rd
    Mountain View, CA 94043
    E-mail: zinin@psg.com


Appendix A. Loop formation analysis


   S is the calculating router discovering the failure through a link-state
   update. P is the old primary, NP is the new primary.

    BF:
                        <------
            [P]----------------[S]----------------[NP]
               ...>?

    AF:

                                  ------>
            [P]----------------[S]----------------[NP]
                                              ?<...

   To analyze possible loop formation, we need to check the following:


     1)   if it is possible for P to start forwarding packets to S
          before S switches to NP

     2)   if it is possible for NP to be forwarding packets back to S
          before or after S starts using it

   Assumptions are that type-As switch-over to NP immediately, and type-



Zinin                                                          [Page 11]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   Bs and type-Cs wait certain amount of time so that:

      DELAY_TYPEB > DELAY_TYPEC > fault-propagation-time

   1. S is type A:

   BF analysis:

     1.1 If P is another type-A, then S cannot be its new primary, since
     S has not been P's LFA before (since it's been fwd'ing through P).
     Hence, P will not route through S AF, and the will be no loops
     between P and S.

     1.2 If P is a type-B, then S hasn't been P's LF neighbor BF, and P
     will not forward through S at least for DELAY_TYPEB, which gives S
     enough time to switch to NP. After DELAY_TYPEB P may start using S
     as it's new primary.

     1.3 If P is a type-C, then it hasn't been forwarding traffic to S
     BF, and will not use S as its new primary at least for DELAY_TYPEC,
     which should give S enough time to switch to NP.

     1.4 Consequently, no loops will form between a type-A node and it's
     old primary before the type-A nodes switches to its new primary.

   AF analysis:

     1.5 Regardless of its type, NP has not been forwarding packets to S
     BF and will not do so AF by definition of type-A.

     1.6 Consequently, no loops will form between a type-A node and it's
     new primary before or after the type-A nodes switches to it.

   2. S is type B:

   BF analysis:

     2.1 If P is a type-A, then similarly to 1.1 above, there will be no
     routes between P and S.

     2.2 If P is another type-B, then similarly to 1.2, S will not be
     used by P for at least DELAY_TYPEB, and S will have enough time to
     switch to its safe hops or NP.

     2.3 If P is a type-C, then similarly to 1.3, S hasn't been receiv-
     ing traffic from P BF, and will not AF for at least DELAY_TYPEC,
     which should give S enough time to switch to its safe hops or NP.




Zinin                                                          [Page 12]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


     2.4 Consequently, no loops will form between a type-B node and it's
     old primary before the type-B nodes switches to its new primary.

   AF analysis:

     2.5 If NP is a type-A, then because of the DELAY_TYPEB NP must have
     had enough time to switch to its new NP, which cannot be S by defi-
     nition of SPT considering that NP is S's new nexthop in the SPT AF.

     2.6 If NP is another type-B, then because of DELAY_TYPEB, NP must
     have had enough time to switch from its old primary and can equally
     likely be routing through either its safe hops, or its new primary.
     Neither of the two can be S by definition of a downstream node (for
     safe hops) and SPT (for new primary).

     2.7 If NP is a type-C, then because DELAY_TYPEB > DELAY_TYPEC, NP
     must have had enough time to switch to its new primary, which can't
     be S by definition of SPT and considering that NP is S's nexthop in
     the SPT AF.

     2.8 Consequently, no loops will form between a type-B node and it's
     new primary before or after the type-A nodes switches to it.

   3. S is type C:

   BF analysis:

     3.1 If P is a type-A, then similarly to 1.1 before, S has not been
     P's LF neighbor before and hence won't be its new primary, so no
     loops will form between P and S.

     3.2 If P is a type-B, then similarly to 1.2, S will not be used by
     P for at least DELAY_TYPEB, and because DELAY_TYPEB > DELAY_TYPEC,
     S will have enough time to switch to NP.

     3.3 If P is another type-C, then it hasn't been using S as its pri-
     mary BF, but it is possible for P to consider S as its new primary
     AF and to install routes before S after their DELAY_TYPEC expires.
     Hence, a microloop is possible between P and S.

     3.4 Consequently, a microloop between a type-C node and its old
     primary is possible only if the old primary is also a type-C node
     and it considers S as its new primary AF. Note that DELAY_TYPEC
     only delays probably loop formation, but does not increase its
     duration, as both neighboring routers are using the same delay.

   AF analysis:




Zinin                                                          [Page 13]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


     3.5 If NP is a type-A, then because of the DELAY_TYPEC NP must have
     had enough time to switch to its new NP, which cannot be S by defi-
     nition of SPT considering that NP is S's new nexthop in the SPT AF.

     3.6 If NP is a type-B, then because of DELAY_TYPEC, NP must have
     had enough time to switch to its safe hops, which can't be S by
     definition of a downstream node and considering that NP is S's new
     SPT next-hop.

     3.7 If NP is another type-C, a loop is possible if S's DELAY_TYPEC
     expires before that on NP and NP has been using S as its primary
     BF.

     3.8 Consequently, a microloop between a type-C node and its new
     primary is possible only if the new primary is also a type-C node
     and S was NP's primary BF.

   4. Given the above analysis, it can be noted that, for a given fail-
   ure, presence of single type-C nodes in the network does not create
   microloops.
    It is the C-C combination that introduces this potential.


IPR Disclaimer

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any assur-
   ances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt
   made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.

Full Copyright Statement



Zinin                                                          [Page 14]





INTERNET DRAFT    IGP Microloop Analysis & Minimization         May 2005


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFOR-
   MATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.








































Zinin                                                          [Page 15]


