 Internet Draft                                   David Allan, Editor
 Document: draft-ietf-mpls-oam-frmwk-04.txt           Nortel Networks
                                             Thomas D. Nadeau, Editor
                                                   Cisco Systems, Inc.
 Category: Informational
 Expires: May 2006                                      November 2005


                 A Framework for MPLS Operations
                       and Management (OAM)


 Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of
   BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than
   as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

 Abstract
    This document is a framework for how data plane protocols can
    be applied to operations and maintenance procedures for
    Multi-Protocol Label Switching. The document is structured to
    outline how Operations and Management functionality can be used to
    assist in fault management, configuration, accounting, performance
    management and security, commonly known by the acronym FCAPS.












MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 1]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005



 Table of Contents
 1.   Introduction ...................................................2
 2.   Terminology.....................................................2
 3.   Fault Management................................................3
    3.1 Fault detection...............................................3
    3.1.1 Enumeration and detection of types of data plane faults.....3
    3.1.2 Timeliness..................................................5
    3.2 Diagnosis.....................................................6
    3.2.1 Characterization............................................6
    3.2.2 Isolation...................................................6
    3.3 Availability..................................................7
 4.    Configuration Management.......................................7
 5.    Accounting Management..........................................7
 6.    Performance Management.........................................7
 7.    Security Management............................................8
 8.    IANA Considerations ...........................................8
 9.    Security Considerations .......................................8
 10.   Intellectual Property Statement................................8
 11.   Disclaimer of Validity.........................................9
 12.   Copyright statement............................................9
 13.   Acknowledgements...............................................9
 14.   References.....................................................9
 14.1  Normative References ..........................................9
 14.2  Informative References ........................................9
 15.   Authors' Address..............................................10


 1. Introduction

    This memo outlines in broader terms how data plane protocols
    can assist in meeting the operations and management (OAM)
    requirements outlined in [MPLSREQS] and [Y1710] and can apply to
    the management functions of fault, configuration, accounting,
    performance and security (commonly known as FCAPS) for MPLS networks
    as defined in [RFC3031]. The approach of the document is to outline
    functionality, the potential mechanisms to provide the function and
    the required the applicability of data plane OAM functions. Included
    in the discussion are security issues specific to use of tools
    within a provider domain and use for inter provider LSPs.

 2. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

    OAM          Operations and Management
    FCAPS        Fault management, Configuration management,
                 Administration management, Provisioning
                 management, and Security management
    FEC          Forwarding Equivalence Class

MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 2]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005


    ILM          Incoming Label Map
    NHLFE        Next Hop Label Forwarding Entry
    MIB          Management Information Base
    LSR          Label Switching Router
    RTT          Round Trip Time

 3. Fault Management

 3.1 Fault detection

    Fault detection encompasses the identification of all data
    plane failures between the ingress and egress of an LSP.
    This section will enumerate common failure scenarios and
    explain how one might (or might not) detect the situation.

 3.1.1 Enumeration and detection of types of data plane faults

    Lower layer faults:

         Lower layer faults are those in the physical or virtual link
         that impact the transport of MPLS labeled packets between
         adjacent LSRs at the specific level of interest. Some physical
         links (such as SONET/SDH) may have link layer OAM functionality
         and detect and notify the LSR of link layer faults directly.
         Some physical links (such as Ethernet) may not have this
         capability and require MPLS or IP layer heartbeats to detect
         failures. However, once detected, reaction to these fault
         notifications is often the same as those described in the first
         case.

    Node failures:

         Node failures are those that impact the forwarding capability
         of a node component, including its entire set of links. This
         can be due to component failure, power outage, or reset of
         control processor in an LSR employing a distributed
         architecture, etc.

    MPLS LSP misforwarding:

         Misforwarding occurs when there is a loss of synchronization
         between the data and the control planes in one or more nodes.
         This can occur due to hardware failure, software failure or
         configuration problems.

         It will manifest itself in one of two forms:

         - packets belonging to a particular LSP are cross-connected
           into an NHLFE for which there is no corresponding ILM at
           the next downstream LSR. This can occur in cases where the



MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 3]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005



           NHLFE entry is corrupted. Therefore the packet arrives at
           the next LSR with a top label value for which the LSR has no
           corresponding forwarding information, and is typically
           dropped. This is a No Incoming Label Map (No ILM) condition
           and can be detected directly by the downstream LSR which
           receives the incorrectly labeled packet.

         - packets belonging to a particular LSP are cross-connected
           into an incorrect NHLFE entry for which there is a
           corresponding ILM at the next downstream LSR, but is
           associated with a different LSP. This may be detected by
           a number of means:
              o some or all of the misdirected traffic is not routable
                at the egress node.
              o Or OAM probing is able to detect the fault by detecting
                the inconsistency between the data path and the control
                plane state.

    Discontinuities in the MPLS Encapsulation
         The forwarding path of the FEC carried by an LSP may transit
         nodes or links for which MPLS is not configured. This may
         result in a number of behaviors which are undesirable and not
         easily detected
         - if exposed payload is not routable at the LSR resulting in
         silent discard OR
         - the exposed MPLS label was not offered by the LSR which may
         result in either silent discard or misforwarding

         Alternately the payload may be routable and packets
         successfully delivered but bypasses associated MPLS
         instrumentation and tools.

    MTU problems
         MTU problems occur when client traffic cannot be fragmented by
         intermediate LSRs, and is dropped somewhere along the path of
         the LSP. MTU problems should appear as a discrepancy in the
         traffic count between the set of ingresses and the egresses for
         a FEC and will appear in the corresponding MPLS MIB performance
         tables in the transit LSRs as discarded packets.

    TTL Mishandling
         The implementation of TTL handling is inconsistent at
         penultimate hop LSRs. Tools that rely on consistent TTL
         processing may produce inconsistent results in any given
         network.

    Congestion
         Congestion occurs when the offered load on any interface
         exceeds the link capacity for sufficient time that the
         interface buffering is exhausted. Congestion problems will


MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 4]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005


         appear as a discrepancy in the traffic count between the set of
         ingresses and the egresses for a FEC and will appear in the
         MPLS MIB performance tables in the transit LSRs as discarded
         packets.

    Misordering
         Misordering of LSP traffic occurs when incorrect or
         inappropriate load sharing is implemented within an MPLS
         network. Load sharing typically takes place when equal cost
         paths exist between the ingress and egress of an LSP. In these
         cases, traffic is split among these equal cost paths using a
         variety of algorithms. One such algorithm relies on splitting
         traffic between each path on a per-packet basis. When this is
         done, it is possible for some packets along the path to be
         delayed due to congestion or slower links, which may result in
         packets being received out of order at the egress. Detection
         and remedy of this situation may be left up to client
         applications that use the LSPs. For instance, TCP is capable of
         re-ordering packets belonging to a specific flow (although this
         may result in re-transmission of some of the misordered
         packets).

         Detection of mis-ordering can also be determined by sending
         probe traffic along the path and verifying that all probe
         traffic is indeed received in the order it was transmitted.
         This will only detect truly pathological problems as
         misordering typically is an insufficiently predictable and
         repeatable problem.

         LSRs do not normally implement mechanisms to detect misordering
         of flows.

    Payload Corruption
         Payload corruption may occur and be undetectable by LSRs. Such
         errors are typically detected by client payload integrity
         mechanisms.

 3.1.2 Timeliness

    The design of SLAs and management support systems requires that
    ample headroom be alloted in terms of their processing capabilites
    in order to process and handle all necessary fault conditions
    within the bounds stipulated in the SLA. This includes planning for
    event handling using a time budget which takes into account the
    over-all SLA and time to address any defects which arise. However,
    it is possible that some fault conditions may surpass this budget
    due their catastrophic nature (e.g.: fibre cut) or due to
    misplanning of the time processing budget.





MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 5]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005


        ^    --------------
        |    |           ^
        |    |           |----  Time to notify NOC + process/correct
  SLA   |    |           v      defect
  Max - |    -------------
  Time  |    |           ^
        |    |           |-----  Time to dignose/isolate/correct
        |    |           v
        v    -------------

        Figure 1: Fault Correction Budget

    In figure 1, we represent the overall fault correction time budget
    by the maximum time as specified in an SLA for the service in
    question. This time is then divided into two subsections, the first
    encompassing the total time required to detect a fault and notify an
    operator (or optionally automatically correct the defect). This
    section may have an explicit maximum time to detect defects arising
    from either the application or a need to do alarm management (i.e.:
    supression) and this will be reflected in the frequency of OAM
    execution. The second section indicates the time required to notify
    the operational systems used to diagnose, isolate and correct the
    defect (if they cannot be corrected automatically).

 3.2 Diagnosis

 3.2.1 Characterization

    Characterization is defined as determining the forwarding path of a
    packet (which may not be necessarily known). Characterization may be
    performed on a working path through the network. This is done for
    example, to determine ECMP paths, the MTU of a path, or simply to
    know the path occupied by a specific FEC. Characterization will be
    able to leverage mechanisms used for isolation.

 3.2.2 Isolation

    Isolation of a fault can occur in two forms. In the first case, the
    local failure is detected, and the node where the failure occurred
    is capable of issuing an alarm for such an event. The node should
    attempt to withdraw the defective resources and/or rectify the
    situation prior to raising an alarm. Active data plane OAM
    mechanisms may also detect the failure conditions remotely and issue
    their own alarms if the situation is not rectified quickly enough.

    In the second case, the fault has not been detected locally. In this
    case, the local node cannot raise an alarm, nor can it be expected
    to rectify the situation. In this case, the failure may be detected
    remotely via data plane OAM.  This mechanism should also be able to
    determine the location of the fault, perhaps on the basis of limited
    information such as a customer complaint. This mechanism may also be


MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 6]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005


    able to automatically remove the defective resources from and the
    network and restore service, but should at least provide a network
    operator with enough information by which they can perform this
    operation. Given that detection of faults is desired to happen as
    quickly as possible, tools which posses the ability to incrementally
    test LSP health should be used to uncover faults.

 3.3 Availability

    Availability is the measure of the percentage of time that a service
    is operating within specification, often specified by an SLA.

    MPLS has several forwarding modes (depending on the control plane
    used). As such more than one model may be defined and require more
    than one measurement technique.


 4.  Configuration Management

    Data plane OAM can assist in configuration management by providing
    the ability to verify the configuration of an LSP or of applications
    utilizing that LSP. This would be an ad-hoc data plane probe
    that should both verify path integrity (a complete path exists) as
    well as verifying that the path function is synchronized with the
    control plane. The probe would carry as part of the payload relevant
    control plane information that the receiver would be able to compare
    with the local control plane configuration.

 5. Accounting

    The requirements for accounting in MPLS networks as specified in
    [MPLSREQS] do not place any requirements on data plane OAM.

 6.  Performance Management

    Performance management permits the information transfer
    characteristics of LSPs to be measured, perhaps in order to
    compare against an SLA. This falls into two categories, latency
    (where jitter is considered a variation in latency) and information
    loss.

    Latency can be measured in two ways: one is to have precisely
    synchronized clocks at the ingress and egress such that timestamps
    in PDUs flowing from the ingress to the egress can be compared. The
    other is to use an exchange of PING type PDUs that gives a round
    trip time (RTT) measurement, and an estimate of the one way latency
    can be inferred with some loss of precision. Use of load spreading
    techniques such as ECMP mean that any individual RTT measurement is
    only representative of the typical RTT for a FEC.

    To measure information loss, a common practice is to periodically


MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 7]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005

    read ingress and egress counters (i.e.: MIB module counters). This
    information may also be used for offline correlation. Another common
    practice is to send explicit probe traffic which traverses the data
    plane path in question. This probe traffic can also be used to
    measure jitter and delay.

 7. Security Management

    Providing a secure OAM environment is required if MPLS specific
    network mechanisms are to be used successfully. To this end,
    operators have a number of options when deploying network mechanisms
    including simply filtering OAM messages at the edge of the MPLS
    network. Malicious users should not be able to use non-MPLS
    interfaces to insert MPLS specific OAM transactions. Provider
    initiated OAM transactions should be able to be blocked from leaking
    outside the MPLS cloud.

    Finally, if a provider does wish to allow OAM messages to flow into
    (or through) their networks, for example, in a multi-provider
    deployment, authentication and authorization is required to prevent
    malicious and/or unauthorized access. Also, given that MPLS networks
    often run IP simultaneously, similar requirements apply to any 
    native IP OAM network mechanisms in use. Therefore, authentication 
    and authorization for OAM technologies is something that MUST be
    considered when designing network mechanism which satisfy the
    requirements presented in this document.

    OAM messaging can address some existing security concerns with the
    MPLS architecture. i.e. through rigorous defect handling operator's
    can offer their customers a greater degree of integrity protection
    that their traffic will not be misdelivered (for example by being
    able to detect leaking LSP traffic from a VPN).

    Support for inter-provider data plane OAM messaging introduces a
    number of security concerns as by definition, portions of LSPs will
    not be within a single provider's network, the provider has no
    control over who may inject traffic into the LSP which can be
    exploited for denial of service attacks. OAM PDUs are not
    explicitly identified in the MPLS header and therefore are not
    typically inspected by transit LSRs. This creates opportunity for
    malicious or poorly behaved users to disrupt network operations.
    Attempts to introduce filtering on target LSP OAM flows may be
    problematic if flows are not visible to intermediate LSRs. However
    it may be possible to interdict flows on the return path between
    providers (as faithfulness to the forwarding path is ot a return
    path requirement) to mitigate aspects of this vulnerability.

    OAM tools may permit unauthorized or malicious users to extract
    significant amounts of information about network configuration. This
    would be especially true of IP based tools as in many network
    configurations, MPLS does not typically extend to untrusted hosts,
    but IP does. For example, TTL hiding at ingress and egress LSRs will


MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 8]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005


    prevent external users from using TTL-based mechanisms to probe an
    operator's network. This suggests that tools used for problem
    diagnosis or which by design are capable of extracting significant
    amounts of information will require authentication and authorization
    of the originator. This may impact the scalability of such tools
    when employed for monitoring instead of diagnosis.

8. IANA Considerations

   This document does not contain any IANA considerations.

9. Security Considerations

   This draft describes a framework for MPLS Operations and Management.
   Although this document discusses and addresses some security
   concerns in section 7 above, it does not introduce any new
   security concerns.


10. Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

11. Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE



MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006               [Page 9]

Internet Draft            MPLS OAM Framework            November 2005




   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

12. Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
      retain all their rights.13. Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

   The editors would like to thank Monique Morrow from Cisco Systems,
   and Harmen van Der Linde from AT&T for their valuable review comments
   on this document.


14. References

14.1 Normative References

    [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

    [RFC3031] Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon,
              "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", RFC
              3031, January 2001.

    [MPLSREQS] Nadeau et.al., "OAM Requirements for MPLS Networks",
               draft-ietf-mpls-oam-requirements-05.txt, November 2004

    [Y1710] ITU-T Recommendation Y.1710(2002), "Requirements for OAM
            Functionality for MPLS Networks"

14.1 Informative References


15. Authors' Addresses

    David Allan
    Nortel Networks              Phone: +1-613-763-6362
    3500 Carling Ave.            Email: dallan@nortelnetworks.com
    Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA

    Thomas D. Nadeau
    Cisco Systems                Phone: +1-978-936-1470
    300 Beaver Brook Drive       Email: tnadeau@cisco.com
    Boxborough, MA 01824

MPLS Working Group            Expires May 2006              [Page 10]
