



Network Working Group                                            L. Yong
Internet-Draft                                                  D. Cheng
Intended status: Standards Track                                  W. Hao
Expires: September 5, 2015                                   D. Eastlake
                                                Huawei Technologies Ltd.
                                                                   A. Qu
                                                                MediaTek
                                                               J. Hudson
                                                                 Brocade
                                                             U. Chunduri
                                                           Ericsson Inc.
                                                           March 4, 2015


                       IGP Multicast Architecture
                  draft-yong-pim-igp-multicast-arch-00

Abstract

   This document specifies the architecture of IP multicast routing
   using an Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP).

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2015.







Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.3.  Conventions used in this Document . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.4.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  An Overview of IGP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Routing IP Multicast Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Multicast Distribution Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       4.1.1.  Bidirectional Distribution Tree . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Advertising Multicast Group Membership  . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  Requirements of Edge Routers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.4.  Intra-Area Multicast Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.5.  Inter-Area Multicast Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.5.1.  Behavior of IS-IS L2 Router . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.5.2.  Behavior of OSPF ABR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.6.  Heterogeneous Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.7.  TE (Traffic Engineering) Support  . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.8.  Applications with Overlay Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.9.  IPv4 and IPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction







Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


1.1.  Overview

   In an IP network, IGP is used to route and forward IP unicast
   packets.  In doing so, the routers collect and maintain the network
   information and store them in their database.  The network
   information includes the identity of the routers and their
   interconnections.  In traffic engineering enabled network, the
   information also includes traffic related parameters such as link
   bandwidth.  The network information that has already maintained on
   routers, along with some minor IGP protocol extension as proposed in
   this document, are sufficient to route IP multicast packets.  This
   means a single IGP can be used for routing both unicast packets and
   multicast packets.  This document describes the architecture of
   routing IP multicast packets using the network information that is
   disseminated by IGP.

1.2.  Motivation

   With the explosion of IP technology based applications, the support
   of IP multicast delivery over the same IP network that carries IP
   unicast traffic becomes mandatory.  In many aspects, some basic
   requirements for routing IP multicast packets are the same as those
   for routing IP unicast packets; e.g., the "plug and play" nature of
   bringing up the routing engine and enabling the packets forwarding.
   It is desirable to use IGP that requires minimum configuration and
   currently only routes and forwards IP unicast packets, also to route
   and forward IP multicast packets.

   Currently in an IP network, a separate protocol such as Protocol
   Independent Multicast (PIM - [RFC4601]) must be used to route and
   forward IP multicast packets, whereby some network information are
   actually retrieved from IGP.  Using a single protocol, i.e., an IGP,
   to route both IP unicast and multicast packets is with much
   efficiency; e.g., there is no additional convergence time otherwise
   would be introduced by the second protocol.  Using one protocol also
   reduces the operational complexity.

   In an advanced data center network, it requires the decoupling of
   network IP space from service IP space, e.g., a VxLAN based network
   overlay [RFC7348].  To support all service applications, such IP
   network fabric must support both unicast and multicast.  Decoupling
   network IP space from service IP address space also provides network
   agility and programmability.  If network IP space is decoupled from
   service IP space, the network itself no longer needs manual
   configuration; automatically forming an IP network fabric can be
   done.





Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


1.3.  Conventions used in this Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.4.  Terminology

   This document makes use of the following terms:

   o  Edge Router: A router that has direct interfaces with one or more
      IP hosts.

   o  Distribution Tree: a rooted distribution tree with one root and
      one or more leaves and it is used facilitate routing multicast
      packets.

   o  IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol.

   o  Intra-Area: Refer to the communication between IGP routing nodes
      within a single IGP's area.

   o  Inter-Area: Refer to the communication between IGP routing nodes
      across area boundary.

   o  IP Multicast Group

   o  Link State Database: The database is constructed and maintained by
      a router running link state based routing algorithm such as IS-IS
      and OSPF.  It contains network based information including
      identity of routers and their interconnections, reachable IP
      addresses, etc.

   o  Local Group Database: The database is constructed and maintained
      by an edge router that stores and maintains entries of multicast-
      address, host pair.

   o  Pruned Tree: A subset of IGP's topology graph and with a tree
      root, from where, multicast packets are forwarded to one or more
      destination nodes with optimization of the usage of links and
      nodes.

   o  Root Node: A router served as a root in a multicast distribution
      tree.

   o  TE (Traffic Engineering) Database: The database is constructed and
      maintained by a router running link state based routing algorithm
      with TE extensions such as ISIS-TE and OSPF-TE.  It contains TE



Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


      parameters (such as bandwidth) that are associated with links and
      nodes.

   o  Transit Router: A router that is capable of receiving an IP
      multicast packet, then replicates it and sends to one or more
      other routers on the downstream direction in the same multicast
      distribution tree.

2.  An Overview of IGP

   There are currently two most deployed IGPs, and they are IS-IS
   [RFC1195]/[RFC5308] and OSPF [RFC2328]/[RFC2740].  IS-IS and OSPF are
   different in many aspects, but they both use link-state algorithm and
   the network information they disseminate for the same IP network are
   the same, including routers' IP addresses, routers' interconnections,
   reachable IP addresses, the network topology, etc.

   An IGP operation is with hierarchy.  An IGP runs within an area,
   where each participating router originates and advertises its own
   information (router's identity, interface IP addresses, identity of
   directly connected neighbors, etc.), and this information converges
   throughout the entire area but not beyond.  As a result, within an
   IGP area, each participating router maintains the information of all
   routers and their interconnections.  We call the collection of the
   network information as Link State Database, which is currently used
   as a base to calculate IP routing table for unicast packets within an
   IGP area.  Sometimes we refer to the topology within an IGP area as a
   topology graph.  Separate IGP areas may be interconnected and between
   areas, only reachability information is advertised across area
   boundary by Level-2 router in IS-IS or Area Border Router (ABR) in
   OSPF.

   [RFC1195] specifies an IGP for routing IPv4 unicast packets using IS-
   IS protocol (ISO), whereas [RFC5308] specifies the extensions to
   support routing IPv6 unicast packets.

   OSPFv2 [RFC2328] is an IGP for routing IPv4 unicast packets whereas
   OSPFv3 [RFC2740] is an IGP for routing IPv6 unicast packets.

   The link state based routing algorithm in OSPF and IS-IS calculates
   the shortest path from the source to the destination.  A routing
   table for routing unicast packets is generated on every participating
   IGP router.

   For some applications, path restrictions (e.g., link bandwidth) need
   to be considered.  As a result, extensions are added to both IS-IS
   and OSPF to support traffic engineering based unicast routing as
   follows:



Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   o  [RFC3630] - Traffic Engineering (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2

   o  [RFC3784] - Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS)
      Extensions for Traffic Engineering (TE)

   o  [RFC5329] - Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF Version 3

   A TE-capable IGP router, in addition to construct a Link State
   Database, also constructs and maintains a TE Database that stores the
   traffic parameters (e.g., bandwidth) associated with links and nodes,
   where the information is used for constraint based consideration
   during normal shortest path calculation.

3.  Scope

   To support IP multicast routing, either IS-IS or OSPF can be used and
   in the perspective of this document, there is no difference in
   choosing.  And there requires no change in IS-IS or OSPF, except that
   extensions are needed in both protocols to advertise and store
   distribution tree root node address and multicast group receiver
   information, refer to Section 4.2.

   Using IGP to route IP multicast packets is within IGP's architecture
   and routing paradigm.  IP multicast routing within an IGP area is
   called intra-area multicast routing, and IP multicast routing across
   IGP area is called inter-area multicast routing.  The concept, rules
   and behavior regarding intra-area unicast routing and inter-area
   unicast routing are all similarly applicable to intra-area and inter-
   area multicast routing, respectively.

   In an IPv4 network, IPv4 multicast packets can be routed using IS-IS
   (based on [RFC1195]) or OSPFv2 as introduced by this document.
   Similarly in an IPv6 network, IPv6 multicast packets can be routed
   using IS-IS (based on [RFC5308]) or OSPFv3 [RFC2740].  As the
   networking industry is currently under transition from IPv4 to IPv6,
   co-existence of the two is sometimes required.  Using the
   architecture described in this document, IPv4 multicast packets can
   be transported over an IPv6 network and vice versa, IPv6 multicast
   packets can be transported over an IPv4 network.

4.  Routing IP Multicast Packets

   As illustrated in Figure 1, a single IGP can be deployed to support
   both IP unicast and multicast routing.

   This section describes routing IP multicast packets using the
   existing network information that IGP collects, the related functions




Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   and characteristics, along with the required extensions to existing
   IGPs.

                  +-------------+ +-------------+
                  |  IP Unicast | | IP Multicast|
                  |   Routing   | |  Routing    |
                  +------^------+ +------^------+
                         |               |
                  +------o------+ +------o------+
                  |   Unicast   | |  Multicast  |
                  |Routing Table| |Routing Table|
                  +------^------+ +------^------+
                         |               |
                  +------o------+ +------o------+
                  |  Shortest   | | Distribution|
                  |  Path Tree  | |  Path Tree  |
                  +------^------+ +------^------+
                         |               |
                  +------o---------------o------+
                  |     Link State Database     |
                  +--------------^--------------+
                                 |
                  +--------------o--------------+
                  |             IGP             |
                  |   +---------+  +---------+  |
                  |   |   OSPF  |  |  IS-IS  |  |
                  |   +---------+  +---------+  |
                  +-----------------------------+


   Figure 1: Using an IGP to Route both IP Unicast and Multicast Packets

4.1.  Multicast Distribution Tree

   To route IP multicast packets, it requires a distribution tree.  A
   distribution tree consists of a tree root, one or more tree leaves,
   and some branch nodes.  The tree root is identified by the IP address
   (or Router ID) of an arbitrary router.  The tree root can be
   configured for a specific IP multicast address group, or
   automatically elected via an algorithm.  A tree leaf is an edge
   router and is a multicast destination.  A tree leaf is identified by
   an edge router's IP address and it is directly attached to one or
   more hosts that advertise the IP multicast group addresses (see
   Section 4.2 for details).  A router that is not a tree root but
   transmits a received IP multicast packet to another router is called
   a Transit Router, which is a branch node in the distribution tree.





Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   In general, there is a single multicast distribution tree for each IP
   multicast address group.  Once a distribution tree is formed, an IP
   packet with the multicast destination address is forwarded according
   to the multicast distribution tree, i.e., from the tree root to all
   tree leaves.

   Via configuration, additional distribution tree can be constructed
   for the same IP multicast address group, however with different tree
   root and tree branches (paths).  This option provides a redundancy
   for routing path protection, and it can also be used to support load
   balance.

   When a leaf node of a multicast distribution tree is in the same IGP
   area as the tree node, the packet flow from the root to the leaf is
   within a single IGP area.  This behavior is called IGP intra-area
   multicast routing.

   When a leaf node of a multicast distribution tree is in a different
   IGP area as the tree node, the packet flow from the root to the leaf
   must cross IGP area boundary.  This behavior is called IGP inter-area
   multicast routing.

   Unicast routing in an IGP domain requires minimum configuration.
   This characteristic is inherited for multicast routing, i.e., there
   requires minimum configuration and a multicast distribution tree can
   generally be constructed quickly in the same manner as a unicast
   routing table.

4.1.1.  Bidirectional Distribution Tree

   The IP multicast distribution tree as described above is uni-
   directional, i.e., all leaf nodes can only receive multicast packets
   destined to a given multicast address.  In this scenario, the tree
   root may be the traffic source and if not, the source must unicasts
   packets to the tree root, which then distributes the packets
   according to the distribution tree.  The uni-directionality of
   distribution tree is useful for applications such as video
   broadcasting.

   A multicast distribution tree can also be constructed as bi-
   directional.  In a bi-directional distribution tree, IP multicast
   packets destined to a given multicast address can traverse on any
   tree branch in both directions; that means any leaf node on the tree
   can be a multicast receiver but also a sender.  When a tree leaf node
   is a sender, it transmits its multicast packets to all other leaf
   nodes according to the bi-directional distribution tree.  The bi-
   directionality of distribution tree is useful for applications such
   as network virtualization overlays ([RFC7365]) and video conference.



Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   The algorithm to build a uni-directional distribution tree is in
   general different from that to build a bi-directional tree.  In both
   cases, care must be taken in order to build an optimized multicast
   distribution tree, such as the consideration of the average path
   length from the root to leaf nodes, the total links (branches) used
   for the distribution, etc.

   Configuration (along with a default) may be used to specify the
   directionality of an IP multicast distribution tree for a given IP
   multicast address group.

4.2.  Advertising Multicast Group Membership

   In order to support multicast routing, an IGP must be extended to
   store and advertise IP multicast addresses in the similar manner
   currently for IP unicast addresses.

   Pairs of [multicast-group, host] can be configured on an edge router,
   or learned from the interaction with IGMP/MLD(see Section 4.3).  In
   either case, the router would be required to advertise the IP
   multicast group membership throughout the IGP area.  The advertising,
   refresh, aging, and removal of IP multicast addresses are handled in
   the same manner as the existing database element, i.e., LSP in IS-IS
   and LSA in OSPF.

   IP multicast addresses can also be advertised across IGP area
   boundary using similar mechanism as for IP unicast addresses.  IP
   multicast addresses may be summarized similar to that of IP unicast
   addresses for scaling purpose.

   The details of storing and advertising IP multicast address using IS-
   IS is specified in a separate document.

   The details of storing and advertising IP multicast address using
   OSPF is specified in a separate document.

4.3.  Requirements of Edge Routers

   To support routing IP multicast packets, edge routers, i.e., routers
   that have interfaces directly connected to IP hosts, are required to
   run IGMP (IGMPv2/[RFC2236] or IGMPv3/[RFC3376]) for IPv4 based hosts
   and MLD (MLD/[RFC2710] or MLDv2/[RFC3810]) for IPv6 based hosts.

   As the result of interaction with hosts, an edge router would build a
   Local Group Database where each entry is a [multicast-group, host]
   pair, which indicates that the attached host belonging to the IP
   multicast group.  This process is on-going in order to keep track of




Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   the IP group membership addresses of attached hosts and strictly
   according to protocol specification of IGMP/MLD.

   The Local Group Database is used in two folds.  First, when an edge
   router receives an inbound IP multicast packet, it checks in the
   database to see if any entry that has any matching IP multicast-group
   address against the destination address in the received packet, and
   if so, the packet is forwarded to the local host(s); otherwise the
   packet is dropped.  Note this behavior already exists on edge routers
   that support IP multicast forwarding.

   Second, an edge router is required to advertise/flush the IP
   multicast addresses learnt/withdrew from IGMP/MLD procedure to/from
   other routers in the same IGP area, in the similar manner as
   advertising/flushing its own interface IP addresses.  With this
   procedure, an IP multicast distribution tree can be built for each IP
   multicast address group.  The details for advertising multicast
   addresses by IS-IS and OSPF will be documented separately.

   In some deployment, a host as a multicast destination or source may
   connect to more than one edge routers for the purpose of reliability
   or/and load balance, as normally termed as multi-homing.  In this
   scenario, care must be taken in order to prevent from forwarding loop
   as well as packets duplication.

4.4.  Intra-Area Multicast Routing

   An IP multicast distribution tree within an IGP area is in effect a
   sub-graph of the IGP's area topology graph (see Section 2).  All
   routers that receive advertisement of IP multicast addresses in the
   IGP area must build the multicast distribution tree for each IP
   multicast address group.  The construction of the distribution is
   based on the IGP's Link State Database, which is currently used for
   routing IP unicast packets.  All routers in an IGP area must
   calculate and construct the intra-area distribution tree using IGP's
   Link State Database with the same algorithm, so that a pruned tree
   can be constructed for the distribution tree.  Care must be taken to
   avoid forwarding loops and routing optimization is highly desired.

   Note the algorithm for constructing an IP multicast distribution
   tree, and other related functions are outside of any specific IGP,
   i.e., there requires no change in IGP.

   The algorithm and related details for intra-area multicast routing is
   specified in a separate document.






Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


4.5.  Inter-Area Multicast Routing

   In inter-area unicast routing, an IP packet from one IGP area
   forwarded to another area is sent to an area border node (ABR for
   OSPF) or L2 router (for IS-IS) first, which then forwards the packet
   to the neighboring area.  This is also the scenario for inter-area
   multicast routing, and as such, an ABR/L2-Router functions as a
   Transit Router, or a branch node in the multicast distribution tree.

   Note that IGP's Link State Database is per area, so the multicast
   distribution tree constructed on routers in the transmitting area in
   generally terminated at the ABR/L2-Router due to lack of routing
   information.  The ABR/L2-Router in question would require extending
   the distribution in the receiving area based on the separate Link
   State Database.

   The procedure and related details for inter-area multicast routing is
   specified in a separate document.

4.5.1.  Behavior of IS-IS L2 Router

   For IS-IS, the area boundary is on the link, and so the L2 router in
   the receiving area extends the distribution tree for that area.

   To support inter-area multicast routing, an IS-IS L2 Router is
   required to propagate IP multicast addresses received in one area to
   all L2 Routers in other areas it is connected.  This behavior is
   similar to the advertisement of IS-IS Reachability Information PDU.

4.5.2.  Behavior of OSPF ABR

   For OSPF, the area boundary is on the ABR.  When an ABR attached to
   both transmitting area and receiving area, it extends the
   distribution tree in the receiving area.

   To support inter-area multicast routing, an OSPF ABR is required to
   propagate IP multicast addresses received in one area to all other
   areas it attached.  This behavior is similar to the advertisement of
   OSPF Summary LSA.

4.6.  Heterogeneous Environment

   To deploy the IP multicast routing using IGP as described in this
   document, it requires all routers in the IGP area implement the
   following:

   o  Implement the extension in IS-IS (documented separately) and in
      OSPF (documented separately) for advertising multicast addresses.



Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   o  Support the new functions as described in Section 4.

   In a heterogeneous network environment, i.e., not all routers in an
   IGP area implement the above extensions.  A multicast distribution
   tree within an area does not allow to be segregated, but tunneling
   mechanism can be used to support multicast routing here.  When there
   are routers that would be required to be on a multicast distribution
   tree but not supporting the required extensions, a tunnel is
   constructed connecting two adjacent routers capable of routing
   multicast and across one or more not-capable routers, such that the
   tunnel becomes a single branch on the distribution tree.  An IP
   multicast packet sent from a tunnel end to the other is encapsulated
   in an IP packet with the sending router's IP address as the source
   address and the receiving router's IP address as the destination
   address.

4.7.  TE (Traffic Engineering) Support

   The existing IP multicast routing practice (e.g., PIM) does not
   consider route constraints (e.g., link bandwidth).  Both OSPF and IS-
   IS support traffic engineering based unicast routing by constructing
   and maintaining a TE Database.  Like Link State Database, the TE
   Database can also be used to support IP multicast routing when one or
   more path constraints is under consideration.

   Note to perform TE based multicast routing using IGP, routers must
   support TE extensions, and otherwise, there requires no other change
   in the IGP.

4.8.  Applications with Overlay Model

   Using a single IGP as a uniformed routing engine for both IP unicast
   and multicast routing enables a simple but highly efficient IP
   networking fabric that can serve varies applications above it as a
   overlay model.  These applications are viewed as at the service
   level, completely decoupled with the underneath IP networking fabric
   however enjoy both IP unicast and multicast transportation
   infrastructure.  In the multicast perspective, the applications can
   be IP based, but can also be level-2 based such as Ethernet.

4.9.  IPv4 and IPv6

   The architecture as outlined in this document supports IPv4 multicast
   routing in IPv4 networks, and also IPv6 multicast routing in IPv6
   networks.

   With mechanisms such as tunneling or address translation, the same
   architecture can also support IPv4 multicast routing in IPv6



Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   networks, and IPv6 multicast routing in IPv4 networks.  The details
   are specified in other document.

5.  Acknowledgement

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC2236]  Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              2", RFC 2236, November 1997.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2710]  Deering, S., Fenner, W., and B. Haberman, "Multicast
              Listener Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October
              1999.

   [RFC2740]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., and J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6", RFC
              2740, December 1999.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630, September
              2003.

   [RFC3784]  Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to Intermediate
              System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering (TE)",
              RFC 3784, June 2004.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.




Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   [RFC5308]  Hopps, C., "Routing IPv6 with IS-IS", RFC 5308, October
              2008.

   [RFC5329]  Ishiguro, K., Manral, V., Davey, A., and A. Lindem,
              "Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF Version 3", RFC
              5329, September 2008.

   [RFC7348]  Mahalingam, M., Dutt, D., Duda, K., Agarwal, P., Kreeger,
              L., Sridhar, T., Bursell, M., and C. Wright, "Virtual
              eXtensible Local Area Network (VXLAN): A Framework for
              Overlaying Virtualized Layer 2 Networks over Layer 3
              Networks", RFC 7348, August 2014.

   [RFC7365]  Lasserre, M., Balus, F., Morin, T., Bitar, N., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Framework for Data Center (DC) Network
              Virtualization", RFC 7365, October 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   Lucy Yong
   Huawei Technologies Ltd.
   Austin, TX
   USA

   Email: lucy.yong@huawei.com


   Dean Cheng
   Huawei Technologies Ltd.
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95135
   USA

   Email: dean.cheng@huawei.com


   Weiguo Hao
   Huawei Technologies Ltd.
   101 Software Avenue
   Nanjing  210012
   China

   Email: haoweiguo@huawei.com








Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         IGP Multicast Architecture             March 2015


   Donald Eastlake
   Huawei Technologies Ltd.
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA  01757
   USA

   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Andrew Qu
   MediaTek
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: laodulaodu@gmail.com


   Jon Hudson
   Brocade
   130 Holger Way
   San Jose, California  95134
   USA

   Email: jon.hudson@gmail.com


   Uma Chunduri
   Ericsson Inc.
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, California  95134
   USA

   Email: uma.chunduri@ericsson.com


















Yong, et al.            Expires September 5, 2015              [Page 15]
