





Internet Draft                                                  A. Adolf
<draft-adolf-dvb-urn-00.txt>                              DVB URN Scheme
Category: Informational                                         Micronas
Expires November 2007                                       May 25, 2007

              A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for
              the Digital Video Broadcasting Project (DVB)
                      <draft-adolf-dvb-urn-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for
   the Digital Video Broadcasting Project (DVB) for naming persistent
   resources defined within DVB standards. Example resources include
   technical documents and specifications, eXtensible Markup Language
   (XML) Schemas, classification schemes, XML Document Type Definitions
   (DTDs), namespaces, style sheets, media assets, and other types of
   resources produced or managed by DVB.









Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 1]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ....................................................2
   2. Specification Template ..........................................2
   3. Examples ........................................................4
   4. Namespace Considerations ........................................4
   5. Community Considerations ........................................5
   6. Security Considerations .........................................5
   7. IANA Considerations .............................................5
   8. References ......................................................5

1.  Introduction

   The Digital Video Broadcasting Project (DVB) is an industry-led
   consortium of over 270 broadcasters, manufacturers, network
   operators, software developers, regulatory bodies and others in over
   35 countries committed to designing global standards for the global
   delivery of digital television and data services. Services using DVB
   standards are available on every continent with a total of more than
   100 million DVB receivers already deployed.

   DVB would like to assign unique, permanent, location-independent
   names based on URNs for some resources it produces or manages.

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.


2.  Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "dvb"

   Registration Information:

      Version: 1
      Date: 2007-02-28

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Name:           Peter MacAvock
      Title:          Executive Director, DVB Project Office
      Affiliation:    DVB Digital Video Broadcasting
      Address:        Ancienne Route 17a
                      CH-1218 Geneva
                      SWITZERLAND
      Phone:          +41 22 717 2719
      Email:          macavock@dvb.org



Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 2]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


   Declaration of structure:

      URNs assigned by DVB will have the following hierarchical
      structure based on the organizational structure of the DVB
      standards:

         urn:dvb:{assigned US-ASCII string}

      where "{assigned US-ASCII string}" is a US-ASCII string that
      conforms to URN Syntax requirements ([RFC2141]).

      The individual URNs will be assigned by DVB through the process of
      development of DVB standards.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      DVB will establish unique identifiers as appropriate.

      Uniqueness is guaranteed as long as the assigned string is never
      reassigned.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      DVB is committed to maintaining the accessibility and persistence
      of all resources that are officially assigned URNs by the
      organization.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that are
      specifically designated by the owner. DVB may designate portions
      of its namespace for assignment by other parties.

   Process of identifier resolution:

      The owner will develop and maintain "URN catalogues" that map all
      assigned URNs to Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) specifically to
      enable Web-based resolution of named resources.  In the future an
      interactive online resolution system may be developed to automate
      this process.

      The owner will authorize additional resolution services as
      appropriate.




Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 3]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      The "assigned US-ASCII string" is case-insensitive.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified. The owner will develop and maintain URN
      catalogues.  The presence of a URN in a catalogue indicates that
      it is valid.

   Scope:

      Global

3.  Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real. They are
   presented for pedagogical reasons only.

      urn:dvb:ipdc:esg:2005
      urn:dvb:cs:ZappingTypeCS:2001

4.  Namespace Considerations

   URN assignment procedures:

      The individual URNs shall be assigned through the process of
      development of DVB standards by the Digital Video Broadcasting
      Project (DVB).

   URN resolution/delegation:

      The resolution and delegation shall be determined through the
      process of development of DVB standards by the Digital Video
      Broadcasting Project (DVB).

   Type of resources to be identified:

      Types of resources to be identified include XML schema definition
      files, classification schemes and identification systems.

   Type of services to be supported:

      Types of services supported include controlled term lookup in



Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 4]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


      classification schemes, resolution of ids in identification
      systems.

5.  Community Considerations

   Open assignment and use of identifiers within the namespace:

      With on-going development of DVB standards, DVB will establish
      requirements for assignment and use of identifiers within the DVB
      namespace.

   Open operation of resolution servers for the namespace (server):

      With on-going development of DVB standards, DVB will establish
      requirements and seek candidates for operating resolution servers
      as appropriate.

   Creation of software that can meaningfully resolve and access
   services for the namespace (client):

      With on-going development of DVB standards, DVB members will
      develop software implementations of its standards.

6.  Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

7.  IANA Considerations

   The IANA has registered formal URN namespace XXX, to DVB within the
   IANA registry of URN NIDs.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", May 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Alexander Adolf
   Micronas GmbH
   Frankenthalerstrasse 2
   D-81539 Munich
   GERMANY
   Tel: +49 89 54845 7203
   Fax: +49 89 54845 7900



Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 5]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


   EMail: alexander.adolf@micronas.com

   Peter MacAvock
   DVB Digital Video Broadcasting
   Ancienne Route 17a
   CH-1218 Geneva
   SWITZERLAND
   Tel: +41 22 717 2717
   EMail: macavock@dvb.org










































Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 6]





Internet Draft     DVB URN                 May 25, 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST, AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.












Adolf             Expires November 2007                 FORMFEED[Page 7]


