



SYSLOG Working Group                                            T. Petch
Internet-Draft                                  Engineering Networks Ltd
Intended status: Informational                               R. Gerhards
Expires: February 1, 2007                                   Adiscon GmbH
                                                           July 31, 2006


                   DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG
           draft-petch-gerhards-syslog-transport-dtls-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 1, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes the transport of syslog messages over DTLS
   (Datagram Transport Level Security).  It provides a secure transport
   for syslog messages in cases where a connection-less transport is
   desired.






Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Security requirements for syslog . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.4.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.5.  DTLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.6.  Client and server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  DTLS usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Port number  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.3.  Invoking DTLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.4.  DTLS connection termination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.5.  Delineation of datagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.6.  Choice of ciphersuite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.7.  Fragmentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.8.  TLS extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1.  Normative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.2.  Informative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14
























Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


1.  Introduction

   The syslog protocol allows a host to send event notification messages
   across the Internet to another host.  This memo describes the use of
   DTLS [4] to secure that syslog traffic, using UDP as the transport
   protocol.

   DTLS is TLS1.1 [3] modified as little as possible; understanding DTLS
   requires an understanding of TLS.  This introduction provides an
   overview of TLS followed by an overview of the modifications that
   DTLS makes, as well as defining syslog terminology and syslog
   security requirements.  The rest of the memo defines the use of TLS/
   DTLS features to secure syslog traffic.

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [1].

1.2.  Terminology

   The following definitions are taken from syslog-protocol [5]
   o  An application that can generate a syslog message is called a
      "sender".
   o  An application that can receive a syslog message is called a
      "receiver".
   o  An application that can receive syslog messages and forward them
      to another receiver is called a "relay".
   o  An application that receives messages and does not relay them to
      any other receiver is called a "collector".

   A single application can have multiple roles at the same time.

1.3.  Security requirements for syslog

   As a result of discussions on the syslog-sec mailing list, three
   primary threats have been identified for syslog:
   o  Modification of information; the contents of a message are altered
      in transit between a syslog sender/relay and syslog collector/
      relay, either maliciously or accidentally.
   o  Masquerade; messages are sent by, or sent to, the 'wrong' party
      masquerading as the intended party.  Masquerade of the sender of
      syslog messages is seen as of greater concern than masquerade of
      the recipient ie the latter may not be considered a threat in some
      environments.





Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   o  Disclosure; the contents of messages are disclosed when they
      should not be, for example, revealing the security credentials of
      a user.  The extent to which this is a threat depends on the
      content of the syslog message and this may not be considered a
      threat in some environments.

   Traffic Analysis and Denial of Service are not considered threats to
   syslog.

1.4.  TLS

   DTLS is TLS modified as little as possible to run over an unreliable
   transport.

   TLS1.1 [3] can provide a secure transport connection between two
   endpoints and can provide protection against all the threats to
   syslog identified above.  It runs as a shim, between the application
   layer and a reliable transport (normally TCP), and sets up a tunnel
   between the endpoints.  Using TCP as that transport brings more than
   reliability - eg error detection and recovery, flow control,
   connections - which may not be suitable for the application; DTLS
   offers the option of TLS over UDP, adding reliability to UDP but
   without all the additional features that TCP brings.  As such, it
   offers an attractive security option for UDP-based applications.

   TLS negotiates options for compression, key exchange, authentication
   and encryption.  Compression is negotiated per se and, while likely
   to be a desirable feature for the character-oriented syslog, is not
   seen as an aspect of security and so will not be considered further
   here.  The other three options come as a set, one of a number of
   predefined ciphersuites, and it is the ciphersuite, not an individual
   option, that is negotiated.  The currently defined ciphersuites can
   be found on the IANA website [9].

   Thus the ciphersuite known as

   TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA

   uses 3DES_EDE with CBC, for encryption, SHA when a hash is required
   and a PKI certificate with an RSA public key valid for encryption as
   the basis for end system authentication.  This is the default
   ciphersuite, the one that an application is REQUIRED to implement,
   for inter-operability, unless the usage of TLS by the application is
   specified otherwise in an RFC.

   Different ciphersuites provide different levels of security with
   respect to each of key exchange, message authentication and
   encryption, ranging from none through weak to strong.  Security is a



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   dynamic field, with techniques being reclassified from strong to
   weak, eg as a result of advances in mathematics or of an increase in
   the computing power available to a potential attacker.  At the same
   time, new techniques appear, and are in turn incorporated into TLS
   (and other) ciphersuites.

   The user of TLS, whether for syslog or any other application, MUST
   verify that the ciphersuite in use provides adequate security for
   their particular environment at the time that TLS is used.  Any
   syslog application invoking TLS SHOULD verify that the ciphersuite in
   use meets the minimum standards of the application and MAY provide
   customisation to specify a minimum acceptable one.

   Disclosure is identified as a threat to syslog and countering this
   implies the use of encryption.  If, in a particular environment,
   disclosure is not regarded as a threat, as when the network is
   physically secure, then the use of a ciphersuite with NULL encryption
   would be appropriate; this may be a consideration where the syslog
   client is a device with limited processing capability.

1.5.  DTLS

   DTLS is TLS, modified, as little as possible, to run over an
   unreliable transport (eg UDP, DCCP).  TLS decryption requires
   messages to arrive in sequence so DTLS adds a sequence number to the
   record header in order to detect reordering.  The TLS handshake
   requires reliable delivery so DTLS specifies timeouts to detect
   packet loss.

   DTLS records are required to fit into a single datagram.  This
   represents no change for a UDP application - eg syslog - but is an
   issue for the TLS handshake protocol, where, as RFC4347 [4] points
   out, messages are, in practice, several kilobytes (of, eg, a
   certificate chain).  DTLS adds fragmentation to the handshake
   protocol and recommends PMTU discovery.  Multiple application records
   may appear in a single DTLS datagram but must not span DTLS
   datagrams.

   Finally, DTLS adds to the transport the concept of a "connection",
   starting with the TLS handshake, ending with TLS closure alerts.

1.6.  Client and server

   TLS evolved in the context of HTTP (with the protocol identifier
   https: [11]), an environment of powerful servers and relatively
   powerful workstations.  As such, the cost and use of the security
   algorithms - eg public key encryption, certificate chains - is of
   limited impact.  The security is asymmetric, with server



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   authentication to client as mandatory (assuming that the ciphersuite
   specifies authentication) while client authentication is optional.
   This also fits well with HTTP where the client, commonly a human user
   of a workstation, wants to confirm that they are talking to the
   server that they think they are and so receive a server certificate
   which can then be verified. [11] specifies that if the client cannot
   validate the certificate it is offered, then it should pass the
   decision to a user, or, where there is no user, then it should
   terminate the connection.

   This model does not carry across well to syslog.  A syslog device may
   be a powerful file or Web server, but may, on the other hand, be a
   low powered, unattended entry level network device, such as remotely
   located CPE (Customer Premises Equipment), ill-suited to verifying
   certificate chains and unlikely to have a human user to pass the
   decision on to.

   TLS is now used on less well-equipped devices, such as mobiles;
   extensions to TLS have been defined which mitigate the impact on the
   TLS client (eg by using URLs of certificates rather than the
   certificates themselves).  First published separately, these
   extensions have now been incorporated in the base specification
   TLS1.2 [8].  The asymmetric approach to authentication remains, with
   server authentication mandatory, client authentication optional.

   Most applications which now run over TLS were previously running over
   TCP and as such already had an application level dialog.  In order to
   invoke TLS, these applications could then change their start command
   (eg STARTTLS) or, having established a TCP connection, invoke TLS (eg
   AUTH) to make the connection secure.

   By contrast, syslog uses simplex UDP, a connectionless transport,
   with syslog messages arriving as and when, independently.  DTLS adds
   the concept of a "connection".  The decision to create a connection
   can be implicit, when the first message is sent; syslog client or
   server may need to decide when to take down the connection.

   syslog defines a client and server, the client being a syslog Sender
   or Relay, the server being a Relay or Collector.  DTLS will also have
   a client and server as does UDP.  There is a choice as to which
   syslog entity is the client, and which the server, both for DTLS and
   UDP.

   The use of syslog over DTLS must address the following issues:







Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


    - authentication
    - connection set up
    - connection termination
    - choice of ciphersuite
    - choice of TLS extensions
    - delineation of syslog datagrams
    - invoking DTLS
    - fragmentation


2.  DTLS usage

2.1.  Authentication

   DTLS is an asymmetric protocol.  Server authentication is required
   (when authentication is part of the ciphersuite), client
   authentication is optional.  For syslog, the greater threat is
   perceived as an unauthenticated syslog client generating spurious
   messages, as opposed to an unauthenticated syslog server receiving
   them ie it is the authentication of the syslog client that is the
   more important.  Hence it is RECOMMENDED that the syslog server
   should be the DTLS client.  If Masquerade of the syslog server is
   considered a threat in a particular environment, then the syslog
   client SHOULD request authentication of the syslog server/DTLS
   client.

   A consequence of this mapping, of DTLS client to syslog server, is
   that where certificates are used for server authentication, then the
   syslog server is the one that has to verify the syslog client's
   certificates (something that it is likely to have the greater
   resources to do).  The syslog client must have a certificate; the
   syslog server certificate remains optional.

2.2.  Port number

   syslog over UDP has been allocated port 514 while syslog-conn, which
   uses BEEP [13], has been allocated port 601 over TCP RFC3195 [12].
   IANA has also allocated port 601 over UDP on the basis of [12]
   although that RFC makes no mention of such a usage.

   This memo defines the use of port 601 for syslog over DTLS in
   preference to asking IANA to assign a new port.  Ports are a scarce
   resource, especially those with values of 1024 or less, and their use
   should be conserved.  Using different ports for slightly different
   applications may ease the task of the receiving host of
   demultiplexing the data but makes it more complex for the providers
   of infrastructure, eg in specifying filters in firewalls and
   application level gateways.  The authors of this memo believe that



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   the latter view should prevail, ie that there should be a port
   defined for secure syslog, with negotiation specifying what security
   there should be, DTLS or some other, yet to be specified.  For UDP,
   no use of port 601 is defined and so its (re-)use for syslog over
   DTLS is seen as feasible.

2.3.  Invoking DTLS

   The DTLS "connection" SHOULD be initiated by syslog client by sending
   the plain text application level command

   AUTH TLS SERVER

   when it wishes to be the DTLS server or

   AUTH TLS CLIENT

   when it wishes to be the DTLS client.  The former is expected to be
   the usual case.  (The use of DTLS, as opposed to TLS, is implicit in
   the use of UDP transport).

   The syslog server MUST respond

   OK

   if it accepts its proposed role or

   ERROR

   if does not.

   This is followed by TLS negotiation with syslog server/DTLS client
   sending DTLS Client Hello and, if the negotiation is successful, by
   syslog messages.

2.4.  DTLS connection termination

   DTLS includes a mechanism for graceful shutdown - TLS1.2 [8] s.7.2.1.
   Closure alerts - and these SHOULD be used to terminate a DTLS
   connection.  As specified there, either DTLS client or DTLS server
   may initiate a closure when it SHOULD send a close_notify alert.  Any
   data received after a closure alert is ignored.  The other party MUST
   send a close_notify alert of its own and close down the connection
   immediately, discarding any pending writes.  The initiator of the
   close need not wait for the responding close_notify alert before
   closing the read side of the connection.

   Closure should be initiated when the syslog application determines



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   that no more messages will be sent or received, or that none have
   been for a period of time.  A suggested value for the period of time
   is one hour.  The choice of a value should balance the resources
   needed to re-create the connection using DTLS against the resources
   used by an idle connection and the increased risk of a breach of
   security by keeping a DTLS connection in place longer than necessary.

   Although closure alerts form part of DTLS, they, like all alerts, are
   not retransmitted by DTLS and so may be lost over an unreliable
   network.

2.5.  Delineation of datagrams

   When syslog runs upon UDP, the UDP datagram frames the syslog
   message.  Over DTLS, syslog messages MUST be sent as DTLS application
   data.  DTLS may place multiple DTLS records in a single datagram,
   each encoded consecutively.  The boundaries are then determined by
   DTLS record framing.

2.6.  Choice of ciphersuite

   The Ciphersuite

   TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA

   is REQUIRED.  Where Disclosure is not a threat to syslog and so
   encryption is not necessary, and may be undesirable because of the
   limited processing capability of the syslog client, then

   TLS_RSA_WITH_NULL_SHA

   is RECOMMENDED.  Where Pre-Shared Keys are a sufficiently strong
   security credential, in contrast to the more powerful X.509
   Certificates, then

   TLS_PSK_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA

   is RECOMMENDED.

   DTLS is defined to use the same ciphersuites as were then current for
   TLS but excluding those using the stream cipher RC4.  New
   ciphersuites must specify whether or not they are suitable for DTLS
   and so suitable for use here.

2.7.  Fragmentation

   syslog messages have no upper limit per se and in some environments
   may be up to 2**16.  TLS v1.1 limits messages to 2**14; TLS



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   extensions allow this to be reduced to 2**9 although, as TLS1.2 [8]
   points out, this may be less than needs to be sent at once and so
   cause the "connection" to be terminated. syslog applications SHOULD
   ensure that syslog messages fit within the limits of DTLS.

2.8.  TLS extensions

   TLS Extensions, first published as RFC3546 [2] and now incorporated
   into TLS1.2 [8], provides a generic extension mechanism together with
   specific extensions suitable for a constrained environment.  The
   general extension mechanism ensures backward compatability for
   devices that either do not support extensions in general or do not
   support a particular extension.  TLS Extensions identifies wireless
   as a constrained environment but the constraints, such as limited
   processing capability or limited storage, apply elsewhere, such as
   with network devices supporting syslog; TLS Extensions also assumes
   that it is the TLS client that is constrained, not the TLS server,
   whereas with network devices, it is the syslog client, TLS server,
   that is more likely to be constrained.  Hence the extensions are of
   limited relevance.

   Extensions are not mentioned in RF4347 [4] but, on the basis that
   DTLS is TLS modified as little as possible, are assumed to be part of
   DTLS.

   The defined extensions, beside the maximum fragment length which has
   already been discussed, are

    server name indication
    truncated HMAC
    client certificate url
    trusted CA
    certificate status request
    certificate hash types.

   Since syslog over DTLS runs over a port specific to syslog, the
   server name indication, which helps the DTLS server in identifying
   the appropriate application, is not required.

   Truncated HMAC reduces the HMAC to 80 bit, saving bandwidth, and is
   not seen as relevant to syslog.

   Client certificate URL allows the client, but not the server, to use
   a URL instead of a certificate per se.  Likewise trusted CA allows
   the client to indicate which CAs it may use so that the server can
   select a suitable certificate to send.  Certificate status request
   proposes the use of OCSP instead of CRL, saving bandwith; certificate
   hash types allows the client to specify which hash algorithms it



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   supports.  Each of these four cases is designed to help the DTLS
   client, the syslog server, and so are of limited value since it is
   expected that it will be the DTLS server, syslog client, that is
   constrained.


3.  Security Considerations

   The whole of this memo is about security.  As pointed out above, DTLS
   can provide security against the threats to syslog identified above
   but whether or not that is achieved depends on the ciphersuite in
   use.  Users MUST ensure that the ciphersuite in use meets their needs
   for security, in terms of the strength of the algorithms used,
   whether or not encryption is used and the nature of credentials used
   to authenticate the parties involved.


4.  Authors

   The authors of this draft are:

         Tom Petch
         Email: ietf2@dial.pipex.com

         Phone: +44-192-575-3018

         Engineering Networks Ltd
         18 Parkwood Close
         Lymm
         Cheshire
         WA13 0NQ
         UK


         Rainer Gerhards
         Email: rgerhards@adiscon.com

         Phone: +49-9349-92880
         Fax: +49-9349-928820

         Adiscon GmbH
         Mozartstrasse 21
         97950 Grossrinderfeld
         Germany







Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.


6.  Acknowledgments

   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in [10].


7.  References

7.1.  Normative

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Blake-Wilson, S., Nystrom, M., Hopwood, D., Mikkelsen, J., and
        T. Wright, "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions",
        RFC 3546, June 2003.

   [3]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
        Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346, April 2006.

   [4]  Rescorla, E. and N. Modadugu, "Datagram Transport Layer
        Security", RFC 4347, April 2006.

   [5]  Gerhards, R., "The syslog Protocol",
        draft-ietf-syslog-protocol-17 (work in progress), June 2006.

   [6]  Wasserman, M. and T. Goddard, "Using the NETCONF Configuration
        Protocol over Secure Shell (SSH)", draft-ietf-netconf-ssh-06
        (work in progress), March 2006.

   [7]  Cooper, D., "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
        Certificate and Certificate  Revocation List (CRL) Profile",
        draft-ietf-pkix-rfc3280bis-04 (work in progress), June 2006.

   [8]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The TLS Protocol",
        draft-ietf-tls-rfc4346-bis-01 (work in progress), June 2006.

   [9]  "IANA Assigned TLS Options,
        http://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters".

7.2.  Informative

   [10]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
         June 1999.



Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


   [11]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [12]  New, D. and M. Rose, "Reliable Delivery for syslog", RFC 3195,
         November 2001.

   [13]  Rose, M., "The Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Core",
         RFC 3080, March 2001.

   [14]  Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet X.509
         Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate
         Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280, April 2002.

   [15]  "ITU-T Recommendation X.509 (1997 E): Information Technology -
         Open Systems Interconnection - "The Directory - Authentication
         Framework". 1988.".


Authors' Addresses

   Tom Petch
   Engineering Networks Ltd
   18 Parkwood Close
   Lymm, Cheshire  WA13 0NQ
   UK

   Email: ietf2@dial.pipex.com


   Rainer Gerhards
   Adiscon GmbH
   Mozartstrasse 21
   Grossrinderfeld, BW  97950
   Germany

   Email: rgerhards@adiscon.com
















Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      DTLS transport mapping for SYSLOG          July 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Petch & Gerhards        Expires February 1, 2007               [Page 14]


