

Network Working Group                                 Michael Behringer 
Internet Draft                                      Cisco Systems, Inc. 
<draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt> 
Category: Informational  
October 2002  
Expires: April 2003  
 
 
 
            Analysis of the Security of the MPLS Architecture 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance  
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering  
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that  
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-  
   Drafts.  
 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents  
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
 
 
Abstract 
 
This document analyses the security of the BGP/MPLS VPN architecture as 
described in RFC 2547, especially in comparison with other VPN 
technologies such as ATM and Frame Relay. The target audience is 
service providers and VPN users. The document consists of two main 
parts: First the requirements for security in VPN services are defined, 
second MPLS is examined with respect to these requirements.  
 
The analysis shows that MPLS VPN networks can be equally secured as 
traditional layer-2 VPN networks such as ATM and Frame Relay.  
 
 


 
 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

Table of Contents 
 
1. Scope and Introduction  
2. Security Requirements of MPLS VPN Networks  
3. Analysis of MPLS Security  
4. What MPLS Doesn't Provide  
5. Summary and Conclusions  
Author's Address  
References  
Full Copyright Statement 
 
 
1. Scope and Introduction 
 
Many enterprises are thinking of replacing traditional layer-2 VPNs 
such as ATM or Frame Relay (FR) with MPLS based services. As MPLS 
(multi protocol label switching) is becoming a more wide-spread 
technology for providing VPN (virtual private network) services, the 
security of the MPLS architecture is of increasing concern to service 
providers and VPN customers. This document gives an overview of the 
security of the MPLS architecture for both service providers and MPLS 
users, and compares it with traditional layer-2 services from a 
security perspective. The focus is specifically on the MPLS/BGP VPN 
architecture as described in [RFC2547].  
 
This document assumes that the MPLS core network is trusted and 
provided in a secure manner. Thus it does not address basic security 
concerns such as securing the network elements against unauthorised 
access, misconfigurations of the core, internal (within the core) 
attacks and the likes. Should a customer not wish to assume the service 
provider network as trusted it becomes necessary to use additional 
security mechanisms such as IPsec over the MPLS infrastructure.  
 
Analysis of the security features of routing protocols is only covered 
to the extend where it influences MPLS. IPsec technology is also not 
covered, except to highlight the combination of MPLS with IPsec.  
 
The overall security of a system depends on three parts: The 
architecture, the implementation and the operation of the system. 
Security issues can exist in either part. This document analyses the 
architectural security of MPLS. It does not cover implementation issues 
nor operational issues.  
 
This document is targeted at technical staff of service providers and 
enterprises. Knowledge of the basic MPLS architecture is required to 
understand this document.  
 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 2 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

 
2. Security Requirements of MPLS VPN Networks 
 
Both service providers offering VPN services on MPLS networks and 
customers using them have specific demands for the security of this 
special VPN solution. Mostly they compare MPLS based solutions with 
traditional layer 2 based VPN solutions such as Frame Relay and ATM, 
since these are widely deployed and accepted. This section outlines the 
security requirements that are typically made in MPLS networks. The 
following section discusses if and how MPLS addresses these 
requirements, for both the MPLS core and the connected VPNs.  
 
2.1 Address Space, Routing and Traffic Separation 
 
Between two non-intersecting layer 3 VPNs of an MPLS VPN service it is 
assumed that the address space between different VPNs is entirely 
independent. This means that for example two non-intersecting VPNs must 
be able to both use the 10/8 network without any interference. In 
addition traffic from one VPN must never enter another VPN. This 
includes separation of routing protocol information, so that also 
routing tables are seperate per VPN. Specifically:  
 
*  Any VPN must be able to use the same address space as any other VPN.  
*  Any VPN must be able to use the same address space as the MPLS core.  
*  Traffic from one VPN must never flow to another VPN.  
*  Routing information, as well as distribution and processing of that 
   information, for one VPN instance must be independent from any other 
   VPN instance. 
*  Routing information, as well as distribution and processing of that 
   information, for one VPN instance must be independent from the core. 
 
>From a security point of view the basic requirement is to avoid that 
packets destined to a host a.b.c.d within a given VPN reach a host with 
the same address in another VPN or the core, or get routed to another 
VPN even if this address does not exist there.  
 
2.2 Hiding of the MPLS Core Structure 
 
The internal structure of the MPLS core network (PE and P elements) 
should not be visible to outside networks (Internet or any connected 
VPN). Whilst a breach of this requirement does not lead to a security 
problem itself, many service providers feel that it is advantageous if 
the internal addressing and network structure remains hidden to the 
outside world. A strong argument is that DoS attacks against a core 
router for example are much easier to carry out if an attacker knows 
the address. Where addresses are not known, they can be guessed, but 
with this attacks become more difficult. Ideally the MPLS core should 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 3 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

be as invisible to the outside world as a comparable layer 2 (e.g., 
frame relay, ATM) infrastructure. Core routers should also not be 
accessible from a VPN. 
 
Note that security should never rely on obscurity, i.e., the hiding of 
information. On the contrary services should be equally secure if the 
implementation is known. However, there is a strong market perception 
that hiding of details is advantageous. This point addresses that 
market perception.  
 
2.3 Resistance to Attacks 
 
There are two basic types of attacks: Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks, 
where resources become unavailable to authorised users, and intrusions, 
where resources become available to un-authorised users.  
 
For attacks that give unauthorised access to resources (intrusions) 
there are two basic ways to protect the network: Firstly, to harden 
protocols that could be abused (e.g., telnet to a router), secondly to 
make the network as inaccessible as possible. The latter is achieved by 
a combination of packet filtering or firewalling and address hiding, as 
discussed above.  
 
DoS attacks are easier to execute, since in the simplest case a known 
IP address might be enough to attack a machine. This can be done using 
normal "allowed" traffic, but higher than normal packet rates, so that 
other users cannot access the targeted machine. The only way to be 
certain not be vulnerable to this kind of attack is to make sure that 
machines are not reachable, again by packet filtering and optionally 
address hiding.  
 
MPLS networks must provide at least the same level of protection 
against both forms of attack as current layer 2 networks. Note that 
this document concentrates on protecting the core network against 
attacks from the "outside", i.e., the Internet and connected VPNs. 
Protection against attacks from the "inside", i.e., if an attacker has 
logical or physical access to the core network is not considered here, 
since any network can be attacked with access from the inside.  
 
2.4 Impossibility of Label Spoofing 
 
Assuming the address and traffic separation as discussed above, a 
potential attacker might try to gain access to other VPNs by inserting 
packets with a label that he doesn't "own". This could be done from the 
outside, i.e., another CE router or from the Internet, or from within 
the MPLS core. The latter case (from within the core) will not be 
discussed, since the assumption is that the core network is provided in 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 4 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

a secure manner. Should protection against an insecure core be required 
it is necessary to run IPsec on top of the MPLS infrastructure.  
 
Depending on the way several CEs are connected to a PE router, it might 
be technically possible to intrude into another VPN that is also 
connected on that PE, based on layer 2 attack mechanisms. Examples are 
802.1Q - label spoofing, or ATM VPI/VCI spoofing. These layer 2 attacks 
are outside the scope of this document, since they are not MPLS/VPN 
specific.  
 
It is required that VPNs cannot abuse the MPLS label mechanisms or 
protocols to gain un-authorised access to other VPNs or the core.  
   
 
3. Analysis of MPLS Security 
 
In this section the MPLS architecture is analysed with respect to the 
security requirements listed above.  
 
3.1 Address Space, Routing and Traffic Separation 
 
MPLS allows distinct VPNs to use the same address space, which can also 
be private address space [RFC1918]. This is achieved by adding a 64 bit 
route distinguisher (RD) to each IPv4 route, making VPN-unique 
addresses also unique in the MPLS core. This "extended" address is also 
called a "VPN-IPv4 address". Thus customers of an MPLS service do not 
need to change current addressing in their networks.  
 
There is only one exception, which is the IP addresses of the PE 
routers the CE routers are peering with, in the case of using routing 
protocols between CE and PE routers (for static routing between PE and 
CE this is not an issue). Routing protocols on the CE routers need to 
have configured the address of the peer PE router in the core, to be 
able to "talk" to the PE router. This address must be unique from the 
CE router's perspective. In an environment where the service provider 
manages also the CE routers as CPE, this can be made invisible to the 
customer. The address space on the CE-PE link (including the peering PE 
address) must be considered as part of the VPN address space. However, 
since address space can overlap between VPNs, also the CE-PE link 
addressing can overlap between VPNs.  
 
Routing separation between the VPNs can also be achieved. Every PE 
router maintains a separate Virtual Routing and Forwarding instance 
(VRF) for each connected VPN. Each VRF on the PE router is populated 
with routes from one VPN, through statically configured routes or 
through routing protocols that run between the PE and the CE router. 


 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 5 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

Since every VPN results in a separate VRF there will be no 
interferences between the VPNs on the PE router.   
 
Across the MPLS core to the other PE routers this separation is 
maintained by adding unique VPN identifiers in multi-protocol BGP, such 
as the route distinguisher. VPN routes are exclusively exchanged by MP-
BGP across the core, and this BGP information is not re-distributed to 
the core network but only to the other PE routers, where the 
information is kept again in VPN specific VRFs. Thus routing across an 
MPLS network is separate per VPN.  
 
Traffic separation is achieved by prepending VPN-specific labels to the 
packets, so that a packet can also on the core be identified as 
belonging to a specific VPN.  
 
Given the addressing, routing and traffic separation across an MPLS 
core network, it can be assumed that MPLS offers in this respect the 
same security as comparable layer-2 VPNs such as ATM or Frame Relay. It 
is not possible to intrude into other VPNs through the MPLS could, 
unless this has been configured specifically.  
 
3.2 Hiding of the MPLS Core Structure 
 
For reasons of security service providers and end-customers do not 
normally want their network topology revealed to the outside. This is 
done to make attacks more difficult: If an attacker doesn't know the 
target he can only guess the IP addresses to attack. Since most DoS 
attacks don't provide direct feedback to the attacker it would be 
difficult to attack the network. It has to be mentioned specifically 
that information hiding as such does not provide security. However, in 
the market this is a perceived requirement.  
 
With a known IP address a potential attacker can launch a DoS attack 
more easily against that device. So the ideal is to not reveal any 
information of the internal network to the outside. This applies 
equally to the customer networks as to the MPLS core. In practice a 
number of additional security measures have to be taken, most of all 
extensive packet filtering.  
 
MPLS does not reveal unnecessary information to the outside, not even 
to customer VPNs. The addressing of the core can be done with private 
addresses [RFC1918] or public addresses. Since the interface to the 
VPNs as well as potentially to the Internet is BGP, there is no need to 
reveal any internal information. The only information required in the 
case of a routing protocol between PE and CE is the address of the PE 
router. If this is not desired static routing on unnumbered interfaces 


 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 6 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

can be configured between the PE and CE. With this measure the MPLS 
core can be kept completely hidden.  
 
Customer VPNs will have to advertise their routes as a minimum to the 
MPLS core (dynamically or statically), to ensure reachability across 
the MPLS cloud. Whilst this could be seen as "too open", the following 
has to be noted: Firstly, the information known to the MPLS core is not 
about specific hosts, but networks (routes); this offers some degree of 
abstraction. Secondly, in a VPN-only MPLS network (i.e., no shared 
Internet access) this is equal to existing layer-2 models, where the 
customer has to trust the service provider to some degree. Also in a FR 
or ATM network routing information about the VPNs can be seen on the 
core network.  
 
In a VPN service with shared Internet access the service provider will 
typically announce the routes of customers that wish to use the 
Internet to his upstream or peer providers. This can be done via a NAT 
function to further obscure the addressing information of the 
customers' networks. In this case the customer does not reveal more 
information to the general Internet than with a general Internet 
service. Core information will still not be revealed at all, except for 
the peering address(es) of the PE router(s) that hold(s) the peering 
with the Internet.  
 
In summary, in a pure MPLS-VPN service, where no Internet access is 
provided, the information hiding is as good as on a comparable FR or 
ATM network: No addressing information is revealed to third parties or 
the Internet. If a customer chooses to access the Internet via the MPLS 
core he will have to reveal the same addressing structure as for a 
normal Internet service. NAT can be used for further address hiding.  
 
If an MPLS network has no interconnections to the Internet, this is 
equal to FR or ATM networks. With an Internet access from the MPLS 
cloud the service provider has to reveal at least one IP address (of 
the peering PE router) to the next provider, and thus the outside 
world.  
 
3.3 Resistance to Attacks 
 
Section 3.1 shows that it is not possible to directly intrude into 
other VPNs. Another possibility is to attack the MPLS core, and try to 
attack other VPNs from there. There are two basic ways the MPLS core 
can be attacked:  
 
1. By attacking the PE routers directly. 
2. By attacking the signaling mechanisms of MPLS (mostly routing) 
 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 7 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

To attack an element of an MPLS network it is first necessary to know 
this element, that is, its address. As discussed in section 3.2 it is 
possible to hide the addressing structure of the MPLS core to the 
outside world. Thus an attacker does not know the IP address of any 
router in the core that he wants to attack. The attacker could now 
guess addresses and send packets to these addresses. However, due to 
the address separation of MPLS each incoming packet will be treated as 
belonging to the address space of the customer. Thus it is impossible 
to reach an internal router, even through IP address guessing. There is 
only one exception to this rule, which is the peer interface of the PE 
router.  
 
The routing between the VPN and the MPLS core can be configured two 
ways:  
 
1. Static; in this case the PE routers are configured with static 
   routes to the networks behind each CE, and the CEs are configured to 
   statically point to the PE router for any network in other parts of 
   the VPN (mostly a default route).  There are now two sub-cases: The 
   static route can point to the IP address of the PE router, or to an 
   interface of the CE router (e.g., serial0). 
 
2. Dynamic; here a routing protocol (e.g., RIP, OSPF, BGP) is used 
   exchange the routing information between the CE and the PE at each 
   peering point. 
 
In the case of a static route from the CE router to the PE router, 
which points to an interface, the CE router doesn't need to know any IP 
address of the core network, not even of the PE router. This has the 
disadvantage of a more extensive (static) configuration, but from a 
security point of view is preferable to the other cases. It is now 
possible to configure packet filters on the PE interface to deny any 
packet to the PE interface. This way the router cannot be attacked.  
 
In all other cases, each CE router needs to know at least the router ID 
(RID; peer IP address) of the PE router in the MPLS core, and thus has 
a potential destination for an attack. One could imagine various 
attacks on various services running on a router. In practice access to 
the PE router over the CE-PE interface can be limited to the required 
routing protocol by using ACLs (access control lists). This limits the 
point of attack to one routing protocol, for example BGP. A potential 
attack could be to send an extensive number of routes, or to flood the 
PE router with routing updates. Both could lead to a DoS, however, not 
to unauthorised access.  
 



 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 8 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

To restrict this risk it is necessary to configure the routing protocol 
on the PE router as securely as possible. This can be done in various 
ways:  
 
*  By ACL, allow the routing protocol only from the CE router, not from 
   anywhere else. Furthermore, no access other than that should be 
   allowed to the PE router in the inbound ACL on each CE interface.  
 
*  Where available, configure MD-5 authentication for routing 
   protocols. This is available for BGP [RFC2385], OSPF [RFC2154] and 
   RIP2 [RFC2082] for example. It avoids that packets could be spoofed 
   from other parts of the customer network than the CE router. Note 
   that this requires service provider and customer to agree on a shared 
   secret between all CE and PE routers. Note that it is necessary to do 
   this for all VPN customers, it is not sufficient to do this for the 
   customer with the highest security requirements.  
 
*  To configure where available parameters of the routing protocol, to 
   further secure this communication. In BGP for example it is possible 
   to configure dampening, which limits the number of routing 
   interactions. Also, a maximum number of routes accepted per VRF 
   should be configured where possible.  
 
In summary, it is not possible to intrude from one VPN into other VPNs, 
or the core. However, it is theoretically possible to exploit the 
routing protocol to execute a DoS attack against the PE router. This in 
turn might have negative impact on other VPNs on this PE router. For 
this reason PE routers must be extremely well secured, especially on 
their interfaces to the CE routers. ACLs must be configured to limit 
access only to the port(s) of the routing protocol, and only from the 
CE router. MD5 authentication in routing protocols should be used on 
all PE-CE peerings. With all these security measures the only possible 
attack is a DoS attack against the routing protocol itself. However, it 
is easily possible to track the source of such a potential DoS attack. 
Without dynamic routing between CEs and PEs the security is equivalent 
to the security of ATM or Frame Relay networks.  
 
3.4 Label Spoofing 
 
Within the MPLS network packets are not forwarded based on the IP 
destination address, but based on labels that are pre-pended to the IP 
packets by the inbound PE routers. Similar to IP spoofing attacks, 
where an attacker replaces the source or destination IP address of a 
packet, it is also theoretically possible to spoof the label of an MPLS 
packet. In the first section the assumption was made that the core 
network is trusted. If this assumption cannot be made IPsec must be run 
over the MPLS cloud. Thus in this section the emphasis is on whether it 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                            page 9 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

is possible to insert packets with (spoofed) labels into the MPLS 
network from the outside, i.e., from a VPN (CE router) or from the 
Internet.  
 
Principally the interface between any CE router and its peering PE 
router is an IP interface, i.e., without labels. The CE router is 
unaware of the MPLS core, and thinks it is sending IP packets to a 
simple router. The "intelligence" is done in the PE device, where based 
on the configuration, the label is chosen and pre-pended to the packet. 
This is the case for all PE routers, towards CE routers as well as the 
upstream service provider. All interfaces into the MPLS cloud only 
require IP packets, without labels.  
 
For security reasons a PE router should never accept a packet with a 
label from a CE router. [RFC3031] specifies: "Therefore, when a labeled 
packet is received with an invalid incoming label, it MUST be 
discarded, UNLESS it is determined by some means (not within the scope 
of the current document) that forwarding it unlabeled cannot cause any 
harm." Since accepting labels on the CE interface would allow passing 
packets to other VPNs it is not permitted by the RFC.  
 
There remains the possibility to spoof the IP address of a packet that 
is being sent to the MPLS core. However, since there is strict 
addressing separation within the PE router, and each VPN has its own 
VRF, this can only do harm to the VPN the spoofed packet originated 
from, in other words, a VPN customer can attack himself. MPLS doesn't 
add any security risk here.  
 
3.5 Comparison with ATM/FR VPNs 
 
ATM and FR VPN services often enjoy a very high reputation in terms of 
security. Although ATM and FR VPNs can also be provided in a secure 
manner, it has been reported that also these technologies can have 
severe security vulnerabilities [DataComm]. Also in ATM/FR the security 
depends on the configuration of the network being secure, and errors 
can also lead to security problems.  
 
 
4. What MPLS Doesn't Provide 
 
4.1 Protection against Misconfigurations of the Core and Attacks 
"within" the Core 
 
The security mechanisms discussed here assume correct configuration of 
the involved network elements on the MPLS core network (PE and P 
routers). Deliberate or inadvertent misconfigurations from SP staff may 
result in undesired behaviour including severe security leaks.  

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                           page 10 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

 
Note that this paragraph specifically refers to the core network, i.e., 
the PE and P elements. Misconfiguration of any of the customer side 
elements such as the CE router are covered by the security mechanisms 
above. This means that a potential attacker must have access to either 
PE or P routers to gain advantage from misconfigurations. If an 
attacker has access to core elements, or is able to insert into the 
core additional equipment, he will be able to attack both the core 
network as well as the connected VPNs. Thus the following is important:  
 
* To avoid the risk of misconfigurations it is important that the 
   equipment is easy to configure, and that SP staff have the 
   appropriate training and experience when configuring the network. 
   Also, proper tools are required for configuring the core network.  
 
* To avoid the risk of "internal" attacks the MPLS core network must be 
   properly secured. This includes network element security, management 
   security, physical security of the service provider infrastructure, 
   access control to service provider installations and other standard 
   SP security mechanisms.  
 
MPLS can only provide a secure service if the core network is provided 
in a secure fashion. This document assumes this to be the case.  
 
There are various approaches to control the security of an MPLS core if 
the VPN customer cannot or does not want to trust the service provider. 
IPsec from customer controlled devices is one of them. [Bonica] 
proposes a CE based authentication scheme based on cookies, aimed at 
detecting misconfigurations in the MPLS core. [Behringer] proposes a 
similar scheme based on using the MD5 routing authentication. Both 
schemes aim to detect and prevent misconfigurations in the MPLS core.  
 
4.2 Data Encryption, Integrity and Origin Authentication 
 
MPLS itself does not provide encryption, integrity or authentication 
services. If these are required IPsec should be used over the MPLS 
infrastructure. The same applies to ATM and Frame Relay: Also here 
IPsec can provide these missing services.  
 
4.3 Customer Network Security 
 
MPLS can be secured so that it is comparable with other VPN services. 
However, the security of the core network is only one factor for the 
overall security of a customer's network. Threats in today's networks 
do not only come from the "outside" connection, but also from the 
"inside" and from other entry points (modems for example). To reach a 
good security level for a customer network in an MPLS infrastructure, 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                           page 11 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

MPLS security is necessary but not sufficient. The same applies to 
other VPN technologies like ATM or frame relay. See also [RFC2196] for 
more information on how to secure a network.  
 
 
5. Summary and Conclusions 
 
MPLS provides full address and traffic separation as in traditional 
layer-2 VPN services. It hides addressing structures of the core and 
other VPNs, and it is in today's understanding not possible from the 
outside to intrude into the core or other VPNs abusing the MPLS 
mechanisms. It is also not possible to intrude into the MPLS core if 
this is properly secured. However, there is a significant difference 
between MPLS based VPNs and for example FR or ATM based VPNs: The 
control structure of the core is on layer 3 in the case of MPLS. This 
caused significant skepticism in the industry towards MPLS, since this 
might open the architecture to DoS attacks from other VPNs or the 
Internet (if connected).  
 
As shown in this document, it is possible to secure an MPLS 
infrastructure to the same level of security than a comparable ATM or 
FR service. It is also possible to offer Internet connectivity to MPLS 
VPNs in a secure manner, and to interconnect different VPNs via 
firewalls. Although ATM and FR services have a strong reputation with 
regard to security, it has been shown that also in these networks 
security problems can exist [DataComm].  
 
As far as attacks from within the MPLS core are concerned, all VPN 
classes (MPLS, FR, ATM) have the same problem: If an attacker can 
install a sniffer, he can read information in all VPNs, and if he has 
access to the core devices, he can execute a large number of attacks, 
from packet spoofing to introducing a new peer routers. There are a 
number of precautions measures outlined above that a service provider 
can use to tighten security of the core, but the security of the MPLS 
architecture depends on the security of the service provider. If the 
service provider is not trusted, the only way to fully secure a VPN 
against attacks from the "inside" of the VPN service is to run IPsec on 
top, from the CE devices or beyond.  
 
This document discussed many aspects of MPLS security. It has to be 
noted explicitly that the overall security of an MPLS architecture 
depends on all components, and is determined by the security of the 
weakest part of the solution. For example a perfectly secured static 
MPLS network with secured Internet access and secure management is 
still open to many attacks if there is a weak remote access solution in 
place.  
 

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                           page 12 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author would like to thank everybody who has provided input to this 
document. Specific thanks go to Yakov Rekhter for his continued strong 
support, and Loa Andersson for his extended feedback and support.  
 
 
Author's Address 
 
Michael H. Behringer  
Avda de la Vega, 15  
28100 Alcobendas, Madrid  
Spain  
E-mail: mbehring@cisco.com  
 
   
References 
 
[Bonica] "CE-to-CE Authentication for Layer 3 VPNs". R. Bonica et al; 
draft-ietf-ppvpn-l3vpn-auth-00.txt; work in progress 
 
[Behringer] "MPLS VPN Authentication". M. Behringer, J. Guichard; 
draft-behringer-mpls-vpn-auth-00.txt; work in progress 
 
[DataComm] "Frame Relay and ATM: Are they really secure?". Data 
Communications Report, Vol 15, No 4, February 2000. 
(http://www.yankeegroup.com)  
 
[RFC1918] "Address Allocation for Private Internets". Y. Rekhter et al; 
February 1996. (http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1918.txt)  
 
[RFC2082] "RIP-2 MD5 Authentication". F. Baker, R. Atkinson. January 
1997. (http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2082.txt)  
 
[RFC2154] "OSPF with Digital Signatures". S. Murphy, M. Badger, B. 
Wellington. June 1997. (http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2154.txt)  
 
[RFC2196] "Site Security Handbook". B. Fraser. September 1997. 
(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2196.txt)  
 
[RFC2385] "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 Signature 
Option". A. Heffernan. August 1998. 
(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2385.txt)  
 
[RFC2547] "BGP/MPLS VPNs". E. Rosen, Y. Rekhter. March 1999. 
(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2547.txt)  

 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                           page 13 

Internet Draft    Security of the MPLS Architecture      October 2002 

 
[RFC2827] "Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating Denial of Service 
Attacks which employ IP Source Address Spoofing". P. Ferguson, D. 
Senie. May 2000. (http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2827.txt)  
 
[RFC2828] "Internet Security Glossary". R. Shirey. May 2000. 
(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2828.txt)  
 
[RFC3013] "Recommended Internet Service Provider Security Services and 
Procedures". T. Killalea. November 2000. 
(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3013.txt)  
 
[RFC3031] "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture". E. Rosen, A. 
Viswanathan, R. Callon. January 
2001.(http://search.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3031.txt)  
 
   
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.  
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to  
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it  
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published  
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any  
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph  
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this  
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing  
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other  
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of  
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for  
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be  
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than  
   English.  
 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be  
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an  
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING  
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION  
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF  
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."  
 





 
draft-behringer-mpls-security-03.txt                           page 14 
