


Network Working Group                                         E. Marocco
Internet-Draft                                            Telecom Italia
Intended status: Informational                                V. Gurbani
Expires: January 11, 2009              Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
                                                           July 10, 2008


    Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement
                draft-marocco-alto-problem-statement-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2009.

Abstract

   A significant part of the Internet traffic today is generated by
   peer-to-peer applications used for file sharing, realtime
   communications and live media streaming.  Such applications often
   deal with large amounts of data in direct peer-to-peer connections,
   but they usually have little knowledge of the underlying topology,
   both at the overlay layer and the network layer.  As a result, they
   may choose their peers based on measurements and statistics which, in
   some specific situations, often lead to suboptimal choices.  This
   document describes problems related to optimizing traffic generated
   by peer-to-peer applications through the use of link and network
   layer information.



Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Research or Engineering? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.1.  Caching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.2.  Information Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.3.  Topology Hiding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  File sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Cache/Mirror Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Live media streaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Realtime communications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.5.  Distributed Hash Tables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11































Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


1.  Introduction

   A significant part of the Internet traffic is today generated by
   peer-to-peer (P2P) applications used for file sharing, realtime
   communications and live media streaming [WWW.cachelogic.picture]
   [WWW.wired.fuel].  Contrary to client/server architectures, P2P
   applications access resources (e.g. files or media relays)
   distributed across the Internet and exchange large amounts of data in
   connections that they establish directly with nodes hosting such
   resources.

   One of the advantages of P2P systems comes from the fact that the
   resources they offer are often made available through multiple
   instances.  Yet, applications generally ignore the topology of the
   latent overlay network and have to select among available instances
   based on information they deduce from empirical measurements which,
   in some particular situations, could lead to suboptimal choices.

      For example, popular metrics based on round trip time estimation
      sometimes used for initial sources selection (i.e. before actual
      data transmissions begin, when goodput values are unknown) perform
      quite badly for file sharing applications, as they tend to ignore
      bandwidth and reliability of underlying links, which have much
      more influence than delay on file transfers.

   Many of the existing overlay networks are built on top of connections
   between peers that are established regardless of the underlying
   network topology.  In addition to simply achieving suboptimal
   performance, such networks can lead to congestions and cause serious
   inefficiencies.  As shown in [ACM.fear], traffic generated by popular
   P2P applications often cross network boundaries multiple times,
   overloading links which are frequently subject to congestion
   [ACM.bottleneck].

   Recent studies [ACM.ispp2p] [WWW.p4p.overview] [ACM.ono] have shown
   that if Internet Service Providers (ISP), network operators or third
   parties in general provide reliable topology and/or bandwidth
   information to P2P applications, it would be possible to greatly
   increase application performance, reduce congestions and optimize the
   overall traffic across different networks.

   This document describes the problem of optimizing traffic generated
   by P2P applications using information provided by third parties.
   Section 2 introduces the problem and the main issues to keep in mind
   when designing a solution, while Section 3 describes some use cases
   where both P2P users and network operators would benefit from such a
   solution.




Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


1.1.  Research or Engineering?

   At the time of writing, several solutions have been proposed to
   address the problem described in this document, both inside and
   outside the IETF [I-D.bonaventure-informed-path-selection]
   [ACM.ispp2p] [WWW.p4p.overview], all accompanied by encouraging
   simulation and field test results.  Such solutions have been proposed
   independently, but all consists of two essential parts:
   o  a discovery mechanism which can be used by a P2P application to
      find a reliable information source;
   o  a protocol used by P2P applications to query such sources in order
      to retrieve the information needed to choose the best endpoint
      among those which host a desired resource.

   It is not easy to foresee how such solutions would perform in the
   Internet, but a more accurate evaluation would require representative
   data collected from real systems by a critical mass of users.

   However, wide adoption will probably never happen without an
   agreement on a common solution based on open standards; whether such
   a solution should be still studied as a research problem, published
   as a "Proposed Standard" or an "Experimental" RFC [RFC2026] is an
   open issue.


2.  The Problem

   Network engineers have been facing the problem of traffic
   optimization for a long time now and have already designed mechanisms
   like MPLS [RFC3031] and DiffServ [RFC3260] to deal with it.  The
   problem they address consists in finding (or setting) an optimal
   route for packets traveling between specific source and destination
   addresses and based on requirements such as low latency, high
   reliability, and priority.  Such solutions are usually implemented at
   the link and network layers, and tend to be almost transparent.  At
   best, applications can only "mark" the traffic they generate with the
   corresponding properties.

   However, P2P applications which are today posing serious challenges
   to Internet infrastructures, do not benefit much from the above
   techniques and "cooperating" with external services aware of the
   network topology could greatly optimize the traffic they generate.
   In fact, when a P2P application needs to establish a connection, the
   logical target is not a host, but rather a resource (e.g. a file or a
   media relay) generally available in multiple instances on different
   hosts; selection of the closest one -- or, in general, the best from
   an overlay topological proximity -- has much more impact on the
   overall traffic than the route followed by its packets to reach the



Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


   endpoint.

   Addressing the Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem
   means, on the one hand, providing topology information regarding the
   underlying network and, on the other hand, enhancing P2P applications
   in order to use such information to select the best endpoints among
   those that are available for the connections they are going to
   establish.

2.1.  Issues

2.1.1.  Caching

   A common approach to optimize traffic generated by applications which
   require large data transfers is based on caching techniques.  In some
   cases, such techniques have proven to be extremely effective in both
   enhancing user experience and saving network resources; however, they
   have two main limits in respect to the solutions based on provision
   of topology information:
   1.  Application specificity: since a cache is meant to replace the
       source of the content being accessed -- either explicitly or
       transparently -- it must be able to speak the same protocol with
       the querying peer.  For this reason, caching solutions can be
       reasonably adopted only for most popular applications (e.g.  HTTP
       and BitTorrent).
   2.  Content awareness: since caches need to actually store the
       content being delivered, they are subject to legal threats
       whenever the user has not the right to access such content.  This
       limitation makes caching approaches unusable in today's popular
       file-sharing systems.

   In general, solutions based on provision of topology information do
   not interfere with caching; to the contrary, if the peer selection
   service used by applications is aware of the presence of chaches, it
   can give them higher priorities in its replies and thus achieve
   greater optimization.

2.1.2.  Information Distribution

   As a direct consequence of the total distribution of the Internet, it
   seems almost impossible to centralize all information P2P
   applications may need to optimize traffic they generate.  It is quite
   likely that such information would be highly distributed, for
   example, at an ISP or domain level.  It is also reasonable to expect
   that, in some cases, the same network administrators will control
   provision of such information.

   However, as applications usually have no knowledge of the



Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


   administrative entities running the network they are using, any
   solution will need to define a discovery mechanism (e.g. based on or
   similar to reverse DNS [RFC2317]) and perhaps an infrastructure to
   certify information sources.

2.1.3.  Topology Hiding

   Operators can play an important role in addressing the ALTO problem,
   but they generally consider topology of the networks they control to
   be confidential information; therefore, in order to succeed and
   achieve wide adoption, any solution should provide a method to help
   P2P applications in peer selection without explicitly disclosing
   topology of the underlying network.


3.  Use Cases

3.1.  File sharing

   File sharing applications allow users to search for content shared by
   other users and download it.  Typically, search results consist of
   many instances of the same file available from multiple sources; the
   goal of an ALTO solution would be to help peers find the best ones
   according to the underlying networks.

   On the application side, integration of ALTO functionalities may
   happen at different levels.  For example, while in the completely
   decentralized Gnutella network selection of the best sources is
   totally up to the user, in systems like BitTorrent and eDonkey,
   central elements (i.e. trackers or servers) act as mediators.
   Therefore, in the former case, optimization would require
   modification in the applications, while in the latter it could just
   be implemented in some central elements.

3.2.  Cache/Mirror Selection

   Providers of popular content like media and software repositories
   usually resort to geographically distributed caches and mirrors for
   load balancing.  Selection of the proper mirror/cache for a given
   user is today based on inaccurate geolocation data, on proprietary
   network location systems or often delegated to the user himself; an
   ALTO solution could be easily adopted to ease such a selection in an
   automated way.

3.3.  Live media streaming

   P2P applications for live streaming allow users to receive multimedia
   content produced by one source and targeted to multiple destinations,



Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


   in a realtime or near-realtime way without recurring to multicast.
   Such applications typically participate in the distribution of the
   content, acting as both receivers and senders; the goal of an ALTO
   solution would be to help peers to find the best sources and the best
   destinations for media flows they receive and relay.

3.4.  Realtime communications

   P2P realtime communications allow users to establish direct media
   flows, usually to place audio and video calls, or to have text chats.
   In the basic case, media would flow directly between the two
   endpoints; however, in the general case, a significant portion of
   communications between users with limited access to the Internet
   (e.g. users behind NATs, firewalls or HTTP proxies) need to be
   relayed by other elements.  Such media relays are distributed over
   the Internet -- in some cases co-located with applications with a
   public address; the goal of an ALTO solution would be to help peers
   to find the best relays.

3.5.  Distributed Hash Tables

   Distributed hash tables (DHT) are a class of overlay algorithms used
   to implement lookup functionalities in popular P2P systems, without
   recurring to centralized elements.  In such systems, peers maintain
   addresses of other peers participating in the same DHT in a routing
   table, sorted according to specific criteria.  An ALTO solution would
   provide valuable information for DHT algorithms which, in order to
   reduce path latency of distributed queries, include round trip time
   estimations among such criteria [SIGCOMM.resprox].


4.  Security Considerations

   The approach proposed in this document requires P2P applications to
   delegate a portion of their routing capability to third parties,
   giving them a significant role in systems where that would be
   otherwise excluded.

   In the case where an ALTO solution is deployed by the network
   operator, it is conceivable that the P2P community would consider it
   hostile because the operator could, for example:
   o  redirect applications to corrupted mediators providing malicious
      content;
   o  track connections to perform content inspection;
   o  apply policies based on criteria other than network efficiency
      (for example, to avoid peering points regulated by inconvenient
      economic agreements).




Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


   However, ALTO is completely optional for P2P applications and its
   purpose is to help improve performance of such applications.  If, for
   some reason, it fails to achieve this purpose, it would simply fail
   to gain popularity and would not be used.

   Even in cases where the ALTO service provider would decide to
   maliciously alter results returned by queries only after the solution
   has gained popularity (i.e. it behaves for a while to become popular
   and then starts misbehaving), it would be fairly easy for P2P
   application maintainers and users to revert to solutions that are not
   using it.  After all, it would all come down to change some
   application settings in cases where the protocol is implemented
   inside the client and upgrading centralized elements for
   architectures like BitTorrent and eDonkey.


5.  Acknowledgments

   We have to acknowledge many people.  For the record: Vinay Aggarwal
   and the P4P working group for the research work done outside the
   IETF.  Emil Ivov, Rohan Mahy, Anthony Bryan, Stanislav Shalunov,
   Laird Popkin, Stefano Previdi, Reinaldo Penno, Dimitri Papadimitriou
   and many others for interesting discussions, comments and
   corrections.


6.  Informative References

   [ACM.bottleneck]
              Akella, A., Seshan, S., and A. Shaikh, "An Empirical
              Evaluation of WideArea Internet Bottlenecks",  Proceedings
              of ACM SIGCOMM, October 2003.

   [ACM.fear]
              Karagiannis, T., Rodriguez, P., and K. Papagiannaki,
              "Should ISPs fear Peer-Assisted Content Distribution?",
               In ACM USENIX IMC, Berkeley 2005.

   [ACM.ispp2p]
              Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A., and C. Scheideler, "Can ISPs
              and P2P systems co-operate for improved performance?",  In
              ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communications Review (CCR), 37:3,
              pp. 29-40.

   [ACM.ono]  Choffnes, D. and F. Bustamante, "Taming the Torrent: A
              practical approach to reducing cross-ISP traffic in P2P
              systems",  Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM, August 2008.




Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


   [I-D.bonaventure-informed-path-selection]
              Saucez, D. and B. Donnet, "The case for an informed path
              selection service",
              draft-bonaventure-informed-path-selection-00 (work in
              progress), February 2008.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2317]  Eidnes, H., de Groot, G., and P. Vixie, "Classless IN-
              ADDR.ARPA delegation", BCP 20, RFC 2317, March 1998.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3260]  Grossman, D., "New Terminology and Clarifications for
              Diffserv", RFC 3260, April 2002.

   [SIGCOMM.resprox]
              Gummadi, K., Gummadi, R., Ratnasamy, S., Gribble, S.,
              Shenker, S., and I. Stoica, "The impact of DHT routing
              geometry on resilience and proximity",  Proceedings of ACM
              SIGCOMM, August 2003.

   [WWW.cachelogic.picture]
              Parker, A., "The true picture of peer-to-peer
              filesharing", <http://www.cachelogic.com>.

   [WWW.p4p.overview]
              Xie, H., Krishnamurthy, A., Silberschatz, A., and R. Yang,
              "P4P: Explicit Communications for Cooperative Control
              Between P2P and Network Providers",
              <http://www.dcia.info/documents/P4P_Overview.pdf>.

   [WWW.wired.fuel]
              Glasner, J., "P2P fuels global bandwidth binge",
              <http://www.wired.com/techbiz/media/news/2005/04/67202>.














Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Enrico Marocco
   Telecom Italia
   Via G. Reiss Romoli, 274
   Turin  10148
   Italy

   Email: enrico.marocco@telecomitalia.it


   Vijay K. Gurbani
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   2701 Lucent Lane
   Lisle, IL  60532
   USA

   Email: vkg@alcatel-lucent.com

































Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement                July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Marocco & Gurbani       Expires January 11, 2009               [Page 11]

