
Internet Engineering Task Force                       S. Harris
INTERNET-DRAFT                                        Merit Network
                                                      27 August 1999


                      IETF Discussion List Charter
                  <draft-ietf-poisson-listaup-01.txt>

Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   NOTE:  This document represents a snapshot of the policies and
   procedures it covers as of its date of publication.  These policies
   and procedures are subject to change and such change takes effect
   upon their approval. All changes are to be managed according to the
   process used for approving Working Group charters as specified by BCP
   25.

Abstract

   The IETF discussion mailing list furthers the development and
   specification of Internet technology through discussion of technical
   issues, and hosts discussions of IETF direction, policy, meetings,
   and procedures. As this is the most general IETF mailing list,
   considerable latitude is allowed.  Advertising, whether to solicit
   business or promote employment opportunities, falls well outside the
   range of acceptable topics, as do discussions of a personal nature.

Harris                                                          [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        IETF Discussion List Charter           August 1999

1.  Charter for the IETF Discussion List

   The IETF discussion list serves two purposes. It furthers the
   development and specification of Internet technology through
   discussion of technical issues. It also hosts discussions of IETF
   direction, policy, meetings, and procedures. As this is the most
   general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
   Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment
   opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as
   do discussions of a personal nature.

   This list is meant for initial discussion only.  Discussions that
   fall within the area of any working group or well established list
   should be moved to such more specific forum as soon as this is
   pointed out, unless the issue is one for which the working group
   needs wider input or direction.

   In addition to the topics noted above, appropriate postings include:

     - Last Call discussions of proposed protocol actions
     - Discussion of technical issues that are candidates for IETF work,
       but do not yet have an appropriate e-mail venue
     - Discussion of IETF administrative policies
     - Questions and clarifications concerning IETF meetings
     - Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are
       sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF.

   Inappropriate postings include:

     - Unsolicited bulk e-mail
     - Discussion of subjects unrelated to IETF policy, meetings,
       activities, or technical concerns
     - Unprofessional commentary, regardless of the general subject.

   The IETF Chair, the IETF Executive Director, or a sergeant-at-arms
   appointed by the Chair is empowered to restrict posting by a person,
   or of a thread, when the content is inappropriate and represents a
   pattern of abuse.  They are encouraged to take into account the
   overall nature of the postings by an individual and whether
   particular postings are an aberration or typical.  Complaints
   regarding their decisions should be referred to the IAB.

Acknowledgements

   Comments by Donald E. Eastlake 3rd and other members of the IETF
   POISSON working group are gratefully acknowledged.

Harris                                                          [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        IETF Discussion List Charter           August 1999

Author's Address

   Susan R. Harris
   Merit Network, Inc.
   4251 Plymouth Rd., Suite C
   Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2785
   Phone: (734) 936-2100
   Fax:   (734) 647-3185
   Email: srh@merit.edu













































Harris                                                          [Page 3]



