			      
  Internet Draft                            I. Miloucheva (Fraunhofer),
                                        I. Sterdiner Mayer (Netvision),
                                     P.A.Aranda Gutierrez (Telefonica),
                                               Ch. Chassot (CNRS-LAAS),
						      S. Rao (TELSCOM),
                                  S. P. Romano (Universita' di Napoli),    
                                                 A. Flitzikowski (UAM), 
                                      Ch. Brandauer (Salzburg Research)
                                        				       
    Expires: December 20, 2008                           July 18, 2008
							 

                User centric QoS policy management 
              for heterogeneous Internet environment
                draft-miloucheva-user-policy-00.txt

   Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 20, 2008.


Abstract 

   This document presents a framework for user-centric Quality of 
   Service (QoS) management in heterogeneous Internet environments
   (considering fixed, mobile and broadcast networks). 
   The framework is based on dynamic business level QoS policy 
   specification by different actors  (such as users, operators 
   and administrators), as well as hierarchical policy refinement
   and translation, supporting the automated configuration of QoS
   mechanisms at heterogeneous network and transport entities.



Miloucheva               Expires December 2008               [Page 1]
 
INTERNET-DRAFT    User-centric QoS policy management    July 19, 2008


   The hierarchical policy approach involves abstractions and mapping  
   of policies described at business, unified, operational and 
   configuration level considering networks with different capabilities
   and QoS requirements of different actors. 
   The policy specification is dependent on the Service 
   Level Agreements (SLAs) of the particular actors. 
   This allows controlled and restricted usage of the network 
   resources by the actors according to the actor dependencies and 
   corresponding SLA rules.    

   The policy management framework includes components for dynamic 
   actor-based QoS policy specification, policy consistency check
   and dependency analysis regarding SLAs, automated policy 
   provisioning and configuration at heterogeneous transport and 
   network entities, policy monitoring and performance 
   assessment, as well as automated adaptation of QoS mechanisms at 
   operational level.  
   Policy enforcement combined with policy monitoring and performance
   assessment is considered, as well as automated adaptation of 
   policy parameters (e.g. operational policies) based on policy 
   performance analysis. 
 
   Interactions of components for policy specification and automated
   provisioning are based on policy repository storing the unified 
   (intermediate) policy representations describing policy parameters, 
   conditions and actions.    
 
Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction................................................  3
   2.   Terminology used in this document...........................  4
   3.   QoS Policy framework for heterogeneous environment..........  5
   3.1. Actor and user-centric QoS policy specification ............  5
   3.2. Hierarchical policy mapping considering heterogeneous 
        networks ...................................................  5
   4.   Dynamic and user centric QoS policy management for  
        heterogeneous environment ..................................  7
   4.1. Requirements for QoS policy management .....................  7
   4.2. Functions...................................................  8
   4.2.1. Dynamic and user centric policy specification ............  8
   4.2.2. Automated policy adaptation and enforcement...............  9
   4.2.3. Automated policy configuration............................  9
   4.2.4. Policy monitoring and assessment.......................... 10  
   4.3. NETQOS system prototype..................................... 10
   4.4. Experiments................................................. 12
   5.   Conclusions ................................................ 13
   6.   References.................................................. 13
   7.   Author's Addresses.......................................... 15
   8.   Intellectual Property Statement............................. 16
   9.   Full Copyright Statement.................................... 16


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008



1. Introduction
    
   In this document, QOS policy framework is discussed, which is aimed 
   at automated management of QoS mechanisms at transport and network 
   level in heterogeneous IP networking environments considering business 
   goals of users, service providers, and network operators. 

   Design and implementation of the NETQOS system prototype is 
   considered, developed in the European project NETQOS
   (www.ist-netqos.org) [1]. Design and implementation of 
   the NETQOS architecture are discussed in  [2], [3], [4], [5]. 
   
   The QoS policy management framework is based on business policy 
   specifications and hierarchical policy refinement used to support
   user centric preferences for QoS in heterogeneous Internet environment. 
   
   The consideration of policies of different actors including users,
   as well as QoS goals for converged heterogeneous networks (mobile, 
   fixed, broadcast, sensor) with their specific capabilities and 
   QoS mechanisms, allows new business scenarios supporting enhanced QoS 
   guarantees and optimised traffic allocation to specific networks. 
   
   The QoS policy framework for heterogeneous Internet environment
   considers the current IETF standardisations, e.g. Policy Core 
   Information Model (PCIM) [8], the Common Information Model (CIM) [9], 
   QoS Policy Information Model (QPIM) [6] and QoS data path
   mechanisms [7]. 
   The extension of the current state-of-the art is based on: 
   - Hierarchical policy abstraction for provision of user-centric and 
     SLA based QoS policy specifications of different actors aimed at
     control of applications in heterogeneous Internet environment; 
   - Automated policy provisioning including functions for 
     policy monitoring, assessment and adaptation. 
  
   User centric business policies and models for heterogeneous 
   Internet environment are aimed to enable the users to configure 
   dynamically QoS mechanisms at transport and network entities 
   according to their QoS and network preferences considering
   technology and vendor dependent capabilities of the entities.
   
   The framework allows the support of cost efficient resource usage
   in heterogeneous Internet environment, as well as enhanced QoS
   guarantees according to the business preferences of the particular
   actors.
   Dependent on the business QoS policies and SLAs of the actors, 
   the QoS policy management architecture seeks to enhance 
   the QoS provisioning and network efficiency for specific user 
   applications based on adaptation of QoS mechanisms of heterogeneous
   transport and network entities. 


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008


   
   The QoS policy framework for heterogeneous network environments 
   derived from the NETQOS system [1], is characterised by: 
   - Dynamic user centric and scenario oriented business level QoS policy
     specification considering dependencies of policies of different actors
     and SLAs;
   - Policy repository for storage of policy specifications and interaction 
     of policy management functions;
   - Automated QoS policy provisioning including functions for policy 
     adaptation, automated configuration, monitoring and assessment;
   - Hierarchical ontology based policy abstractions and mapping of 
     business, intermediate, operational and configuration policies of the
     actors;
   - Policy configuration for heterogeneous Internet environment
     dependent on the capabilities of managed transport and network 
     entities;
   - Policy monitoring and assessment mechanisms for signalling of 
     policy adaptation requirements;
   - Automated adaptation of policy's QoS mechanisms and actions for 
     enhanced QoS guarantees.

    
2. Terminology used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [14].
    
   Abbreviations used in the following text:

   APM        - Actor Preference Manager
   POLD       - Policy Descriptor   
   APA        - Automated Policy Adaptor
   MoMe       - Monitoring and Measurement
   NetAgent   - Component for automated configuration of mechanisms at 
                network devices
   TransAgent - Component for policy configuration of mechanisms at 
                transport entities.
   CM         - Context Manager monitoring tool interactions
   HQPIM      - Heterogeneous networks QoS policy information model     
   PCIM       - Core Information Model
   QPIM       - QoS Policy Information Model
   SLA	      - Service Level Agreement
   QoS        - Quality of Service
   GUI        - Graphical User Interface

   This Draft considers the terminology for Policy-based management [10] 
   and extends it to specify QoS policy management framework and 
   interaction for heterogeneous network environment. 



Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT     User-centric QoS policy management       July 19, 2008


   Discussed framework is related the QoS policy information model for 
   heterogeneous network environment (HQPIM) [2]. 

3. QoS Policy framework for heterogeneous environment
   
3.1. Actor and user-centric QoS policy specification
  
   The user centric policy framework is based on dynamic specification
   and automated configuration of business level policies of different 
   actors (such as end users, service provider and ISP operators).
   The policies are used by the actors to specify their specific preferences
   for QoS and resources in heterogeneous network environment considering 
   SLAs and actors relationships [3]. 

   Dependent on the specific QoS management scenario, preferences are 
   defined, as for instance requirements for specific QoS 
   guarantee level of applications at different networks, bandwidth 
   reservation options [5], selection of QoS measurement facilities for
   applications and networks [2].
   The policies of the actors are related to the SLA rules. 
   The QoS mechanisms and parameters defined by the policies of different 
   actors can be restricted by the actor's dependencies and SLAs 
   constraints. For instance, the specific amount of bandwidth, which
   can be allocated to the user, can be specified as policy of network 
   operators and end users. 
 
   The SLA rules specify generic requirements for the user policy 
   mechanisms and parameters, such as network resource access permissions
   and QoS parameter thresholds. 
   The semantic of the SLA?s objectives and the policy rules 
   can be presented in consistent way using ontology approaches, such
   as OWL [11] and SWRL [12]. 
   The ontology can be used also to relate the information on objects 
   and identities related to the policy and SLA specification [3], [4]. 
   Ontology based descriptions of the SLA rules and business level 
   policy allow interoperable interfaces and automated consistency
   check.

3.2. Hierarchical policy mapping considering heterogeneous networks 
   
   The QoS policies for management QoS of application in converged 
   Internet infrastructures according the preferences of specific 
   actors are defined in a hierarchical way considering abstraction
   levels: 
    -   Business (high-level or actor-oriented policies),
    -   Intermediate QoS policies (unified policy presentations), 
    -   Operational  (technology dependent QoS mechanisms of managed 
        entities),
    -   Configuration (vendor and system oriented QoS mechanisms 
        of managed entities).


Miloucheva                 Expires December 2008                 [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008

   
   The policies are mapped between the different levels using expert's 
   descriptions and  procedures, which depend on the policy content. 
   The concept of the policy hierarchy and policy management for flexible
   policy provisioning is shown in fig.1:

   Policy Hierarchy                             Policy management
   
   +-----------------+
   ! Business policy !   .................     policy specification
   +-----------------+
          !
          v
   +---------------------+
   ! Intermediate policy ! ................     policy repository
   +---------------------+                       (common access for
          !           !                      policy management tools)
          v           v
   +-------------+ +-------------+
   ! Operational ! ! Operational ! ........     policy adaptation 
   ! policy      ! ! policy      !               (enforcement
   +-------------+ +-------------+            of operational policies                                              
          !           !                        for managed entities)
          v           v
   +---------------+ +--------------+
   ! Configuration ! !Configuration ! .....   configuration of QoS 
   ! policy        ! ! policy       !              mechanisms
   +---------------+ +--------------+           at managed entities

   Fig. 1:  Hiearchical policy mapping and management tasks

   The QoS policies on business level are concise specifications of the 
   QoS goals of the particular actors and are related to the SLA 
   objectives. The internal presentation of the business policies is 
   structured based on generic and specific policy part:

   - The generic part describes basic information about policy 
     identification, related SLAs, actor identifier, the network context, 
     service and policy type.  
   - The structure of the specific part depends on the policy type and
     includes parameters, conditions and actions specifying the specific
     policy requirements, for instance delay, bandwidth, packet 
     loss, or measurement requirements. 
   The business policies are transformed to the unified (intermediate) 
   policy presentation.
   QoS specifications at the intermediate level identify in unified way 
   QoS facilities and mechanisms (for instance defined by ITU-T X.641
   [13]). Intermediate policies are based on a unified presentation of
   QoS mechanisms and parameters using "condition and action" paradigm 
   (see, RFC 3644 [6]) and QoS policy information model for heterogeneous 
   networks [2]. 


Miloucheva                  Expires December 2008                 [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management      July 19, 2008


   The intermediate policy representation includes policy identification
   and type, QoS request and  time requirements, as well as references to
   ontology information for entities, SLA and actor descriptions, as well
   as descriptions of policy conditions, actions and parameters.

   Intermediate QoS policies express the required QoS level for application
   classes (VoIP, IPTV, audio streaming, gaming, bulk data 
   transfer) and network preferences independent on the particular
   QoS technology integrated at the managed entities.

   The automated policy configuration is based on the translation of the 
   intermediate policies into operational QoS parameters and mechanisms 
   of the managed entities (routers, transport protocol and application 
   entities). 
   The operational policies can be aimed to specify QoS mechanisms for
   control the treatment of the packets to/from the end-user dependent
   on the application class (content delivery, streaming, Voice over IP ).
  
   Operational policies can be can be expressed by XACML (eXtensible 
   Access Control Markup Language) [16],  and applied for different kind
   of heterogeneous devices (routers and/or Transport level entities).  
   An operational policy can define for instance handling of user 
   traffic at particular router based on DiffServ technology, specifying
   the  DSCP-field (RFC 2474 [15]) for the user application. 
   Based on DSCP processing at the routers, traffic can be 
   assigned to a particular service class with specific priority. 
   Dependant on the managed entity capabilities (for instance router
   architecture),  the operational policies are transformed into 
   configuration policies, i.e. CLI (Command Line Interface) batches of 
   commands for the corresponding system (Cisco, Juniper or Linux). 
   
   
4. Dynamic user centric QoS policy management for heterogeneous environment    


4.1. Requirements for QoS policy management 


   QoS management of Internet applications in converged Internet environments
   require dynamic and user-centric management strategies for handling of 
   the application traffic considering the specific preferences of different
   actors, actor's profile, SLAs and the context.

   Dynamic policy management allows that policy actors are able to define and 
   change dynamically the business policies specifying the QoS
   level and network preferences of their applications.   
   The QoS policy framework should support controlled usage of the network
   resources in Internet according to the  contracted agreements for 
   usage services and resources, e.g. SLAs restrictions and the dependencies
   of the policies of the actors. 


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008 



   Automated provisioning of the actor's policies is based on mapping  
   of business QoS policy requirements to the specific QoS mechanisms 
   and capabilities of managed transport, network and application
   entities in heterogeneous environments. 
   To provide mapping of business QoS requirements to specific mechanisms
   of managed entities, hierarchical policy abstractions are needed, 
   which consider technology dependent QoS mechanisms of heterogeneous
   entities and their effects on the QoS experience of the user. 
   For the refinement of policies between different layers, the expertise
   of the network administrators and operators is used. 
   Further requirements concern the autonomous policy management design 
   involving: 
   - Actor based QoS requirements dependent on the profile (identity) 
     of the actors and related SLAs, 
   - Policy consistency check considering dependencies of policies of
     different actors and SLAs,
   - Automated configuration of QoS mechanisms at application, transport
     and network entities based on operational policy requirements, 
   - Adaptation of policy parameters for enhanced guarantees, 
   - Policy assessment,  monitoring and context learning for policy 
     performance improvement.   
  
4.2. Functions

   The user-centric dynamic QoS policy management in heterogeneous network 
   environment include interoperable functions and facilities aimed at 
   flexible and consistent business QoS policy specification of actors 
   according SLAs, automated QoS policy assessment, configuration and
   adaptation for optimised QoS guarantees.
   Functions are based on unified (intermediate) policy information 
   stored in a repository and grouped in the following main tasks: 
   - User-centric dynamic policy specification and storage of policies;
   - Automated policy adaptation and enforcement. 
   - Automated policy configuration;
   - Policy monitoring and assessment;

   The tasks for automated policy enforcement, configuration, monitoring, 
   assessment and adaptation are referred as policy provisioning. 
   Policy abstraction and mapping from business level to
   intermediate,  operational and configuration level policies is  
   used in order to support the technology and vendor dependent 
   configuration of QoS mechanisms.

4.2.1. User-centric dynamic policy specification

   Flexible and consistent specification of user-centric business 
   preferences for QoS management of their applications in heterogeneous
   Internet environment considers the SLAs restrictions and actors 
   dependencies. 


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008
  
   Actor specific policy specification interfaces allow automated
   translation of dynamically specified requirements and preferences 
   (e.g. business level policies) into intermediate (unified) policies,
   which are stored in common policy repository and can be accessed by
   the functions for automated policy provisioning. 
   The "on demand" user policy specification is restricted by the
   particular SLA and dependencies of the actor's policies.
   To allow automated policy translation and consistency check, the 
   policies, SLAs and entities are specified using ontologies [3].  
   Dependent on the QoS management goals of the actors, the SLAs and
   the particular scenario, different business level QoS policy types
   for heterogeneous network environment are considered. 
   
   Dynamic QoS policy specification is actor and scenario based. 
   The actor and scenario oriented policy specification interfaces allow 
   for different kind of users, such as mobile and fixed users, dependent 
   on their profile to store dynamically policies in the common policy 
   repository. 
   The common policy repository for unified (intermediate policies) 
   allows: 
   - Access to policies and check of their dependencies considering
     different actors and corresponding SLAs. 
   - Interaction of the functions for automated policy provisioning 
     using common and consistent policy definitions;
   - Interoperation of policy management and identity management 
     facilities. 

   The QoS policy management strategy based on translation of business
   policy  specifications into unified policy repository, accessed by the
   QoS provisioning functions, reduces the QoS management overhead 
   especially for mobile applications, for instance in case of handover 
   and roaming.

4.2.2. Automated policy adaptation and enforcement 

    The automated policy adaptation includes functions for 
    - Mapping of intermediate to operational policies; 
    - Adaptation of operation policies and their mechanisms considering 
      policy assessment results;
    - Enforcement of operational policy configuration based on triggering
      of corresponding configuration agents at managed transport and 
      network entities. 

    The unified policy presentations in the repository are translated
    into operational  policies considering hierarchical policy mapping
    specifications, SLAs and actor policy dependencies, as well as 
    monitoring and network context.     
    Operational policies define user-centric QoS mechanisms, for 
    instance bandwidth allocation request for user's applications, 
    specification of the QoS class for the user's flow, appropriate 
    composition of transport functions.  


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008

    
    The methods for the enforcement of the operational policies can be: 
    - Application driven. In this case the enforcement is performed,
      when the policy controlled application of the particular actors
      (user) is detected (launched);
    - Triggered by the policy specification functions. In this case, 
      the policy enforcement is done, when the intermediate policy 
      for specific actor's application is stored in the repository.

    The efficiency considerations for the policy enforcement method 
    depend on the policy content and usage of the policy controlled
    application.

4.2.3. Automated policy configuration

    The automated policy configuration functions are invoked by the
    policy adaptation facilities, whenever an operational 
    policy is enforced.
    Dependent on the managed entity, appropriate configuration agents
    are used  for policy configuration at the transport and network 
    entities.
    The configuration agents translate the operational policy into 
    technology and vendor dependent QoS mechanisms taking into account
    the specific capabilities of the heterogeneous entities.     
 
4.2.4. Policy monitoring and assessment

    Automated QoS policy monitoring and assessment is aimed to:
    - evaluate the policy performance based on measurements and other
      techniques, as well as  
    - to signal the policy performance degradations, based on which 
      the policy adaptation functions can adapt the parameters of
      the operational policies. 
    
    The policy monitoring functions are invoked, when the policy is enforced. 
    Based on the unified policy specification in the repository, 
    the policy monitoring and assessment function configure appropriate 
    actions for policy performance evaluation.
    Policy monitoring actions includes execution of measurement scenarios
    based on active and passive measurements, learning techniques,  
    as well as modelling and prediction of context data 
    (e.g. patterns and events).  

4.3. NETQOS system prototype

   The components and interactions for automated actor oriented policy 
   specification and provisioning in heterogeneous network environment
   are described considering the NETQOS architecture [1].  
   The architecture is based on autonomous concepts and ontology 
   oriented framework for interoperable and consistent policy 
   specification and provisioning [4]. 


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008

   
   The components for automated QoS specification and provisioning 
   include; 
   - Actor Preference Manager (APM) for actor and scenario oriented 
     business level QoS policy specification;
   - Policy Description and Management (POLD) allowing unified policy 
     access / storage;
   - Automated Policy Adaptor (APA) for policy decision, enforcement 
     and adaptation;
   - Monitoring and Measurement (MoMe) for policy performance analysis 
     and assessment of policy performance;
   - NetAgent and TransAgent for policy configuration at the managed 
     entities,  such as router or transport protocols, considering
     their particular capabilities; 
   - Context Manager for control of interactions between different policy 
     management components.
   The interoperation of the components is based on common policy 
   repository for unified (intermediate) policy specifications.
   Ontology is used for policy specification and translation of 
   business policies to intermediate, operation and configuration
   level specifications. 
   The components, integrated in the NETQoS system prototype for
   QoS policy management in heterogeneous network environment,
   and their generic interactions are illustrated in fig. 2:      

			Policy monitoring         Management  
                        & assessment of              of
                        enforced policies         interactions
			   +--------+		|-------------| 
			   | MoMe   |<--------- |     CM      |
			   +--------+           |-------------| 
				| 		|
 			        v		v
               +------+     +-------+      +-------------+ Policy decision,
     +-------->| APM  | --->| POLD  |<---> |    APA      |  adaptation, 
     actor's   +------+     +-------+      +-------------+  enforcement 
     business                   |                     |  |  (operational                                
     QoS  			|		      |  |   policy)
     policies                   |                     |  | 
     interface         Storage  v Access              |	 |
                     +---------------------+   +------+  +----------+          
                     | policy repository   |   |  Net |  | Transport|          
                     |  (unified policies) |   |Agent |  | Agent    |
                     | policy translation  |   +------+  +----------+
                     +---------------------+   Configuration
                                               of operational policies
                                               at heterogeneous entities 
 
   Fig.2: Interactions of NETQOS system components for 
                 dynamic QoS policy provisioning



Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management         Juni 2008

   At the business level, QoS policies are entered dynamically by the 
   actors using APM GUIs, which are designed considering the role, knowledge
   and expertise of the particular actors (operator, user, customer).
   The business level QoS requirements of the actors are checked
   by APM GUIs for consistency using the ontology descriptions. 
   internal business level policy descriptions are generated.
   For the automated provisioning, business level policies are 
   translated (refined) into intermediate (unified) QoS policy abstractions
   stored in the repository.
   The access to the policy repository is performed by the POLD component. 
   POLD functions translate and store the business policies of the actors
   as intermediate (unified) QoS policies in the repository. 
   When the policy enforcement is required (by launching of the actor's 
   policy controlled application), the APA (Automated Policy Adaptor)
   component obtains the intermediate policies dealing with the application
   from the repository using POLD and transforms them into operational
   policies (represented as XACML messages). 
  
   The operational policies are defined for managed entities and allow 
   the mapping of the unified policy requirements to the specific QoS
   mechanisms of the managed heterogeneous entities (routers, services
   protocols). 
   The Transport and Network Agents, which are invoked by APA, 
   receive the operational policies and enforcement instructions for 
   automated configuration considering the specific capabilities of the 
   transport and network entities. 
   
   When the operational policy is enforced, the MoMe component for 
   evaluation of policy performance and detection of policy degradation is
   automatically triggered.   
   MoMe can detect specific events related to the policy (i.e. congestion, 
   overloaded connection, etc.), and send signalling message to the APA
   components for adaptation of operational QoS policy mechanisms.

4.4. Experiments

   Using the NETQOS system prototype, following scenarios are 
   studied in trial experiments [17]:
   
   1. User-centric and dynamic Business QoS policy specification. 

     The focus here was to demonstrate dynamic specification and 
     translation of user's  preferences for QoS of streaming video
     application considering different networks, as well as consistency
     check of business level policies considering SLAs and  policies
     of other actors. 
     The scenario has shown the benefits of the ontology-oriented policy 
     specification using the actor and scenario oriented GUI, as well 
     as efficient methods for translation of the user's business QoS
     policies to the intermediate unified policy presentations in the
     common policy repository.


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008



   2.Policy provisioning driven by an application launch.

     This scenario was aimed to show the automated policy provisioning actions, 
     which are required in order to configure automatically an intermediate
     policy, stored already in the repository, when the user's application,
     controlled by the policy is launched. 

     The provisioning actions, which was demonstrated, are:
     - Translation of intermediate policy into operational policy 
       considering DiffServ QoS mechanisms [15], 
     - Policy enforcement and triggering of the corresponding network and
       transport configuration Agents;
     - Automated policy configuration by mapping of operational policies 
       to concrete configuration policies dependent on capabilities of the 
       routers; 
     - Activation of policy monitoring and measurement functions.

   3. Automated policy adaptation triggered by policy monitoring actions

     In this scenario, the policy monitoring and measurement (MoMe) component
     was used to detect degradation of the policy performance considering the 
     intermediate level policy specification. 
     Based on MoMe signalling about the performance problem of the streaming
     video quality, the adaptation of the operational policy mechanisms for the
     corresponding intermediate policy was triggered by APA.
     As result, the network agent could configure new QoS policy at the 
     routers using the DSCP-field for the user application traffic. 
   
5. Conclusions and Further Work
   
   QoS policy framework for dynamic and user-centric QoS management in 
   heterogeneous network environment derived from the NETQOS actor-based 
   QoS management architecture [1], [2], [3], [4] was presented.   
   
   The main focus was the hierarchical QoS policy abstraction considering 
   mapping of business to intermediate (unified), operational and 
   configuration policies for specification and configuration of QoS 
   mechanisms.    
   Unified common policy repository for dynamic QoS policy specification
   and automated QoS policy provisioning dependent on SLAs was discussed. 
   Components and interactions for flexible QoS policy specification 
   and automated provisioning including policy adaptation, configuration 
   and monitoring for optimised QoS guarantees were identified. 
   Currently, there is a need for more experience with the developed 
   NETQOS prototype and prototype enhancement for further policy 
   scenarios in heterogeneous Internet[17]. 

   Further work is aimed to study QoS policy management scenarios for 
   applications considering user location. 
 

Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008


   The specified framework will be extended to define interoperation 
   of QoS policy and identity management facilities for heterogeneous 
   Internet with special focus of relationships of different kind of actors.

6. References 


   [1]     EU IST project, Policy Based Management of Heterogeneous 
           Networks for Guaranteed QoS (NETQOS), www.ist-netqos.org.

   [2]     P.A.Aranda Gutierrez, I. Miloucheva,Ch. Chassot, K. Drira, 
           A. Flitzikowski, Ch. Brandauer, S. Romano, S. Rao, 
           QoS policies for heterogeneous access network environment, 
           draft-paag-qos-policy-00.txt, Internet Draft, Work in Progress, 
           February 2007		

   [3]     I. Miloucheva, D. Wagner, Ch. Niephaus, ?User centric QoS 
           policy management for heterogeneous Internet environment?, 
           ICT-Mobile Summit, Stockholm, Sweden, June, 2008.

   [4]     I.Miloucheva,  D.Wagner, P.A.A.Gutierrez, ?Architecture for 
           dynamic management of QoS policies for heterogeneous Internet 
           environments?, Next Generation Mobile Applications, Services 
           and Technologies (NGMAST), Cardiff, Wales, UK, September, 2007.

   [5]     D. Hetzer, I. Miloucheva, K.l Jonas, ?Policy based resource 
           management for QoS aware applications in heterogeneous network
           environments?, International Conference on Communications and 
           Networking (CHINACOM), Shanghai , China , August 22-24, 2007.

   [6]     Y. Snir, Y. Ramberg, J. Strassner, R. Cohen, B. Moore, ?Policy
           Quality of Service Information Model?, RFC 3644, Nov. 2003.

   [7]     B. Moore, D. Durham, J. Strassner, A. Westerinen, W. Weiss,  
           ?Information Model for Describing Network Device QoS Datapath
           Mechanisms?, RFC 3670, January 2004.

   [8]     B. Moore, E. Elleson, J. Strassner, A. Westerinen, ?Policy Core 
           Information Model-Version 1 Specification?, RFC 3060, Febr.2001.

   [9]     B. Moore, Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) Extensions, 
           RFC 3460, January 2003.

   [10]    A. Westerinen, J. Schnizlein, J. Strassner, M. Scherling, 
           R. Quinn, S. Herzog, A. Huynh, M. Carlson, J. Perry, J. and M.
           Waldbusser, ?Terminology for Policy-based  Management?, IETF 
           RFC 3198, November 2001.

   [11]    OWL Web Ontology Language Semantics and Abstract Syntax, 
           http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ . 


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008
 

   [12]    SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining OWL and RuleML, 
           W3C, http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/.

   [13]    ITU-T Recommendation X.641, Series X: Data Networks and Open
           System Communication, OSI networking and system aspects ? 
           Quality of Service: Framework, 12, 1997.

   [14]    S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
           Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [15]    K. Nichols, S. Blake, F. Baker, D. Black, Definition of the 
           Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and 
           IPv6 Headers, RFC 2474, December 1998.

   [16]    OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) TC, 
           XACML 2.0 Specification Set, XACML 3.0 Work in Progress.

   [17]    EU IST NETQOS project, Deliverable 3.3, Trials execution, 
           www.ist-netqos.org

7. Author's Addresses 

   Ilka Miloucheva                         
   Fraunhofer Institute, SATCOM FOKUS,Schloss Birlinghoven	
   53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
   Phone: +49-2241-14-3471
   Email: ilka.miloucheva@fokus.fraunhofer.de

   Irit Sterdiner Mayer 
   Netvision, Herzeliya, Israel
   Phone: 09-9551207
   Email: ibuma@netvision.net.il

   P.A Aranda Gutierrez     
   Telefonica, Investigacion y Desarrollo, S.A.U.
   C/Emilio Vargas,6, ES-28034 Madrid, Spain
   Phone: +34-91-337-4702
   Email: paag@tid.es	
   
   Adam Flizikowski 
   Adam Mickiewicz University (UAM), Department of Applied Informatics
   ul.Umultowska 85, 61-614 Poznan, Poland
   Phone: +48-505-086-892
   Email: adamf@amu.edu.pl
  
   Christophe CHASSOT          
   INSA/DGEI - LAAS/OLC, LAAS/CNRS 
   7 Avenue du Colonel Roche, 31077 Toulouse cedex 04
   Phone: 05 61 33 78 16 
   Email: chassot@laas.fr - Bureau 41  Email : chassot@insa-toulouse.fr


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008


   Sathya Rao
   TELSCOM Company, Bern, Switzerland
   Phone: 0041 31 3762033
   Email: rao@telscom.ch

   Simon P. Romano
   Universita' di Napoli Federico II
   Computer Science Department, Napoli, Italy 
   Phone: +39 081 7683823
   e-mail: spromano@unina.it
     
Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Miloucheva                Expires December 2008                 [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT       User-centric QoS policy management     July 19, 2008
