INTERNET DRAFT                                            Thierry Moreau
Document: draft-moreau-srvloc-dnssec-priming-00.txt            CONNOTECH
Category: Experimental                                    April 20, 2007
Expires: October 20, 2007


               DNSSEC Validation Root Priming Through SLP
                             (DNSSEC-ROOTP)

                  draft-moreau-srvloc-dnssec-priming-00


Status of this Memo

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts. 

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress." 

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

IPR Disclosure Acknowledgment

     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
     have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
     aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.
Abstract

     By assigning the SLP (Service Location Protocol, [RFC2608]) UA
     (User Agent) role to a DNS resolver, the present document opens the
     door to selective deployment of DNS root nameservice substitution
     within an administrative domain. This SLP scheme directly addresses
     the DNS resolver configuration scaling issue. It is envisioned that
     various DNS root nameservice substitution undertakings target their
     respective user base, and no single one will be exposed alone to
     the global scaling problem. Usage is limited to DNSSEC-enabled root
     nameservice. Moreover, from the SLP security features, the proposed
     scheme expands the set of DNS root trust anchor key rollover
     options.


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 1]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007



Table of Contents

1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

2. Overview and Rationales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1 DNS Root Nameservice Substitution and Motivations  . . . . .  3
     2.2 Rationale for Departure from the Single DNS Root Dogma . . .  4
     2.3 Rationale for SLP Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.4 Non-Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

3. Use of Service Location Protocol for DNSSEC Priming  . . . . . . .  6
     3.1 SLP Service Announcement with Attributes . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2 SLP Usage Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

4. DNSSEC Priming Operation vs Trust Anchor Key Management  . . . . .  7
     4.1 Un-authenticated Priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2 Priming with SLP Digital Signature Validation  . . . . . . .  8
     4.3 Priming with Implied TAKREM Trust Anchor Management  . . . .  8
     4.4 Priming and Rollover with SLP Digital Signature Validation .  8

5. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

6. Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

7. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

Appendix A - A Primer on DNSSEC Root Priming  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

IPR Notices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Intellectual Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Copyright Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Disclaimer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12















Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 2]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

1. Introduction

     The present document addresses well-known DNSSEC deployment and
     scaling issues. DNSSEC is the DNS security protocol ([RFC4033],
     [RFC4034], and [RFC4035]). The Service Location Protocol version 2,
     or SLP ([RFC2608]), is applied to tame some of the issues.

     For the purpose of the present document, and at the time of
     writing, the DNSSEC still lacks an accepted standards-based
     rollover procedure for the DNS root trust anchor key. The timers-
     based rollover ([TIMERS-ROLL]) is submitted to the IESG wisdom for
     adoption, and the present author's TAKREM proposal ([SDDA-RR],
     [TAKREM-DNSSEC]) remains available, at least as a proprietary
     rollover scheme.

     The present document then makes contributions in a number of ways:

       .  it discusses the opportunity to operate limited-scope DNS root
          authoritative nameservers for DNSSEC purposes;

       .  it details the use of SLP to facilitate the deployment of such
          undertakings;

       .  it investigates the interaction between the SLP security
          features and DNSSEC root trust anchor initial distribution;

       .  in doing this investigation, it revisits the root trust anchor
          rollover issue, and while doing so it brings a new solution;
          and

       .  it provides, in appendix A, a draft formalism for DNNSEC root
          priming, and while doing so it comes up with a root
          operational recommendation and a special validating resolver
          logic for root priming.

2. Overview and Rationales

2.1 DNS Root Nameservice Substitution and Motivations

     Recently, a model was revisited for DNSSEC deployment near the top
     of the DNS hierarchy. It relies on the observation that the
     operation of a small-scale DNSSEC-aware root nameserver is
     relatively easy. It can be described as DNS root nameservice
     substitution for DNSSEC support purposes.

     The technical requirements for a small scale DNS root nameservice
     are easily met. It is the global reachability objective that is
     difficult to meet. In summary, an authoritative nameserver operator
     1) retrieves the root zone file contents from the Internic ftp
     site, 2) edits or replaces a few resource records, i.e. SOA record,
     authoritative NS records, and authoritative A records, and 3)
     serves the edited root zone contents from the nameserver(s)
     indicated in the edited A records. A DNS resolver may use this


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 3]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     substitute nameservice if it is properly configured.

     If DNSSEC enters in the picture, the editing step 2) above is
     augmented with the addition of DNSKEY records for the digital
     signature keys, and DS resource records for secure delegations to
     TLDs that support DNSSEC. Furthermore, a step 2.1) is added for the
     root zone file signature operation. These DNSSEC-specific actions
     are required when managing any DNS zone contents. A DNS resolver
     using this substitute DNSSEC-aware nameservice must further be
     configured with the appropriate trust anchor data.

     The substitute DNS root nameservice may be recursively extended to
     lower zones when this make up for missing links in the chains of
     DNSSEC signatures, e.g. in the case of infrastructure zones .arpa,
     and in-addr.arpa. The same idea applies to the .int zone as soon as
     a first international organization launches DNSSEC support. These
     three sample zones are currently managed by IANA, and are available
     from the Internic ftp site.

     The above is a duplication of DNS zone management efforts that were
     anticipated from IANA. If there is added value in this duplication,
     it lies in early adoption of DNSSEC and in the opportunity for
     oversight by some decentralized management. The latter is a
     substitution for the global oversight management expected from
     IANA. Maybe the global expectations are so extensive and
     diversified that DNSSEC support at the root by IANA is not
     foreseeable.

2.2 Rationale for Departure from the Single DNS Root Dogma

     An explanation of arguments for a single DNS root is found in
     informative reference [RFC2826].

     An argument is the desirability of coordinated DNS root zone
     updates. The present proposal for DNS root nameservice substitution
     is limited to DNSSEC support purposes, and aims to remain fully
     compliant with IANA coordinated updates of the root zone contents.

     The last argument for a single DNS root is the practical difficulty
     of relocating the root nameservers in the IP address space. This is
     addressed in the present proposal with the recourse to the SLP
     (Service Location Protocol) as explained below.

2.3 Rationale for SLP Usage

     The present document applies SLP to the task of priming the DNSSEC
     configuration in resolver systems, in the scope of an
     administrative domain, e.g. a medium or large organization, a
     government, a consortium of ISPs. See appendix A for a
     formalization of DNSSEC root priming prior to the introduction of
     SLP in the picture.

     It should be noted that the term "domain" in the SLP applicability


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 4]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     statement refers to an administrative domain, and is encoded in the
     "scope" field of the SLP frame format. In the present document, we
     disambiguate the SLP domains from DNS domains by using the phrases
     "administrative domain" and "DNS domain" respectively.

     The SLP functionality is sometimes compared to DHCP, DNS SRV
     records, and out-of-band configuration, for instance see
     informative reference [RFC3105]. For our purpose, there are,
     broadly speaking, two attractive aspects of SLP:
       .  a good fit between the SLP administrative domains, and the
          task of DNSSEC priming for DNS root nameservice substitution,
          and
       .  the SLP security features.

     With the use of SLP, the control of DNSSEC priming within an
     administrative domain, both for caching resolvers and DNSSEC-
     validating resolver functionality that may appear in end-user
     applications in the future, potentially remains in the hands of
     administrative domain management. This may facilitate the phasing
     out of DNS root nameservice substitution once DNSSEC support is
     offered by the IANA root.

     In essence, the SLP security is an optional digital signature
     affixed by an SLP SA (Service Agent) on its announcement of URLs
     for a given service, and on service attributes associated with a
     given service URL. This simple SLP security scheme does not provide
     any public signature distribution mechanism, but it may accommodate
     X.509 security certificates affixed to the digital signature value.

     The security of SLP is considered inadequate when SLP is applied to
     the priming of connections for block storage protocol, see
     informative reference [RFC3723] where IPsec is recommended as a
     security scheme underlying SLP. For DNSSEC priming, somehow
     surprisingly, we make good use of the minimalist and optional SLP
     security feature, i.e. a digital signature affixed to a service
     announcement. Actually, the surprise would not resist a deeper
     analysis with the realization that DNSSEC priming is a security
     scheme priming, and the further recourse to any full-blown security
     mechanism would merely push back the perils of security bootstrap.
     A later section of the present document explains four security
     models that are not strictly mutually exclusive. It is expected
     that an administrative domain selects a security model and then
     adheres to it for a 1) initial DNSSEC priming, and 2) in the case
     of subsection 4.4, DNSSEC root key rollover operation.

     The DNS resolver operators within an administrative domain refer to
     it with an SLP scope identifier. The SLP scope identifier thus
     selects a DNSSEC-enabled root nameservice. It is strongly
     recommended that a DNS resolver operator be offered a very small
     selection of scope identifiers. E.g. only "IANA", for the ICANN
     accredited root nameservers, and "INTERNAL", for whatever the
     corporate IT department selects as a DNS root nameservice


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 5]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     substitution. In the case of the rollover scheme introduced in
     subsection 4.4, the security foundation for trust anchor key
     management can be common to more than one scope identifier. But
     this is an exception, and furthermore it is difficult to counter
     the operational threat of maliciously inducing a DNS resolver
     operator to select a rogue SLP scope identifier.

2.4 Non-Goals

     The present proposal attempts to be focused on a single goal, i.e.
     providing end-to-end DNSSEC deployment in a context where DNSSEC
     support at the root is not foreseeable. Accordingly, non-goals are
     readily identified.

       .  The present proposal is not intended to support alternate DNS
          roots nameservice where DNSSEC support is not provided. The
          assumed value added in the case of DNSSEC deployment support
          (section 2.1) is absent for insecure alternate DNS
          nameservice.

       .  The present proposal is not intended to assist configuration
          of DNSSEC trust anchors other than for the DNS root domain.
          Other solutions are provided in this area. Moreover, support
          for DNSSEC island of trust other than the root would be hard-
          to-justify duplication of DNS zone management effort.

3. Use of Service Location Protocol for DNSSEC Priming

     Document editing note: This section is in draft form. The review of
     the technical details for validating the concept is nearing
     completion to the point where the adage "the evil is in the
     details" has been addressed. Part of the specification refinement
     exercise is a template per [RFC2609] to be submitted for IANA
     registration.

     A SLP UA (User Agent) entity is co-located with the DNSSEC-aware
     resolver. It is expected that existing SLP SA and DA software and
     systems can be readily applied to the proposed use, except when the
     use is made of the recommended addition of algorithm RSA with
     SHA-1.

3.1 SLP Service Announcement with Attributes

     Each IPv4 or IPv6 addresses of authoritative root nameservers
     should be encoded in a URL, with the respective nameserver DNS
     domain names encoded as the later part of the url, e.g.
     "service:dnssec://193.0.14.129/k.root-servers.net." (the reader
     should not yet take this example for granted). The set of DNSSEC
     trust anchors for the DNSSEC root nameservice at this URL is an SLP
     attribute by the name "TA" containing an opaque value for SLP
     service selection or filtering purposes.

     Three SLP attributes are used to convey the type of trust anchor


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 6]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     rollover support:
       .  a presence-only attribute by the name "TIMERS" for a DNS root
          nameservice compliant to [TIMERS-ROLL],
       .  a presence-only attribute by the name "TAKREM" for a DNS root
          nameservice compliant to [SDDA-RR] and [TAKREM-DNSSEC], and
       .  a string attribute by the name "SLP-ROLL" for a DNS root
          nameservice announced an SLP SA compliant with the rollover
          scheme in subsection 4.4, where the attribute value is the SLP
          SPI (Security Parameter Index).
     These are not mutually exclusive.

     The present document specifies the addition of the algorithm
     selection RSA plus SHA-1 in the protocol option set in the SLP
     deployment, for sake of consistency with the mandatory algorithm in
     DNSSEC. This is reflected in the IANA considerations section.

3.2 SLP Usage Rules

     The SLP attribute request protocol feature is used only in its
     variant where an explicit service URL is provided by the SLP UA
     (this is required whenever an attribute signature is to be
     validated, so we make it a general rule).

     A simple SLP UA (User Agent) implementation is required.

     The basic DNSSEC priming service discovery uses the SLP request
     messages "Multicast SrvRqst" and "Unicast SrvRqst". The latter is
     available if the SLP DA (Directory Agent) address is known, which
     can be obtained via DHCP ([RFC2610]), or through the SLP service
     discovery itself as indicated in the SLP specification. The
     expected answer is a SLP response message "Unicast SrvRply"
     containing the service URL(s) indicated above.

4. DNSSEC Priming Operation vs Trust Anchor Key Management

     Unless otherwise specified herein, the DNSSEC root nameservice
     service discovery operation should not be triggered without
     operator intervention by a DNSSEC-aware resolver system. In
     addition, the operator should be fully aware of the SLP scope used
     by the SLP UA for priming the DNSSEC-aware resolver. This is
     recommended so that a DNSSEC root nameservice substitution has a
     well-known name.

4.1 Un-authenticated Priming

     The unauthenticated SLP service discovery may be an option for an
     administrative domain management, or it may be the only option
     available because the DNS resolver system that needs DNSSEC priming
     lacks the appropriate SLP SPI public key or the functionally
     analogue TAKREM TAK-i configuration data. In either case the
     security implications of un-authenticated priming should be
     weighted against the alternatives.



Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 7]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

4.2 Priming with SLP Digital Signature Validation

     This is a straightforward application of SLP security features. The
     public signature key to be used for signature must be configured in
     the DNS resolver prior to the priming operation. The public
     signature key is identified by the SLP SPI protocol field. If SLP
     is already deployed in the system hosting the DNS resolver, an SPI
     value and the corresponding public key may already be available for
     authenticating the DNSSEC priming.

4.3 Priming with Implied TAKREM Trust Anchor Management

     No SLP attribute is defined for distributing the TAKREM TAK-i
     configuration data to DNSSEC-aware resolver.

     However, if TAKREM TAK-i configuration data pre-exists in a DNSSEC-
     aware resolver, priming with SLP need not use the SLP security
     option.

4.4 Priming and Rollover with SLP Digital Signature Validation

     If DNSSEC priming becomes "easy" and adequately secured with the
     SLP security option, a spontaneous trust anchor key rollover scheme
     emerges: repeat the DNSSEC priming operation whenever a trust
     anchor key rollover is deemed required.

     Indeed, this is an instance of this classical security scheme: the
     long-term signature key periodically endorses a fresh operational
     key. In this instance, the rollover scheme catastrophic failure
     mode is a compromise of the SLP signature verification key. The
     rollover scheme implementation guidelines are obvious to deduce:
     use a larger key size for SLP than for DNSSEC, and restrict the key
     usage as much as possible.

     Inherited from the notion of SLP administrative domain, this
     rollover scheme is born with a flexible security authority
     management capability: the administrative domain that "controls"
     rollover may be separate from the DNS root zone operator. The SLP
     administrative domain may indeed migrate the DNSSEC service from a
     root operator to another one without DNS resolver operator
     involvement, e.g. upon a scheduled trust anchor rollover operation.

5. Security Considerations

     The DNSSEC priming operation is a security critical operation
     subject to "social engineering" attacks (e.g. induce the DNS
     resolver operator to perform priming using a bogus procedure). This
     is especially true when the operator is expected to select an SLP
     SPI identifier.

     In deploying the scenario of section 4.4, confidence in the overall
     security would be increased with no operator selection of SLP SPI
     identifier, i.e. if there is a single one.


Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 8]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

6. Internationalization Considerations

     No internationalization consideration has been identified at the
     time of writing the initial revision of the present document. It is
     expected that the final version will restrict the SLP usage to the
     English language.

7. IANA Considerations

     No IANA consideration arises from the SLP notion of an
     administrative domain, including the namespaces for SLP scope field
     values and SLP SPI (Security Parameter Index).

     In a later revision, the present document would require an
     allocation for a service scheme registration per [RFC2609], for
     reference to the DNSSEC root nameservice. Then a template per
     [RFC2609] would be filled.

     In a later revision, the present document would require a
     allocation for a Cryptographic BSD (Block Structure Descriptor)
     Codes per [RFC2608] for the digital signature specifications that
     is mandatory in DNSSEC, i.e. RSA with SHA-1. This is justified by
     the avoidance of implementation burden of the DSA digital signature
     scheme in the SLP UA software that would typically be embedded in
     DNSSEC resolver software. The whole DNSSEC deployment effort is
     based on RSA with SHA-1. In the DNSSEC specification, the RSA
     signature with MD5 is not allowed for DNS zone signing.

     No IANA consideration arises in relation with DNS or DNSSEC
     specifications.

Appendix A - A Primer on DNSSEC Root Priming

     The present appendix contains a preliminary specification for
     DNSSEC root priming. Such a specification seems to lack from the
     DNSSEC document set.

     If the initial configuration of a DNS resolver can be seen as a
     local matter with respect to protocol standardization, it is
     nonetheless a significant impediment to DNSSEC deployment. Indeed,
     in bringing up the following specification, an operational issue
     came up, with a related recommendation, about DNS root zone
     management in the context of DNSSEC deployment.

     The specifications language used in the present appendix is both
     technical and high-level. In a later document revision, it should
     be complemented with more specific references to the DNSSEC
     protocol features.

     DNSSEC is about validating digital signatures for data retrieved
     from the DNS, e.g. authoritative A RRsets for a domain name, so
     that name-to-address translation is trustworthy.



Moreau                        Experimental                      [page 9]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     Let's refine by adaptation to the authoritative nameservers for a
     DNS domain name that is a DNS zone apex: DNSSEC is sometimes
     applied to validate the digital signatures for A and AAAA RRsets
     from DNS domain names that are listed in the NS RRset in the zone
     apex, the latter RRset deserving signature validation as well.

     Let's further refine to DNSSEC priming for an island of trust: when
     the above process for validation of authoritative nameservers is
     applied to an island of trust, validation of signatures stops at
     the KSK(s) found and self-validated in the DNSKEY RRset in the zone
     apex. Some or all of these KSK(s) may need to be backed by an
     authentication procedure outside of DNSSEC, either a priori or a
     posteriori.

     Oops, this introduces a potential corner case: the DNSSEC priming
     process for an island of trust may encounter a different island of
     trust for the authoritative nameserver addresses than for the zone
     apex.

     This suggests an original DNSSEC operational recommendation for an
     island of trust: if the DNS domain name of an authoritative
     nameserver is neither within the zone itself nor within a
     descendant zone for which a chain of trust exists, the zone
     containing the authoritative nameserver should have the same public
     key value as the trust anchor in its DNSKEY RRset, and the DNSKEY
     RRset should be signed with it. It is the signature public keys
     that should match, not the DNSSEC RR itself.

     The following refinement it then made: in the DNSSEC priming
     process for an island of trust, when the DNS domain name of an
     authoritative nameserver is within neither the zone itself nor a
     descendant zone for which a chain of trust exists, the DNSKEY RRset
     at this other zone apex deserves special validation with the same
     signature public key as found in at least one of the KSK(s) for the
     original zone.

     Now, we can formulate the two requirements for DNSSEC root priming:
       .  The DNS root zone management should follow the above
          recommendation about signature public key. In practice for the
          IANA root nameservice, this would be done by adding an
          appropriate DNSKEY RR in the DNSKEY RRset of the DNS zone
          "root-servers.net.", signing the resulting RRset with the
          private key counterpart, and serving the DNS zone "root-
          servers.net." with the RRSIG RR included.
       .  For a resolver, the DNSSEC root zone priming is the above
          process applied to the root zone.

     In summary, DNSSEC root priming starts with an IP address for a
     root nameserver; the end-result of DNSSEC root priming is the
     validated list of DNS domain names and addresses for root
     nameservers; this validation is trustworthy to the extent that the
     KSK(s) on which it relies are backed by an authentication procedure
     outside of DNSSEC.


Moreau                        Experimental                     [page 10]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

     The DNSSEC root priming process should occur in the following
     cases:
       .  upon installation of a DNSSEC-aware resolver entity,
       .  on a timer expiry basis, as implied by the smallest TTL value
          observed in DNS RRsets relied upon in the previous instance of
          root priming, and
       .  in relation with root trust anchor key rollover, whenever a
          change occurs in the set of trusted KSK root keys.

Normative References

[RFC2608] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day, "Service Location
          Protocol, Version 2", RFC2608, June 1999

[RFC4033] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, "DNS
          Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC 4033, March 2005

[RFC4034] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose,
          "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4034,
          March 2005

[RFC4035] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose,
          "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions",
          RFC 4035, March 2005

[TIMERS-ROLL]  M. StJohns, "Automated Updates of DNSSEC Trust Anchors",
               internet draft
               draft-ietf-dnsext-trustupdate-timers-05.txt, November 29,
               2006

[SDDA-RR] T. Moreau, "The SEP DNSKEY Direct Authenticator DNS Resource
          Record (SDDA-RR)", work-in-progress, Internet Draft
          draft-moreau-dnsext-sdda-rr-02.txt, April 2006

[TAKREM-DNSSEC]     T. Moreau, "The Trust Anchor Key Renewal Method
                    Applied to DNS Security (TAKREM-DNSSEC)", work-in-
                    progress, Internet Draft
                    draft-moreau-dnsext-takrem-dns-02.txt, April 2006

[RFC2609] Guttman, E., Perkins, C. and J. Kempf, "Service Templates and
          service: Schemes", RFC 2609, June 1999

Informative References

[RFC2826] Internet Architecture Board, "IAB Technical Comment on the
          Unique DNS Root", May 2000

[RFC3105] J. Kempf, G. Montenegro, "Finding an RSIP Server with SLP",
          RFC3105, October 2001

[RFC3723] B. Aboba, J. Tseng, J. Walker, V. Rangan, F. Travostino,
          "Securing Block Storage Protocols over IP", RFC3723, April
          2004


Moreau                        Experimental                     [page 11]
Internet-Draft                DNSSEC-ROOTP                   April, 2007

Author's Address

     Thierry Moreau
     CONNOTECH Experts-conseils inc.
     9130 Place de Montgolfier
     Montreal, Qc, Canada
     Tel.: +1-514-385-5691
     e-mail: thierry.moreau@connotech.com

IPR Notices

Intellectual Property

     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
     Information on the ISOC's procedures with respect to rights in ISOC
     Documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
     this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
     ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

     This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
     contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
     retain all their rights.

Disclaimer

     This document and the information contained herein are provided on
     an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
     IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
     WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
     WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
     ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
     FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Moreau                        Experimental                     [page 12]
