


Network Working Group                                     S. Chakrabarti
Internet-Draft                                    Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Expires: January 7, 2006                                    July 6, 2005


                 LowPan Mobility Requirements and Goals
                draft-chakrabarti-mobopts-lowpan-req-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   IETF LowPan working group defines IPv6 over low-power personal area
   network (IEEE 802.15.4).  Lowpan architecture allows routing to take
   place at the link layer in order to save payload overhead over the
   IEEE 802.15.4 link and thus more efficient routing for low power, low
   data-rate networks such as sensor networks.  This document discusses
   a few scenarios of mobility in LowPan network and states mobility
   requirements and goals for LowPan networks.





Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Goals of mobility in LowPan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Requirements of mobility in LowPan . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Possible Scenarios of Mobility in LowPan . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 12





































Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


1.  Introduction

   The IPv6-over-IEEE 802.15.4 [1] document has specified IPv6 headers
   carrying  over IEEE 802.15.4 network with the help of a adaptation
   layer which sits between the MAC layer and the network layer.  The
   LowPan network is characterized by low-powered, low bit-rate, short
   ranged, low cost network.  The LowPan payload capability is between
   102 bytes to 81 bytes depending on usage of link-layer security.
   Hence usage of 128bit uncompressed IPv6 address in undesirable in the
   network.  LowPan networks are typically ad-hoc in nature and several
   multihop routing algorithms such as RFC3561, RFC3626, RFC3684 may be
   partially applied to LowPan network.  However, the above mentioned
   mobile ad-hoc network protocols are designed for IP network which is
   different from the nature of LowPan network including data-rate,
   power efficiency, payload capability and routing layers.  The LowPan
   goals and requirements [2] also state that the routing packets should
   fit within a single IEEE 802.15.4 frame.

   The IPv6-over-IEEE 802.15.4 [1] document provides mesh routing
   capability at the link layer.  Yet each node is configured with IPv6
   addresses.  Thus a IEEE 802.15.4 may look like one single IPv6 subnet
   to the IP layer.  It may be an auto-configuration issue how IPv6
   addresses are configured, the mobility cases still need to consider
   IPv6 addresses and IEEE 802.15.4 MAC addresses for routing.

   In this document, we are considering mobility within a isolated
   network across different IEEE 802.15.4 Personal area networks and
   movement across different IPv6-over-IEEE 802.15.4 networks.























Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


2.  Goals of mobility in LowPan

   o  A lowpan node which participates in forwarding packet from its
      neighbor, may no longer be available to forward packet if it moves
      away from its neighbor's range of wireless transmission.  Thus the
      sender of the packet needs to find an alternate route if the
      forwarder node becomes unreachable.

   o  A lowpan node should be reachable by another lowpan node or a
      global network node even if it moves from one personal area
      network to another.

   o  A lowpan node or a group of lowpan nodes comprising a IEEE
      802.15.4 network may be able to keep continuous connectivity while
      moving across different personal area networks depending on the
      application requirements.

   o  Due to the nature of instability in the LowPan or sensor networks,
      the protocol design must take consideration in distributed storage
      of inforamtion rather than conventional central repository or
      server style architecture.

   o  In order to protect the resources in the low-power networks, node
      authentication and authorization may be necessary for joining the
      network.  An efficient protocol design should consider security as
      part of the features.

























Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


3.  Requirements of mobility in LowPan

   o  A lowpan node has a IPv6 address (global or link-local) as well as
      IEEE 802.15.4 MAC address.

   o  A lowpan node in a isolated IEEE802.15.4 network that has no
      connectivity outside itself, does not require to have global IPv6
      address configuration.If the routing of packets are performed at
      the lowpan layer using M bit, then only link-local address
      configuration is sufficient.

   o  When a lowpan node moves from one personal area network to
      another, it should immediately inform the new PAN co-ordinator
      about its presence.  The mobile lowpan node should also let its
      original PAN co-ordinator know that it has moved to a new location
      under the new co-ordinator.

   o  The original co-ordinator is responsible for buffering and
      forwarding packets directly destined to the moved lowpan node.  If
      a pakcet uses the moved lowpan node as a forwarder at the previous
      location then, the orginal co-ordinator does not forward packet to
      the new location of the lowpan node except when the lowpan node
      moves but stays within the same PAN and its reachability
      characterstics from the original co-rdinator has improved or
      remained unchanged;instead the original co-ordinator is
      responsible for finding an alternative next hop for forwarding.

   o  For global connectivity with the Internet, a lowpan node or a
      group of lowpan node may be addressed by a global IPv6 address.  A
      group of lowpan node may be identified by the IPv6 address of
      their group-leader or co-ordinator's IPv6 address.  In this case,
      it's the group-leader's responsibility to pass the information to
      the group where each member of the group may or may not have
      individualIPv6 addresses due to their nature of low capability of
      resources.

   o  The movement of a lowpan node with an IPv6 address can be
      transparent to the correspondent IPv6 node outside the LowPan
      network, if the IPv6 address of the lowpan node is not dependent
      on LowPan link-layer network topology and the movement happens
      only within a realm of LowPan network.

   o  As with any network, the movement of a lowpan node may introduce
      security threats in the old and new LowPan Networks.  Thus,
      authentication of mobile lowpan node is required when it updates
      the movement information to the new and old co-ordinators or local
      routing group-leaders.




Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


   o  The lowpan nodes must be able to detect its movement from one
      wireless LowPan to another correctly.  This may require multiple
      hints from signal strength measurement to packet reception
      capacity and location or neighborhood assessment.















































Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


4.  Possible Scenarios of Mobility in LowPan

   Mobility within a LowPan - It is assumed that the LowPan network is
   comprised of many personal area networks.  However, the routing
   happens at the L2 layer using IEEE 802.15.4 addresses.  A node can
   move from one personal network to another.  One personal area network
   is identified by the IEEE 802.15.4 PAN id and co-ordinator or group-
   leader characteristics.  A LowPan network can be a isolated network
   or it may be connected to a global network with a network layer
   gateway.

   Mobility across two different LowPan networks- A lowpan node moves
   from IEEE802.15.4 star network to a mesh network.  Assume that these
   two LowPan networks are interconnected.  Routing function takes place
   at the link-layer.

   Mobility across LowPan and other wireless network - A multi-
   interfaced node may have IEEE802.15.4 radio for LowPan network and
   other wireless radio for communicating on the regular Internet or a
   different type of wireless network.  These devices often act as
   gateways.  A lowpan gateway can be mobile.

   Moving of a lowpan node from one lowpan network to another lowpan
   network across the Internet is another example of mobility across
   LowPan networks.


























Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


5.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations for the mobility in LowPan networks are
   discussed in the "Requirements" section above.















































Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


6.  IANA Considerations

   No actions are required by IANA for this document.
















































Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author likes to thank Rajeev Koodli for initial discussion about
   this document.















































Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


8.  References

8.1  Normative References

   [1]  Montenegro, G. and N. Kushalnagar, "Transmission of IPv6 Packets
        over IEEE 802.15.4 networks",
        draft-montenegro-lowpan-ipv6-over-802.15.4-02.txt (work in
        progress), February 2005.

   [2]  Kushalnagar, N. and G. Montenegro, "6LoWPAN: Overview,
        Assumptions, Problem Statement and Goals",
        draft-kushalnagar-lowpan-goals-assumptions-00.txt (work in
        progress), February 2005.

8.2  Informative References

   [3]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6),
        Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [4]  Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for Stateless
        Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 3041, January 2001.

   [5]  IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2003",  ,
        October 2003.


Author's Address

   Samita Chakrabarti
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   16 Network Circle
   Menlo Park, CA 95024
   USA

   Email: Samita.Chakrabarti@Sun.COM
















Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     LowPan Mobility Requirements-Goals          July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Chakrabarti              Expires January 7, 2006               [Page 12]

