



Network Working Group                      Hans Hannu, Ericsson (Editor)
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                    Sweden
Expires: January 2002                                      July 06, 2001








            Signaling Compression Requirements & Assumptions
             <draft-ietf-rohc-signaling-req-assump-01.txt>



Status of this memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This document is a submission of the IETF ROHC WG. Comments should be
   directed to its mailing list, rohc@cdt.luth.se.



Abstract

   The purpose of this document is to outline requirements on a
   signaling compression scheme to be made in the ROHC WG, and
   assumptions on the link it is used over. The scheme should be able to
   compress/decompress messages from signaling protocols, such as
   SIP/SDP.






Hannu                                                           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


0. Document History

   - June 7, 2001, version 00.
     First version

   - July 06, 2001, version 01.
     Updated with additional requirements


TABLE OF CONTENTS

   1.  Introduction..................................................2

   2.  Assumptions...................................................3

   3.  Requirements..................................................3

   3.1.  General requirements........................................4

   3.2.  Performance requirements....................................4

   4.  Security considerations.......................................6

   5.  IANA considerations...........................................6

   6.  Editor's address..............................................6

   7.  References....................................................6


1. Introduction

   The purpose of this document is to outline requirements on a
   signaling compression scheme to be made in the ROHC WG, and
   assumptions on the link it is used over. The scheme should be able to
   compress/decompress messages from signaling protocols, such as
   SIP/SDP [SIP], [SDP].

   In wireless environments and especially in cellular systems, such as
   GSM/GPRS, there is a need to maximize the transport efficiency of
   data over the radio interface. The radio spectrum is rather expensive
   [CELL] and must be used carefully. Therefore the cellular systems
   must support a sufficient number of users to make them economical
   feasible. Thus, there is a limitation in the per user bandwidth.

   Compressing the headers of the IP-protocols used for carrying user
   data is one way to make more efficient use of the scarce radio
   resources [ROHC]. However, compression of the messages from signaling
   protocols, such as SIP/SDP, should also be considered to increase the
   radio resource usage even further. Compression will also improve the
   service quality, by reducing the user idle time, at e.g. call setup.




Hannu                                                           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


   When IP will be used end-to-end, new applications, such as streaming,
   will be brought to the cellular devices. This will introduce
   additional traffic in cellular systems. Compression of signaling
   messages, such as RTSP [RTSP], should also be considered to improve
   both the service availability and quality.
   New services with their corresponding signaling protocols make it
   reasonable to consider a scheme that is generic. The scheme should be
   generic in the meaning that the scheme efficiently can be applied to
   arbitrary protocols with certain characteristics, such as the ASCII
   based protocols SIP and RTSP, [APP].


2. Assumptions

   SIP/SDP messages are some of the messages that could be compressed by
   a signaling compression scheme. The statement in [GUIDE]:
   "Compression of SIP messages SHOULD be handled at lower layers, for
   example, using IP payload compression [9] or link layer compression"
   implies that signaling compression should be placed below the
   application layer.

   The use of the signaling compression scheme should be negotiated. In
   [ROHC-PPP], an option to negotiate the use of robust header
   compression (ROHC) on IP datagrams transmitted over the Point-to-
   Point Protocol [RFC1661] is described.
   It is out of the scope of this document to specify options to
   negotiate the use of signaling compression.

   When using IP to traverse voice data (VoIP) over wireless links, such
   as cellular links, there will be comparisons between the VoIP service
   and the existing circuit-switched voice service. Most likely capacity
   (users/cell) will be used in the comparisons. Using near the same
   bandwidth per user as for the circuit-switched voice service will
   most likely be preferred also for the VoIP service due to scarce
   radio resources. Therefore it is assumed that the same bandwidth used
   for the actual speech data is also used for the signaling ,when one
   is to compare different signaling compression approaches.

   Processor load and memory requirements are two essential issues with
   mobile handheld terminals, such as cellular phones. However, it is
   hard to predict both how complex a signaling compression scheme will
   become and also what memory and processor capacity handheld terminals
   will have in the future. Thus, no assumption on the capabilities of
   future terminals are made.


3. Requirements

   The requirements are divided into two parts. Section 3.1 sets general
   requirements concerning the Internet infrastructure, while section
   3.2 sets requirements on the scheme itself.




Hannu                                                           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


3.1. General requirements

   1. The compression must be transparent: when a message is compressed
   and then decompressed the result must be bitwise identical to the
   original message. The transparency must be maintained independently
   of the payload.

   Justification: This is to ensure that the compression scheme will not
   cause problems for any current or future part of the Internet
   infrastructure.


   2. The compression scheme must be able to coexist with header
   compression, specially the ROHC protocol. Compression of IP/UDP and
   IP/TCP should be inherited from existing profiles, like the existing
   ROHC profile for IP/UDP compression.

   Justification: Signaling compression is used because there is a need
   to conserve bandwidth usage. In that case, header compression will
   likely be needed too.


   3. Modifications to the protocols, which generates the messages that
   are to be compressed, must not be required for the compression scheme
   to work.

   Justification: This will simplify deployment of the compression
   scheme.


   4. Compression of arbitrary message streams must be supported. The
   compression scheme must not be limited to certain protocols, traffic
   patterns or sessions.

   Justification: Needed for generality of the compression scheme.

   Note: This does not preclude optimization for certain streams.


   5. The compression scheme must be able to operate on unidirectional
   links, i.e. without explicit feedback messages from the decompressor.

   Note: Implementations on unidirectional links might possibly show a
   degraded performance compared to implementations on bi-directional
   links


3.2. Performance requirements

   6. The compression scheme must be able to operate under all expected
   link delay conditions.




Hannu                                                           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


   7. The compression scheme must be able to operate under all expected
   packet loss conditions, including loss events due to typical handover
   operations.


   8. The compression scheme must be able to operate under all expected
   residual bit error conditions.

   Note: See also requirement 11.


   9. The compression scheme should aim at minimizing transmission delay
   and maximizing the bitwise efficiency.

   Note: Since there are no previously defined solutions for compression
   of application signaling protocols it is difficult to find a suitable
   benchmark.


   10. The total delay, including processing time of the compression
   scheme, must decrease when compression is applied compared to sending
   the packets uncompressed on the same channel bandwidth.

   Justification: This is one of the primary goals for signaling
   compression.


   11. Error propagation must be minimized. Loss or damage to a single
   or several messages, on the link between compressor and decompressor
   should not prevent compression and decompression of later messages.

   Justification: Error propagation reduces resource utilization and
   quality.


   12. The compression scheme should be able to compress and decompress
   when there are reordered messages reaching the compressor.

   Justification: Reordering is frequent on the Internet, which implies
   that the compressor must be able to handle reordering.


   13. The scheme must be flexible to accommodate a range of
   compressor/decompressor with varying memory and processor
   capabilities.

   Justification: A primary target for the signaling compression scheme
   is cellular systems, where the mobile terminals have varying
   capabilities.






Hannu                                                           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


4. Security considerations

   A protocol specified to meet these requirements must be able to cope
   with packets that has undergone security measures, such as
   encryption, without adding any security risks. This document by
   itself, however, does not add any security risks.


5. IANA considerations

   A protocol which meets these requirements will require the IANA to
   assign various numbers. This document by itself, however, does not
   require any IANA involvement.


6. Editor's Address

     Hans Hannu                   Tel:    +46 920 20 21 84
     Ericsson Erisoft AB
     Lulea, Sweden                EMail:  Hans.Hannu@epl.ericsson.se


7. References

   [APP]       H. Hannu, J. Christoffersson and K. Svanbro, Application
               signaling over cellular links, Internet Draft (work in
              progress), March 2001.
              <draft-hannu-rohc-signaling-cellular-01.txt>

   [CELL]      L. Westberg and M. Lindqvist, Realtime traffic over
               cellular access networks, Internet Draft (work in
               progress), June 2001.
               <draft-westberg-realtime-cellular-04.txt>

   [GUIDE]    J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, Guidelines for Authors of
              SIP Extensions, Internet Draft (work in progress), March
              2001. <draft-ietf-sip-guidelines-02.txt>

   [RFC1661]   Simpson, W., Ed., "The Point-To-Point Protocol (PPP)",
               STD 51, RFC 1661, July 1994.

   [ROHC]     C. Bormann, Et. al., RObust Header Compression, Internet
              Draft (work in progress), February 2001.
              <draft-ietf-rohc-rtp-09.txt>

   [ROHC-PPP] C. Bormann, ROHC over PPP, Internet Draft (work in
              progress), March 2001.
               <draft-ietf-rohc-over-ppp-01.txt>

   [RTSP]      H. Schulzrinne, A. Rao and R. Lanphier, Real Time
               Streaming Protocol (RTSP), RFC 2326, April 1998.




Hannu                                                           [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT  Signaling Compression req. & assumptions   July 06, 2001


   [SDP]       M. Handley and V. Jacobson, SDP: Session Description
               Protocol, RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [SIP]       M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler and J. Rosenberg,
               SIP: Session Initiation Protocol, RFC 2543, August 2000.


This Internet-Draft expires in January 2002.















































Hannu                                                           [Page 7]
