
HIP Working Group                                         M. Stiemerling
Internet-Draft                                                J. Quittek
Expires: August 24, 2005                                       L. Eggert
                                                                     NEC
                                                       February 20, 2005


       Middlebox Traversal Issues of Host Identity Protocol (HIP)
                             Communication
                      draft-stiemerling-hip-nat-03

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.  This document may not be modified, and derivative works of
   it may not be created, except to publish it as an RFC and to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 24, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The Host Identity Protocol (HIP) fundamentally changes the way in
   which two Internet hosts communicate.  One key advantage over other



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   schemes is that HIP does not require modifications to the traditional
   network-layer functionality of the Internet, i.e., its routers.  In
   the current Internet, however, many devices other than routers modify
   the traditional network-layer behavior of the Internet.  These
   "middleboxes" are intermediary devices that perform functions other
   than the standard functions of an IP router on the datagram path
   between source and destination hosts.  Whereas some types of
   middleboxes may not interfere with HIP at all, others can affect some
   aspects of HIP communication and others can render HIP communication
   impossible.  This document discusses the problems associated with HIP
   communication across network paths that include middleboxes.  It
   pinpoints issues in the current HIP specifications that are the
   causes of problems for communicating across middleboxes.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  HIP Across Middleboxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   Phase 1: HIP Base Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.1.1   IPv6 Base Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.1.2   IPv4 Base Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2   Phase 2: IPsec Data Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3   HIP across Twice-NAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Extensions to HIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Extension to NATs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  HIP unaware NATs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Firewalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14

















Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


1.  Introduction

   The current specification of the Host Identity Protocol (HIP)
   [I-D.ietf-hip-arch] assumes simple Internet paths, where routers
   forward globally routable IP packets based on their destination
   address alone.  Over such paths, the HIP protocol performs well.

   In the current Internet, such pure paths are becoming increasingly
   rare.  For a number of reasons, several types of devices modify or
   extend the pure forwarding functionality the Internet's network layer
   used to deliver.  [RFC3234] coins the term middleboxes for such
   devices: "A middlebox is (...) any intermediary device performing
   functions other than the normal, standard functions of an IP router
   on the datagram path between a source host and destination host."

   Middleboxes affect communication in a number of ways.  For example,
   they may inspect the flows of some transport protocols, such as TCP,
   and selectively drop, insert or modify packets.  If such devices
   encounter a higher-layer protocol they do not support, or even a
   variant of a supported protocol that they do not know how to handle,
   communication across the middlebox may become impossible for these
   kinds of traffic.

   There are many different variants of middleboxes.  The most common
   ones may be network address translators and firewalls.  [RFC3234]
   identifies many other types of middleboxes.  One broad way of
   classifying them is by behavior.  The first group operates on
   packets, does not modify application-layer payloads and does not
   insert additional packets.  This group includes NAT, NAT-PT, SOCKS
   gateways, IP tunnel endpoints, packet classifiers, markers,
   schedulers, transport relays, IP firewalls, application firewalls,
   involuntary packet redirectors and anonymizers.  Other middleboxes
   exist, such as TCP performance-enhancing proxies, application-level
   gateways, gatekeepers and session control boxes, transcoders,
   proxies, caches, modified DNS servers, content and applications
   distribution boxes, load balancers that divert or modify URLs,
   application-level interceptors and application-level multicast
   systems.

   Middleboxes can cause two different kinds of communication problems
   for HIP.  They can interfere with the transmission of HIP control
   traffic or with the transmission of the IPsec'ed HIP data traffic.

   This document does not propose a specific solution to the identified
   issues.  It serves as a problem description that separate solution
   proposals can refer to.  It also does not promote the use of any of
   the discussed types of middleboxes.




Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


2.  HIP Across Middleboxes

   HIP operates in two phases.  It first performs a HIP "base exchange"
   handshake before starting to exchange application data in the second
   phase.  This section describes the problems that occur in each of the
   two phases when middleboxes are present along the path from the HIP
   initiator to the responder.

2.1  Phase 1: HIP Base Exchange

   The HIP base exchange uses different transport mechanisms for IPv6
   and IPv4.  With IPv6, a HIP-specific IPv6 extension header carries
   the base exchange information [I-D.ietf-hip-base].  With IPv4, HIP
   transmits base exchange packets as UDP payloads [I-D.ietf-hip-base].

2.1.1  IPv6 Base Exchange

   During a HIP base exchange over IPv6, current implementations use
   plain IPv6 packets without any payload other than the HIP extension
   header.  This approach can cause problems in combination with
   middleboxes that translate or multiplex IP addresses, such as NATs,
   and packet filtering firewalls.

   NATs typically operate on a combination of IP addresses and TCP or
   UDP port numbers.  They cannot translate packets that do not contain
   TCP or UDP transport headers - such as the IPv6 HIP base exchange
   packets.  Consequently, IPv6 HIP base exchanges through such NATs
   will fail and HIP communication cannot occur.  (This issue is
   currently of minor concern, because IPv6 NATs are rare.)

   IPv6 packet filtering firewalls are configured following the same
   filtering policies as IPv4 firewalls would do.  A typical
   configuration is blocking all traffic belonging neither to TCP nor
   UDP.  HIP base exchange packets will be blocked by such IPv6
   firewalls since network administrators usually block IPv6 extension
   headers.  In IPv4, network administrators configure firewalls to
   discard IP packets with IP options set (see [reference.fw_config].

2.1.2  IPv4 Base Exchange

   The HIP base specification suggests to encapsulate the HIP base
   exchange in IPv4 networks over UDP (see Appendix E in
   [I-D.ietf-hip-base]).  This theoretically allows the HIP base
   exchange to traverse middleboxes more easily.  However, UDP transport
   suffers from many well-known problems when traversing middleboxes,
   especially NATs, [RFC3715].  One general problem is that firewalls
   and NATs often block and discard UDP packets.




Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   Even if middleboxes do allow UDP packets to pass, they may change the
   UDP port number and/or IP addresses of these packets.  HIP over UDP
   currently mandates using a fixed port number (272) for both source
   and destination ports of HIP base exchange packets.  If middleboxes
   change these port numbers, the base exchange fails.

2.2  Phase 2: IPsec Data Exchange

   HIP uses IPsec to secure the data transmission between two HIP nodes
   after the base exchange is completed.  [RFC3715] discusses issues
   with IPsec traversal across middleboxes.  They fall into three
   distinct areas: NAT-intrinsic issues, NAT implementation issues and
   helper incompatibilities.  The NAT intrinsic issues related to IPsec
   (IKE issues are omitted) are discussed in this section.

   With ESP-encrypted data traffic, all upper-layer headers are
   invisible to a NAT.  Thus, changes of the IP header during NAT
   traversal can invalidate upper-layer checksums contained within the
   ESP-protected payload.  HIP hosts already avoid this problem by
   substituting HITs for IP addresses during checksum calculations
   [I-D.ietf-hip-base].

   Although it is possible to transmit ESP-encrypted packets through a
   NAT, [RFC3715] notes that the used SPI values have only one-way
   significance.  Thus, although SPIs could be used for demultiplexing
   different IPsec flows at the NAT, NATs can only observe the SPI
   values of outgoing ESP flows.  They cannot determine the SPI value of
   the corresponding response traffic.  Furthermore,  SPI values may
   collide at the NAT, meaning that several different peers behind the
   NAT are using the same SPI value at the same time.

   [I-D.ietf-ipsec-udp-encaps] describes a method for carrying IPsec
   traffic through NATs via UDP encapsulation.

2.3  HIP across Twice-NAT

   A type of Network Address Translation is not mentioned in previous
   sections , these so-called twice-NATs (see [RFC2663] ) are
   translating source and destination address at once while a datagram
   is translated from one address realm into another.  Typically,
   twice-NATs are used when two private address realms have address
   collisions, for example, if two enterprises merge their networks and
   both of them are using the same address realm.

   Twice-NATs are used in IPv4 networks and in some cases to translate
   from IPv6 to IPv4 and vice versa (NAT with protocol translation
   (NAT-PT, [RFC2766].)  This form of NAT is not considered within this
   memo,  since HIP facilitates its own IPv4 to IPv6 mechanism.  The



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   v6Ops working group is considering NAT-PT as an experimental
   technique [I-D.ietf-v6ops-natpt-to-exprmntl].

   Figure 1 sketches a scenario where HIP peers A and C are in
   overlapping address realms, due to address conflicts and HIP peer B
   is in the public Internet.

                                      +---+
         +---------+     --------     |   |     --------     +---------+
         |   HIP   |   / Private  \   | T |   /  Public  \   |   HIP   |
         |   peer  |--|  Internet  |--| W |--|  Internet  |--|   peer  |
         |    A    |   \  realm1  /   | I |   \  realm   /   |    B    |
         +---------+     --------     | C |     --------     +---------+
                                      | E |
         +---------+     --------     |   |
         |   HIP   |   / Private  \   | N |
         |   peer  |--|  Internet  |--| A |
         |    C    |   \  realm2  /   | T |
         +---------+     --------     |   |
                                      +---+

              Figure 1: Network Environment with twice-NAT

   Twice-NATs are usually operated with application level support, such
   as DNS proxies or SIP proxies.  These proxies intercept application
   signaling and configure the twice-NAT middlebox according the
   request.  Configuring means allocating the first IP address in one
   address realm (e.g., realm1) and a second IP address in another
   address realm (e.g., reaml2).  The configuration assures that data
   from the private realm is sent to one of the twice-NAT's addresses
   and afterwards mapped into the other address realm.  Furthermore, the
   proxies will modify the application signaling to reflect the address
   changes.  HIP peer A would see data from HIP peer C actually coming
   from the twice-NAT's address in realm1.  HIP peer C would see data
   coming from HIP peer A coming from the twice-NAT's address in realm2.
   For HIP peer B data from peer A and B would come from one of the
   public IP addresses of the twice-NAT.  For further studies it is
   assumed that the twice-NAT is running a n:m translation with n=m and
   n(realm1)=n(realm2),  where n is the number of internal IP addresses
   in each realm and m the number of public IP addresses.  Note that
   traffic either from peer A or C to peer B does not necessarily be
   traversed through twice-NAT; traditional NAT or NAPT is sufficient.

   While using DNS queries to find another peer's IP address behind the
   same twice-NAT,  the DNS proxy is configuring the NAT to forward
   traffic between both peers (peer A and peer C in Figure 3).  The HIP
   base exchange and IPSec traffic should be able to traverse the
   twice-NAT without any problem since only the address translation is



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   done, but it should be considered that both source and destination
   address will be changed.  There is port mapping, since the address
   translation is 1:1 and the multiplexing is done on an IP address
   base.  The IPSec traffic is valid for processing at both peers as
   long as ESP is used only, but the use of AH will result in broken
   IPsec checks, since the IP addresses were changed.

   The advent of non-DNS based lookup mechanisms (such as described in
   [I-D.eggert-hiprg-rr-prob-desc]) is challenging for HIP with
   twice-NATs.  Either a new type of proxy for this lookup mechanism
   must be installed at every twice-NAT device or as mentioned in
   Section 6 a new signaling protocol between HIP peer and twice-NAT can
   be used.

3.  Extensions to HIP

   This section evaluates changes to HIP so that it can traverse
   middleboxes with less problems.  Two issues must be tackled, the
   reachability of HIP peers behind NATs and traversal of HIP's base
   exchange through middleboxes.

   Section 2 lists several problems with HIP's base exchange
   encapsulation schemes for IPv4 and IPv6.  It seems to be more
   appropriate to run the base exchange of HIP over UDP in general and
   not to rely on below transport level encapsulation schemes.  The uses
   solves many issues in the presence of NATs and Firewalls.  Other
   middleboxes may treat an UDP encapsulated HIP base exchange more
   friendly too.  For example, load balancer that use IP and transport
   layer information for their load balancing algorithm.  Running the
   base exchange in two different modes, one in plain IP and in one in
   UDP encapsulation, is not a viable solution.  HIP peers would need to
   detect if they have to run one or the other mode depending on their
   network environment and, even worse, on the particular destination
   HIP peer's network connection.  A HIP peer behind a NAT could
   communicate with other HIP peers in the public Internet and with HIP
   peers in the same private IP address space at the same time.

   HIP peers located behind NAT must notify other peers about its public
   reachable IP address and UDP port number (the contact address).
   Otherwise it is impossible to contact those NAT'ed HIP peers from the
   Internet.  HIP requires an extension to notify other peers about
   their contact address.  A kind of rendezvous point is required where
   NAT'ed peers can register their current location, meaning storage of
   their contact address, and an extension of the HIP base exchange is
   needed.  This extension contains the contact address of the NAT'ed
   peer.  The proposed REA packet exchange of
   [I-D.ietf-hip-mm][reference.NDSS-03.nikander] can be used for this.
   The original intention of this extension is support of for  end host



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   mobility and multi-homing.  HIP peers can notify by REA about their
   NAT'ed contact address and their private IP addresses.  This behavior
   is similar to [I-D.ietf-mmusic-anat].

   The mentioned rendezvous can be achieved by an extended rendezvous
   server.  There are currently several approaches to this.

   However, HIP peers must determine their contact address first before
   they can announced it within the REA packet to other peers.

4.  Extension to NATs

   As described in Section 2.2 , IPsec SPIs have only one-way
   significance, meaning that NATs can learn SPI values of outgoing
   packets, but they cannot learn the corresponding SPI values of
   incoming packets.  Therefore, a matching between SPI values used for
   outgoing flows to SPI values used for incoming flows is impossible.

   NATs must learn the corresponding SPI values for outgoing and
   incoming IPsec flows.  There are two ways in doing so.  First, NATs
   can monitor the HIP base exchange and learn the SPI values agreed by
   both HIP peers.  Afterwards, NATs can remember these values and map
   outgoing and incoming IPsec flows accordingly.

   Second, HIP peers can use a NAT signaling protocol and signal the
   appropriate SPI values with IP addresses.  NATs can so learn the SPI
   values out of the signaling protocol.

   Both approaches require changes to NATs.  The first approach would
   require changes that are only benificial to HIP, the second one would
   be beneficial to other protocols as well.  Possible solutions for
   signaling NATs SPI values are NSIS NAT/FW traversal
   [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw]  and MIDCOM [RFC3303].  Using MIDCOM in
   the context of HIP would require some additional knowledge about
   network topology, for instance, in multihomed environments with
   different border NATS, host must know which of the multiple NATs to
   signal for.  Therefore, this solution is hard to deploy.

   By using the NSIS NAT/FW traversal (NATFW NSLP) mechanism HIP nodes
   could signal the used SPI values for both directions.  NATFW NSLP
   always ensures that signaling messages will reach an appropriate NAT
   and those messages follow exactly the data path (path-coupled
   signaling).  NSIS requires usually both ends, i.e., both HIP peers,
   to support this new signaling protocol.  However, NATFW NSLP offers
   support for only one end supporting this protocol, the so-called
   proxy mode.  HIP peers behind a NATFW NSLP enabled NAT could so
   configure the local NATs without impacting other networks.  An add-on
   is given through NATFW traversal, too, since on-path firewalls are



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   configured as well.

   Requiring NATs to understand the HIP base exchange itself seems not
   be appropriate.  Requiring a specialized signaling protocol between
   HIP peers and NAT/firewalls seems not be appropriate.  Both require
   changes to those device would only being beneficial to HIP but no
   other protocol.

5.  HIP unaware NATs

   The solutions outlined in Section 4 require that NATs are updated to
   support new functions, such as HIP itself or NSIS NATFW signaling.
   By today's measures, NATs are widely deployed and are currently
   getting a push through low-cost devices rolled out to broadband
   connection users, for instance, DSL lines.  NATs are deployed in
   various places, at enterprise network borders, mobile phone networks
   offering IP-based services, etc.  It will be impossible to upgrade or
   replace all of them to support HIP or HIP-related extensions since so
   many NATs are deployed.  It is the intent of this section to explore
   how HIP works even in the presence of these HIP unaware NATs.
   Deployed NATs are currently IPv4 only, so that this section considers
   them only.

   For HIP over IPv4, UDP encapsulated HIP messages solve already some
   problems in traversing NATs.  Usually, UDP packets can traverse NATs
   from inside (private Network) to outside (public network) and vice
   versa when they have been initiated from inside.  The other way
   around, initiated from outside, will be blocked or impossible since
   the destination IP address of the NAT is not known a priory.  In the
   case that UDP encapsulation works fine for the HIP message exchange,
   IPsec is still troublesome (see [RFC3715] .)  Some NAT
   implementations offer some sort of so-called VPN passthrough, where
   the NAT learns about IPsec flows and tries to correlate outgoing and
   incoming SPI values.  This works probably only for a small numbers of
   nodes behind a single NAT, until there will be SPI  collisions.  The
   solution for running IPsec through NATs is documented in
   [I-D.ietf-ipsec-udp-encaps] and applicable here, too.  HIP should
   support IPsec over UDP transport through an extension to the
   signaling.  This extension  would indicate when to use IPsec over
   UDP, instead of plain IPsec.

   HIP peers should also consider additional NAT traversal mechanisms,
   such as the widely deployed Universal Plug and Play (UPNP,
   [reference.UPNP].)  UPNP can be used to configure on-link home
   gateways to forward particular traffic.






Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


6.  Firewalls

   IP firewalls, usually as known as packet filter firewalls, do
   inspection on a packet base and decided whether to forward or discard
   a packet.  This type of middlebox is first of all not an obstacle for
   HIP, as long as the policy rule set defining the filtering allows the
   HIP base exchange and IPsec traffic to traverse.  However, it is
   common to block traffic with unknown IPv6 extension headers, such as
   HIP is using, therefore preventing to exchange the HIP base exchange
   messages.  Furthermore, outbound traffic initiated in the protected
   part is allowed to traverse and corresponding inbound traffic too.
   On the other hand, traffic initiated from outside and headed inbound
   is blocked by default.  This issue is a problem for the IPsec
   traffic, since the correlation between outbound IPsec (defined
   through IP source, IP destination, outbound SPI value) and inbound
   (defined through IP source, IP destination, inbound SPI value) is
   impossible to learn for the IP firewall.  No correlation is possible,
   as long  as the firewall is unable to learn these corresponding
   outbound and inbound SPI values.

7.  Security Considerations

   To be done.

8.  Acknowledgements

9.  References

9.1  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-hip-arch]
              Moskowitz, R., "Host Identity Protocol Architecture",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-hip-arch-02, January 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-hip-base]
              Moskowitz, R., "Host Identity Protocol",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-hip-base-01, October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-ipsec-udp-encaps]
              Huttunen, A., "UDP Encapsulation of IPsec Packets",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ipsec-udp-encaps-09, May 2004.

   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC2766]  Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address
              Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC 2766,



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


              February 2000.

9.2  Informative References

   [I-D.eggert-hiprg-rr-prob-desc]
              Eggert, L. and J. Laganier, "HIP Resolution and Rendezvous
              Problem Description",
              Internet-Draft draft-eggert-hiprg-rr-prob-desc-00, October
              2004.

   [I-D.ietf-hip-mm]
              Nikander, P., "End-Host Mobility and Multi-Homing with
              Host Identity Protocol",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-hip-mm-00, October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-anat]
              Camarillo, G., "The Alternative Network Address Types
              Semantics (ANAT) for theSession  Description Protocol
              (SDP) Grouping Framework",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-mmusic-anat-02, October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw]
              Stiemerling, M., "A NAT/Firewall NSIS Signaling Layer
              Protocol (NSLP)",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw-04, October
              2004.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-natpt-to-exprmntl]
              Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move NAT-PT to
              Experimental",
              Internet-Draft draft-ietf-v6ops-natpt-to-exprmntl-00,
              February 2005.

   [RFC2401]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.

   [RFC3234]  Carpenter, B. and S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and
              Issues", RFC 3234, February 2002.

   [RFC3303]  Srisuresh, P., Kuthan, J., Rosenberg, J., Molitor, A. and
              A. Rayhan, "Middlebox communication architecture and
              framework", RFC 3303, August 2002.

   [RFC3715]  Aboba, B. and W. Dixon, "IPsec-Network Address Translation
              (NAT) Compatibility Requirements", RFC 3715, March 2004.

   [reference.NDSS-03.nikander]
              Nikander, P., Ylitalo, J. and J. Wall, "Integrating



Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


              Security, Mobility, and Multi-Homing in a HIP Way", Proc.
              Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium
              (NDSS) 2003, February 2003.

   [reference.UPNP]
              UPNP Web Site, "Universal Plug and Play Web Site",
              http://www.upnp.org/ , February 2005.

   [reference.fw_config]
              CERT Web Site, "Configure firewall packet filtering",
              http://www.cert.org/security-improvement/practices/p058.ht
              ml , February 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Stiemerling
   NEC Network Laboratories
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 90511 13
   Fax:   +49 6221 90511 55
   Email: martin.stiemerling@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de/


   Juergen Quittek
   NEC Network Laboratories
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 90511 15
   Fax:   +49 6221 90511 55
   Email: juergen.quittek@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de/













Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


   Lars Eggert
   NEC Network Laboratories
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 90511 43
   Fax:   +49 6221 90511 55
   Email: lars.eggert@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de/









































Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       HIP Middlebox Traversal Issues        February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stiemerling, et al.      Expires August 24, 2005               [Page 14]

