INTERNET-DRAFT                               Danny McPherson
draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-experience-protocol-01.txtArbor Networks
                                                 Keyur Patel
                                               Cisco Systems
Category                                       Informational
Expires: February 2004                           August 2003


                   Experience with the BGP-4 Protocol
            <draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-experience-protocol-01.txt>



Status of this Document

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   The key words "MUST"", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].


   This document is a product of an individual.  Comments are solicited
   and should be addressed to the author(s).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.






McPherson, Patel                                                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


                                Abstract


   The purpose of this memo is to document how the requirements for
   advancing a routing protocol from Draft Standard to full Standard
   have been satisfied by Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4).

   This report satisfies the requirement for "the second report", as
   described in Section 6.0 of RFC 1264.  In order to fulfill the
   requirement, this report augments RFC 1773 and describes additional
   knowledge and understanding gained in the time between when the
   protocol was made a Draft Standard and when it was submitted for
   Standard.






































McPherson, Patel                                                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


                           Table of Contents


   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. BGP-4 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
    2.1. A Border Gateway Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3. Management Information Base (MIB). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4. Implementations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5. Operational Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6. Metrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
    6.1. MULTI_EXIT_DISC (MED) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.1. Sending MEDs to BGP Peers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.2. MED of Zero Versus No MED. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.3. MEDs and Temporal Route Selection. . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7. LOCAL_PREF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8. Internal BGP In Large Autonomous Systems . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9. Internet Dynamics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. BGP Routing Information Bases (RIBs). . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. Update Packing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   12. Limit Rate Updates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   13. Ordering of Path Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   14. AS_SET Sorting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   15. Control over Version Negotiation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   16. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    16.1. TCP MD5 Signature Option . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    16.2. BGP Over IPSEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    16.3. Miscellaneous. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
    16.4. PTOMAINE and GROW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
    16.5. Internet Routing Registries (IRRs) . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
    16.6. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   17. References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   18. Authors' Addresses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   19. Full Copyright Statement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17


















McPherson, Patel                                                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


1.  Introduction


   The purpose of this memo is to document how the requirements for
   advancing a routing protocol from Draft Standard to full Standard
   have been satisfied by Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4).

   This report satisfies the requirement for "the second report", as
   described in Section 6.0 of RFC 1264.  In order to fulfill the
   requirement, this report augments RFC 1773 and describes additional
   knowledge and understanding gained in the time between when the
   protocol was made a Draft Standard and when it was submitted for
   Standard.



2.  BGP-4 Overview


   BGP is an inter-autonomous system routing protocol designed for
   TCP/IP internets.  The primary function of a BGP speaking system is
   to exchange network reachability information with other BGP systems.
   This network reachability information includes information on the
   list of Autonomous Systems (ASs) that reachability information
   traverses.  This information is sufficient to construct a graph of AS
   connectivity for this reachability from which routing loops may be
   pruned and some policy decisions at the AS level may be enforced.

   The initial version of the BGP protocol was published in RFC 1105.
   Since then BGP Versions 2, 3, and 4 have been developed and are
   specified in [RFC 1163], [RFC 1267], and [RFC 1771], respectively.
   Changes since BGP-4 went to Draft Standard [RFC 1771] are listed in
   Appendix N of [BGP4].



2.1.  A Border Gateway Protocol


   The Initial Version of BGP [RFC 1105].  BGP version 2 is defined in
   [RFC 1163].  BGP version 3 is defined in [RFC 1267].  BGP version 4
   is defined in [RFC 1771] and [BGP4].  Appendices A, B, C and D of
   [BGP4] provide summaries of the changes between each iteriation of
   the BGP specification.







McPherson, Patel                                  Section 2.1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


3.  Management Information Base (MIB)


   The BGP-4 Management Information Base (MIB) has been published [BGP-
   MIB].  The MIB was updated from previous versions documented in [RFC
   1657] and [RFC 1269], respectively.

   Apart from a few system variables, the BGP MIB is broken into two
   tables: the BGP Peer Table and the BGP Received Path Attribute Table.

   The Peer Table reflects information about BGP peer connections, such
   as their state and current activity. The Received Path Attribute
   Table contains all attributes received from all peers before local
   routing policy has been applied. The actual attributes used in
   determining a route are a subset of the received attribute table.



4.  Implementations


   There are numerous independent interoperable implementations of BGP
   currently available.  Although the previous version of this report
   provided an overview of the implementations currently used in the
   operational Internet, at this time it has been suggested that a
   separate BGP Implementation Report [BGP-IMPL] be generated.

   It should be noted that implementation experience with Cisco's BGP-4
   implementation was documented as part of [RFC 1656].

   For all additional implementation information please reference [BGP-
   IMPL].



5.  Operational Experience


   This section discusses operational experience with BGP and BGP-4.

   BGP has been used in the production environment since 1989, BGP-4
   since 1993.  Production use of BGP includes utilization of all
   significant features of the protocol.  The present production
   environment, where BGP is used as the inter-autonomous system routing
   protocol, is highly heterogeneous.  In terms of the link bandwidth it
   varies from 56 Kbps to 10 Gbps.  In terms of the actual routers that
   run BGP it ranges from a relatively slow performance Pentium to a
   very high performance RISC-based CPUs, and includes both the special



McPherson, Patel                                    Section 5.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   purpose routers and the general purpose workstations running various
   UNIX derivatives and other operating systems.

   In terms of the actual topologies it varies from very sparse to quite
   dense.  The requirement for full-mesh IBGP topologies has been
   largely remedied by BGP Route Reflection, Autonomous System
   Confederations for BGP, and perhaps some mix of the two.  BGP Route
   Reflection was initially defined in [RFC 1966] and subsequently
   updated in [RFC 2796].  Autonomous System Confederations for BGP were
   initially defined in [RFC 1965] and subsequently updated in [RFC
   3065].

   At the time of this writing BGP-4 is used as an inter-autonomous
   system routing protocol between all Internet-attached autonomous
   systems, with nearly 15k active autonomous systems in the global
   Internet routing table.

   BGP is used both for the exchange of routing information between a
   transit and a stub autonomous system, and for the exchange of routing
   information between multiple transit autonomous systems.  There is no
   protocol distinction between sites historically considered
   "backbones" versus "regional" or "edge" networks.

   The full set of exterior routes that is carried by BGP is well over
   120,000 aggregate entries, representing several times that number of
   connected networks.  The number of active paths in some service
   provider core routers exceeds 2.5 million.  Native AS_PATH lengths
   are as long as 10 for some routes, and "padded" path lengths of 25 or
   more ASs exist.



6.  Metrics


   This section discusses different metrics used within the BGP
   protocol. BGP has a seperate metric parameter for IBGP and EBGP. This
   allows policy based metrics to overwrite the distance based metrics;
   allowing each autonomous systems to define their independent policies
   in Intra-AS as well as Inter-AS. BGP Multi Exit Discriminator (MED)
   is used as a metric by EBGP peers while BGP Local Preference is used
   by IBGP peers.









McPherson, Patel                                    Section 6.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


6.1.  MULTI_EXIT_DISC (MED)


   BGP version 4 re-defined the old INTER-AS metric as a MULTI_EXIT_
   DISC (MED).  This value may be used in the tie-breaking process when
   selecting a preferred path to a given address space, and provides BGP
   speakers with the capability to convey to a peer AS the optimal entry
   point into the local AS.

   Although the MED was meant to only be used when comparing paths
   received from different external peers in the same AS, many
   implementations provide the capability to compare MEDs between
   different ASs as well.

   Though this may seem a fine idea for some configurations, care must
   be taken when comparing MEDs between different autonomous systems.
   BGP speakers often derive MED values by obtaining the IGP metric
   associated with reaching a given BGP NEXT_HOP within the local AS.
   This allows MEDs to reasonably reflect IGP topologies when
   advertising routes to peers.  While this is fine when comparing MEDs
   between multiple paths learned from a single AS, it can result in
   potentially bad decisions when comparing MEDs between difference
   automomous systems.  This is most typically the case when the
   autonomous systems use different mechanisms to derive IGP metrics,
   BGP MEDs, or perhaps even use different IGP procotols with vastly
   contrasting metric spaces.

   Another MED deployment consideration involves the impact of
   aggregation of BGP routing information on MEDs.  Aggregates are often
   generated from multiple locations in an AS in order to accommodate
   stability, redundancy and other network design goals.  When MEDs are
   derived from IGP metrics associated with said aggregates the MED
   value advertised to peers can result in very suboptimal routing.

   The MED was purposely designed to be a "weak" metric that would only
   be used late in the best-path decision process.  The BGP working
   group was concerned that any metric specified by a remote operator
   would only affect routing in a local AS if no other preference was
   specified.  A paramount goal of the design of the MED was to ensure
   that peers could not "shed" or "absorb" traffic for networks that
   they advertise.



6.1.1.  Sending MEDs to BGP Peers


   [BGP4] allows MEDs received from any EBGP peers by a BGP speaker to



McPherson, Patel                                Section 6.1.1.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   be passed to its IBGP peers.  Although advertising MEDs to IBGP peers
   is not a required behavior, it is a common default.  MEDs received
   from EBGP peers by a BGP speaker MUST NOT be sent to other EBGP
   peers.

   Note that many implementations provide a mechanism to derive MED
   values from IGP metrics in order to allow BGP MED information to
   reflect the IGP topologies and metrics of the network when
   propagating information to adjacent autonomous systems.



6.1.2.  MED of Zero Versus No MED


   An implementation MUST provide a mechanism that allows for MED to be
   removed.  Previously, implementations did not consider a missing MED
   value to be the same as a MED of zero.  No MED value should now be
   equal to a value of zero.

   Note that many implementations provide an mechanism to explicitly
   define a missing MED value as "worst" or less preferable than zero or
   larger values.



6.1.3.  MEDs and Temporal Route Selection


   Some implementations have hooks to apply temporal behavior in MED-
   based best path selection.  That is, all other things being equal up
   to MED consideration, preference would be applied to the "oldest"
   path, without preferring the lower MED value.  The reasoning for this
   is that "older" paths are presumably more stable, and thus more
   preferable.  However, temporal behavior in route slection results in
   non-deterministic behavior, and as such, is often undesirable.



7.  LOCAL_PREF


   The LOCAL_PREF attribute was added so a network operator could easily
   configure a policy that overrode the standard best path determination
   mechanism without independently configuring local preference policy
   on each router.

   One shortcoming in the BGP-4 specification was a suggestion for a



McPherson, Patel                                    Section 7.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   default value of LOCAL-PREF to be assumed if none was provided.
   Defaults of 0 or the maximum value each have range limitations, so a
   common default would aid in the interoperation of multi-vendor
   routers in the same AS (since LOCAL_PREF is a local administration
   knob, there is no interoperability drawback across AS boundaries).

   The LOCAL_PREF MUST be sent to IBGP Peers.  The LOCAL_PREF Attribute
   MUST NOT be sent to EBGP Peers.  Although no default value for
   LOCAL_PREF is defined, the common default value is 100.

   Another area where more exploration is required is a method whereby
   an originating AS may influence the best path selection process.  For
   example, a dual-connected site may select one AS as a primary transit
   service provider and have one as a backup.


                    /---- transit B ----\
        end-customer                     transit A----
                    /---- transit C ----\


   In a topology where the two transit service providers connect to a
   third provider,  the real decision is performed by the third provider
   and there is no mechanism for indicating a preference should the
   third provider wish to respect that preference.

   A general purpose suggestion that has been brought up is the
   possibility of carrying an optional vector corresponding to the AS-
   PATH where each transit AS may indicate a preference value for a
   given route.  Cooperating ASs may then chose traffic based upon
   comparison of "interesting" portions of this vector according to
   routing policy.

   While protecting a given ASs routing policy is of paramount concern,
   avoiding extensive hand configuration of routing policies needs to be
   examined more carefully in future BGP-like protocols.



8.  Internal BGP In Large Autonomous Systems


   While not strictly a protocol issue, one other concern has been
   raised by network operators who need to maintain autonomous systems
   with a large number of peers.  Each speaker peering with an external
   router is responsible for propagating reachability and path
   information to all other transit and border routers within that AS.
   This is typically done by establishing internal BGP connections to



McPherson, Patel                                    Section 8.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   all transit and border routers in the local AS.

   In a large AS, this leads to a full mesh of TCP connections (n *
   (n-1)) and some method of configuring and maintaining those
   connections.  BGP does not specify how this information is to be
   propagated, so alternatives, such as injecting BGP routing
   information into the local IGP have been attempted, though it turned
   out to be a non-practical alternative (to say the least).

   Several alternatives to a full mesh IBGP have been defined, to
   include BGP Route Reflection [RFC 2796] and AS Confederations for BGP
   [RFC 2065], in order to alleviate the the need for "full mesh" IBGP.



9.  Internet Dynamics


   As discussed in [BGP4-ANALYSIS], the driving force in CPU and
   bandwidth utilization is the dynamic nature of routing in the
   Internet.  As the net has grown, the number of route changes per
   second has increased.

   We automatically get some level of damping when more specific NLRI is
   aggregated into larger blocks, however, this isn't sufficient.  In
   Appendix F of [BGP4] are descriptions of damping techniques that
   should be applied to advertisements.  In future specifications of
   BGP-like protocols, damping methods should be considered for
   mandatory inclusion in compliant implementations.

   BGP Route Flap Damping is defined in [RFC 2439].  BGP Route Flap
   Damping defines a mechanism to help reduce the amount of routing
   information passed between BGP peers, and subsequently, the load on
   these peers, without adversely affecting route convergence time for
   relatively stable routes.

   Route changes are announced using BGP UPDATE messages. The greatest
   overhead in advertising UPDATE messages happens whenever route
   changes to be announced are inefficiently packed.  As previously
   discussed, announcing routing changes sharing common attributes in a
   single BGP UPDATE message helps save considerable bandwidth and lower
   processing overhead.

   Persistent BGP errors may cause BGP peers to flap persistently if
   peer dampening is not implemented. This would result in significant
   CPU utilization. Implementors may find it useful to implement peer
   dampening to avoid such persistent  peer flapping [BGP4].




McPherson, Patel                                   Section 9.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


10.  BGP Routing Information Bases (RIBs)


   [BGP4] states "Any local policy which results in routes being added
   to an Adj-RIB-Out without also being added to the local BGP speaker's
   forwarding table, is outside the scope of this document".

   However, several well-known implementations do not confirm that Loc-
   RIB entries were used to populate the forwarding table before
   installing them in the Adj-RIB-Out.  The most common occurrence of
   this is when routes for a given prefix are presented by more than one
   protocol and the preferences for the BGP learned route is lower than
   that of another protocol.  As such, the route learned via the other
   protocol is used to populate the forwarding table.

   It may be desirable for an implementation to provide a knob that
   permits advertisement of "inactive" BGP routes.

   It may be also desirable for an implementation to provide a knob that
   allows a BGP speaker to advertise BGP routes that were not selected
   by descision process.



11.  Update Packing


   Multiple unfeasible routes can be advertised in a single BGP Update
   message.  In addition, one or more feasible routes can be advertised
   in a single Update message so long as all prefixes share a common
   attribute set.

   The BGP4 protocol permits advertisement of multiple prefixes with a
   common set of path attributes to be advertised in a single update
   message, this is commonly referred to as "update packing".  When
   possible, update packing is recommended as it provides a mechanism
   for more efficient behavior in a number of areas, to include:

    o Reduction in system overhead due to generation or receipt of
      fewer Update messages.

    o Reduction in network overhead as a result of less packets
      and lower bandwidth consumption.

    o Allows you to process path attributes and look for matching
      sets in your AS_PATH database (if you have one) less
      frequently.  Consistent ordering of the path attributes
      allows for ease of matching in the database as you don't have



McPherson, Patel                                  Section 11.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


      different representations of the same data.

   The BGP protocol suggests that withdrawal information should be
   packed in the begining of Update message, followed by information
   about more or less specific reachable routes in a single UPDATE
   message. This helps alleviate excessive route flapping in BGP.




12.  Limit Rate Updates


   The BGP protocol defines different mechanisms to rate limit the
   Updates. The BGP protocol defines MinRouteAdvertisementInterval
   parameter that determines the minimum time that must be elsape
   between the advertisement of routes to a particular destination from
   a single BGP speaker. This value is set on a per BGP peer basis.



13.  Ordering of Path Attributes


   The BGP protocol suggests that BGP speakers sending multiple prefixes
   per an UPDATE message should sort and order path attributes according
   to Type Codes. This would help their peers to quickly identify sets
   of attributes from different update messages which are semantically
   different.

   Implementers may find it useful to order path attributes according to
   Type Code so that sets of attributes with identical semantics can be
   more quickly identified.



14.  AS_SET Sorting


   AS_SETs are commonly used in BGP route aggregation. They reduce the
   size of AS_PATH information by listing AS numbers only once
   regardless of any number of times it might appear in process of
   aggregation. AS_SETs are usually sorted in increasing order to
   facilitate efficient lookups of AS numbers within them. This
   optimization is entirely optional.






McPherson, Patel                                  Section 14.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


15.  Control over Version Negotiation


   Because pre-BGP-4 route aggregation can't be supported by earlier
   version of BGP, an implementation that supports versions in addition
   to BGP-4 should provide the version support on a per-peer basis.




16.  Security Considerations


   BGP provides flexible and extendable mechanism for authentication and
   security.  The mechanism allows to support schemes with various
   degree of complexity.  BGP sessions are authenticated based on the IP
   address of a peer.  In addition, all BGP sessions are authenticated
   based on the autonomous system number advertised by a peer.

   Since BGP runs over TCP and IP, BGP's authentication scheme may be
   augmented by any authentication or security mechanism provided by
   either TCP or IP.




16.1.  TCP MD5 Signature Option


   RFC 2385 defines a way in which the TCP MD5 signature option can be
   used to valid information transmitted between two peers.  This method
   prevents any third party from injecting information (e.g., a TCP RST)
   into the datastream, or modifying the routing information carried
   between two BGP peers.  RFC ???? provides suggestions for choosing
   passwords to be used with MD5.

   TCP MD5 is not ubiquitously deployed at the moment, especially in
   inter- domain scenarios, largely because of key distribution issues.
   Most key distribution mechanisms are considered to be too "heavy" at
   this point.



16.2.  BGP Over IPSEC


   BGP can run over IPSEC, either in a tunnel, or in transport mode,
   where the TCP portion of the IP packet is encrypted.  This not only



McPherson, Patel                                Section 16.2.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   prevents random insertion of information into the data stream between
   two BGP peers, it also prevents an attacker from learning the data
   which is being exchanged between the peers.

   IPSEC does, however, offer several options for exchanging session
   keys, which may be useful on inter-domain configurations.  These
   options are being explored in many deployments, although no
   definitive solution has been reach on the issue of key exchange for
   BGP in IPSEC.

   It should be noted that since BGP runs over TCP and IP, BGP is
   vulnerable to the same denial of service or authentication attacks
   that are present in any other TCP based protocol.



16.3.  Miscellaneous


   Another issue any routing protocol faces is providing evidence of the
   validity and authority of the routing information carried within the
   routing system.  This is currently the focus of several efforts at
   the moment, including efforts to define the threats which can be used
   against this routing information in BGP [draft-murphy, attack tree],
   and efforts at developing a means to provide validation and authority
   for routing information carried within BGP [SBGP] [soBGP].

   In addition, the Routing Protocol Security Requirements (RPSEC)
   working group has been chartered within the Routing Area of the IETF
   in order to discuss and assist in addressing issues surrounding
   routing protocol security.  It is the intent that this work within
   RPSEC will result in feedback to BGPv4 and future enhancements to the
   protocol where appropriate.



16.4.  PTOMAINE and GROW


   The Prefix Taxonomy (PTOMAINE) working group, recently replaced by
   the Global Routing Operations (GROW) working group, is chartered to
   consider and measure the problem of routing table growth, the effects
   of the interactions between interior and exterior routing protocols,
   and the effect of address allocation policies and practices on the
   global routing system.  Finally, where appropriate, GROW will also
   document the operational aspects of measurement, policy, security and
   VPN infrastructures.




McPherson, Patel                                Section 16.4.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   One such item GROW is currently studying is the effects of route
   aggregation and the inability to aggregate over multiple provider
   boundaries due to inadequate provider coordination.

   It is the intent that this work within GROW will result in feedback
   to BGPv4 and future enhancements to the protocol as necessary.



16.5.  Internet Routing Registries (IRRs)


   Many organizations register their routing policy and prefix
   origination in the various distributed databases of the Internet
   Routing Registry.  These databases provide access to the information
   using the RPSL language as defined in [RFC 2622].  While registered
   information may be maintained and correct for certain providers, the
   lack of timely or correct data in the various IRR databases has
   prevented wide-spread use of this resource.




16.6.  Acknowledgements


   We would like to thank Paul Traina and Yakov Rekhter for authoring
   previous versions of this document.  We would also like to
   acknowledge Russ White, Jeffrey Haas and Curtis Villamizar for
   valuable feedback on this document.





















McPherson, Patel                                Section 16.6.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


17.  References


   [RFC 1105] Lougheed, K., and Rekhter, Y, "Border Gateway Protocol
              BGP", RFC 1105, June 1989.

   [RFC 1163] Lougheed, K., and Rekhter, Y, "Border Gateway Protocol
              BGP", RFC 1105, June 1990.

   [RFC 1264] Hinden, R., "Internet Routing Protocol Standardization
              Criteria", RFC 1264, October 1991.

   [RFC 1267] Lougheed, K., and Rekhter, Y, "Border Gateway Protocol 3
              (BGP-3)", RFC 1105, October 1991.

   [RFC 1519] Fuller, V., Li. T., Yu J., and K. Varadhan, "Classless
              Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and
              Aggregation Strategy", RFC 1519, September 1993.

   [RFC 1656] Traina, P., "BGP-4 Protocol Document Roadmap and
              Implementation Experience", RFC 1656, July 1994.

   [RFC 1771] Rekhter, Y., and T. Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4
              (BGP-4)", RFC 1771, March 1995.

   [RFC 1772] Rekhter, Y., and P. Gross, Editors, "Application of the
              Border Gateway Protocol in the Internet", RFC 1772, March
              1995.

   [RFC 1773] Traina, P., "Experience with the BGP-4 protocol", RFC
              1773, March 1995.

   [RFC 2439] Villamizar, C. and Chandra, R., "BGP Route Flap Damping",
              RFC 2439, November 1998.

   [RFC 2622] C. Alaettinoglu et al., "Routing Policy Specification
              Language", RFC 2622, June 1999.

   [RFC 2796] Bates, T., Chandra, R., and Chen, E, "Route Reflection -
              An Alternative to Full Mesh IBGP", RFC 2796, April 2000.

   [RFC 3065] Traina, P., McPherson, D., and Scudder, J, "Autonomous
              System Confederations for BGP", RFC 3065, Febuary 2001.

   [RFC 3345] McPherson, D., Gill, V., Walton, D., and Retana, A, "BGP
              Persistent Route Oscillation Condition", RFC 3345,
              August 2002.




McPherson, Patel                                  Section 17.  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   [BGP4-ANALYSIS] Work in Progress.

   [BGP4-IMPL] Work in Progress.

   [BGP4] Rekhter, Y., T. Li., and Hares. S, Editors, "A Border
          Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", BGP Draft, Work in Progress.



18.  Authors' Addresses



   Danny McPherson
   Arbor Networks
   Email: danny@arbor.net

   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   Email: keyupate@cisco.com



19.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



McPherson, Patel                                  Section 19.  [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: February 2004              August 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

















































McPherson, Patel                                  Section 19.  [Page 18]
