
draft                  A MIME body part for ODA                 Nov 95


                         A MIME body part for ODA

                       Tue Nov 21 15:32:07 MET 1995


                         Harald Tveit Alvestrand
                                 UNINETT
                      Harald.T.Alvestrand@uninett.no






    Status of this Memo

    This draft document is being circulated for comment.



    Please send comments to the author, or to the MIXER list <ietf-
    mixer@innosoft.com>.

    The following text is required by the Internet-draft rules:

    This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
    Areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

    Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
    other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use
    Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than
    as a "working draft" or "work in progress."

    Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
    Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
    Internet Draft.

    The file name of this version is draft-ietf-mixer-oda-00.txt








Alvestrand                  Expires May 96                    [Page 1]

draft                  A MIME body part for ODA                 Nov 95


    1.  Introduction

    This document contains the definitions, originally contained in
    RFC 1495 and RFC 1341, on how to carry ODA in MIME, and how to
    translate it to its X.400 representation.

    This document is an Experimental standard; if it turns out to be
    useful and widely deployed, it can be moved onto the standards
    track.


    1.1.  The Application/ODA MIME content-type

    The "ODA" subtype of application is used to indicate that  a body
    contains  information  encoded according to the Office Document
    Architecture  [ODA]   standards,  using  the  ODIF representation
    format.   For  application/oda, the Content- Type line should also
    specify an attribute/value  pair  that indicates  the document
    application profile (DAP), using the key word "profile", and the
    document class, using the keyword "class".

    For the keyword "class", the values "formatted", "processable" and
    "formatted-processable" are legal values.

    Thus an appropriate header field  might look like this:

    Content-Type:  application/oda; profile=Q112; class=formatted

    Consult the ODA standard [T.411] for further information.

    The Base64 content-transfer-encoding is appropriate for carrying
    ODA.



    1.2.  ODA - application/oda

    X.400 Body Part: ODA
    MIME Content-Type: application/oda
    Conversion: None
    Comments:

    The ODA body part is defined in the CCITT document T.411 [T.411],
    appendix E, section E.2, "ODA identification in the P2 protocol of





Alvestrand                  Expires May 96                    [Page 2]

draft                  A MIME body part for ODA                 Nov 95


    MHS"

    An abbreviated version of its ASN.1 definition is:

    oda-body-part EXTENDED-BODY-PART-TYPE
            PARAMETERS      OdaBodyPartParameters
            DATA            OdaData
            ::= id-et-oda

    OdaBodyPartParameters ::= SET {
            document-application-profile    [0] OBJECT IDENTIFIER
            document-architecture-class     [1] INTEGER {
                                            formatted (0)
                                            processable (1)
                                            formatted-processable(2)}}

    id-et-oda OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { 2 8 1 0 1 }

    Mapping from X.400 to MIME, the following is done:

    The Parameters.document-application-profile is mapped onto the
    MIME parameter "profile" according to the table below.


    Profile         OBJECT IDENTIFIER

    Q112            { iso (1) identified-organization (3) ewos (16)
                      eg (2) oda (6) profile (0)  q112 (1) }

    The Parameters.document-architecture-class is mapped onto the MIME
    parameter "class" according to the table below

    String                  Integer

    formatted               formatted(0)
    processable             processable(1)
    formatted-processable   formatted-processable(2)

    NOTE: This parameter is not defined in RFC 1341.

    The body of the MIME content-type is the Data part of the ODA body
    part.

    When mapping from MIME to X.400, the following steps are done:





Alvestrand                  Expires May 96                    [Page 3]

draft                  A MIME body part for ODA                 Nov 95


    The Parameters.document-application-profile and
    Parameters.document-architecture-class are set from the tables
    above.  If any of the parameters are missing, the values for Q112
    and formatted-processable are used.

    It is an option for the gateway implementor to try to access them
    from inside the document, where they are defined as

     document-profile.document-characteristics.document-architecture-class

     document-profile.document-characteristics.document-application-profile

    Gateways are NOT required to do this, since the document-
    characteristics are optional parameters.  If a gateway does not,
    it simply uses the defaulting rules defined above.

    The OBJECT IDENTIFIERs for the document application profile and
    for ODA {2 8 0 0} must be added to the Encoded Information Types
    parameter of the message envelope.


    2.  Security considerations

    Security issues are not consiered in this memo.


    3.  REFERENCES


    [MIME]
         RFC 1521: N. Borenstein, N. Freed, "MIME  (Multipurpose
         Internet Mail Extensions) Part One:  Mechanisms for
         Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message
         Bodies", 09/23/1993


    [T.411]
         CCITT Recommendation T.411 (1988), Open Document Architecture
         (ODA) and Interchange Format, Introduction and General
         Principles









Alvestrand                  Expires May 96                    [Page 4]

draft                  A MIME body part for ODA                 Nov 95



















































Alvestrand                  Expires May 96                    [Page 5]


