


IDR                                                            G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                             G. Michaelson
Intended status: Best Current                                      APNIC
Practice                                               September 9, 2008
Expires: March 13, 2009


                  Textual Representation of AS Numbers
                draft-ietf-idr-as-representation-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 13, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   A textual representation for Autonomous System (AS) numbers is
   defined as the decimal value of the AS Number.  This textual
   representation is to be used by all documents, systems and user
   interfaces referring to AS numbers.






Huston & Michaelson      Expires March 13, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                ASN Notation                September 2008


1.  Introduction

   A textual representation for Autonomous System (AS) numbers is
   defined as the decimal value of the AS Number.  This textual
   representation is to be used by all documents, systems and user
   interfaces referring to AS numbers.

   This document notes a number of potential representation formats and
   proposes the adoption of a decimal value notation for AS numbers, or
   "asplain" according to the representation taxonomy described here.


2.  Taxonomy of Representation Formats

   A taxonomy of representation for AS numbers is as follows:

   asplain
      refers to a syntax scheme of representing all AS numbers using
      decimal integer notation.  Using asplain notation an AS number of
      value 65526 would be represented as the string "65526" and as AS
      number of value 65546 would be represented as the string "65546".

   asdot+
      refers to a syntax scheme of representing all AS numbers using a
      notation of two integer values joined by a period character: <high
      order 16-bit value in decimal>.<low order 16-bit value in
      decimal>.  Using asdot+ notation, an AS number of value 65526
      would be represented as the string "0.65526" and an AS number of
      value 65546 would be represented as the string "1.10".

   asdot
      refers to a syntax scheme of representing AS number values less
      than 65536 using asplain notation and representing AS number
      values equal to or greater than 65536 using asdot+ notation.
      Using asdot notation, an AS number of value 65526 would be
      represented as the string "65526" and as AS number of value 65546
      would be represented as the string "1.10".



3.  Representation of AS Number Values

   To avoid confusion, a single textual notation is useful for
   documentation, configuration systems, reports, and external tools and
   information repositories.  The decimal value representation, or
   "asplain" is proposed as the textual notiation to use for AS Numbers.

   The "asplain" representation represents the number as its decimal



Huston & Michaelson      Expires March 13, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                ASN Notation                September 2008


   value, without any field delimiter, corresponding to to lack of any
   internal fields defined by the semantics AS numbers.


4.  IANA Considerations

   IANA Registries should use decimal representation ("asplain") for AS
   numbers.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document does not refer to matters associated with security of
   routing systems.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The terminology of "asplain", "asdot" and "asdot+" was originally
   devised and described by Juergen Kammer in January 2007 [KAMMER2007].


7.  Informative References

   [KAMMER2007]
              Kammer, J., "AS Number Formats", Jan 2007,
              <http://quagga.ncc.eurodata.de/asnumformat.html>.


Authors' Addresses

   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: gih@apnic.net


   George Michaelson
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: ggm@apnic.net










Huston & Michaelson      Expires March 13, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                ASN Notation                September 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Huston & Michaelson      Expires March 13, 2009                 [Page 4]

