


DKIM Working Group                                               D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                         Trend Micro, NSSG
Intended status: Standards Track                           June 25, 2008
Expires: December 27, 2008


              DKIM Author Domain Signing Practices (ADSP)
                        draft-otis-dkim-adsp-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) as described in [RFC4871], defines
   a domain-level authentication framework for email to permit
   verification of the source and contents of messages.  This document
   specifies an adjunct mechanism to aid in assessing messages that lack
   valid DKIM signatures for domains used in the author's address.  It
   defines a record that can advertise the extent to which a domain
   signs outgoing mail that is publicly exchanged on SMTP port 25, as
   described in [RFC2821].  Also, how other hosts can access those



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   records.

   Advertisements, defined by this document, may also increase DKIM
   signature expectations for messages received by Mail User Agents
   (MUAs) or for messages which might have been exchanged over protocols
   other than SMTP.  In some circumstances, author domains may wish to
   have accommodations for protocol failures or for mixed public
   protocol messaging not to be made.

   In addition, DKIM's identity parameters related to the author address
   are decisive only when a corresponding DKIM key local-part template
   precludes an author address.  DKIM in conjunction with ADSP is to
   provide methods for detecting the spoofing of known domains, but not
   for making strong assertions about the identity of the message
   author.




































Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Language and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Terms Imported from DKIM Signatures Specification  . . . .  4
     2.2.  Valid Signature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Valid Author Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Key Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.5.  Author Key Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.6.  Author Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.7.  Author Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.8.  Author Domain Signing Practices  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Operation Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  ADSP Discovery Results Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  ADSP Discovery Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Detailed Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  DNS Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Publication of ADSP Records  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  ADSP Threat Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  DNS Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.3.  DNS Wildcards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  References - Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.2.  References - Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Appendix A.  Usage Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     A.1.  Single Location Domains  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     A.2.  Bulk Mailing Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.3.  Commonly Forged Transactional Messages . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.4.  Third Party Senders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix B.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix C.  Update History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     C.1.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-00 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     C.2.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-01 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     C.3.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-02 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     C.4.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-03 . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 19












Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) defines a mechanism by which email
   messages can be cryptographically signed, permitting a Key Domain to
   claim responsibility for the introduction of a message.  Receiving
   hosts can verify the signature by querying the Key Domain to retrieve
   the appropriate public key, and thereby confirming that a message has
   been attested to by a party in possession of the private key and in
   control of a portion of the Key Domain.

   However, the legacy of the Internet is such that not all messages
   will be signed or will retain a valid signature, and that absence of
   a valid signature on a message is not an "a priori" indication of
   forgery.  In fact, during early phases of deployment, it is likely
   that most messages will remain unsigned.  However, some domains might
   decide to sign all of their outgoing mail, for example, to better
   protect their brand name.  It is desirable for such domains to be
   able to advertise that fact to other hosts.  This is the premise of
   Author Domain Signing Practices (ADSP).

   Receiving hosts implementing this specification ensure greater safety
   by first inquiring into the validity of the SMTP domain before
   attempting a series of transactions related to DKIM validations.  The
   transactions pertaining to this document determine Author Domain
   Signing Practices advertised by the Author Domains.  This
   determination is called ADSP Discovery.

   The detailed requirements for Author Domain Signing Practices are
   given in [RFC5016].  This document refers extensively to [RFC4871]
   and assumes the reader is familiar with it.

   Requirements Notation:  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
      "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",
      "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
      described in [RFC2119]


2.  Language and Terminology

2.1.  Terms Imported from DKIM Signatures Specification

   Some terminology used herein is derived directly from [RFC4871].  In
   several cases, references in that document to Sender have been
   changed to Author here, to emphasize the relationship to the Author
   address(es) in the From: header field described in [RFC2822].

   In addition, [RFC4871] requires that a valid signature having a
   restrictive local-part template, the key's "g=" tag and value, must



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   match against an undefined "signing address".  The "signing address"
   could be understood to be the email address associated with the
   signature's "on behalf of" identity which would be the "i=" tag and
   value or its default, but the benefit of this check is limited since
   DKIM signatures are not normally displayed.  This document seeks to
   clearly define the "signing address" used in conjunction with a
   restrictive key's local-part template as being the "Author Address".
   Briefly,

   o  The "local-part" is the part of an address preceding the "@" sign,
      as defined in [RFC2822] and used in [RFC4871].

2.2.  Valid Signature

   A "Valid Signature" is any message signature which correctly verifies
   using procedures described in section 6.1 of [RFC4871].

2.3.  Valid Author Signature

   A "Valid Author Signature" is any message signature which correctly
   verifies using procedures described in section 6.1 of [RFC4871], and
   where the local-part template, the key "g=" tag and value, and the
   Key Domain, match against the Author Address.

2.4.  Key Domain

   The "Key Domain" is the domain listed in the "d=" tag of a Valid
   Signature.

2.5.  Author Key Domain

   The "Author Key Domain" is the domain listed in the "d=" tag of a
   Valid Author Signature that is at or above the Author Domain.  The
   Author Key Domain must match all of its domain components with that
   of the Author Domain.  When a referenced Key contains a "t=s" tag and
   value, the Author Key Domain will contain the entire Author Domain
   for the signature to be valid.

2.6.  Author Address

   An "Author Address" is an email address in the From header field of a
   message [RFC2822].  If the From header field contains multiple
   addresses, the message has multiple Author Addresses.

2.7.  Author Domain

   An "Author Domain" is determined by the entire right-hand-side of the
   Author Address (the portion that is to the right of the "@",



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   excluding the "@" itself).

2.8.  Author Domain Signing Practices

   "Author Domain Signing Practices" (or just "practices") consist of a
   machine-readable record published at the "_adsp." subdomain of the
   Author Domain.  The ADSP record includes statements about outgoing
   mail practices for messages containing the Author Domain.


3.  Operation Overview

   Domain owners can publish Author Domain Signing Practices via a
   distribution service, such as the Domain Name System; specific
   details related to the use of DNS are given in Section 4.1.

   Hosts can obtain Author Domain Signing Practices of the domain(s)
   specified by the Author Domain as described in Section 4.2.2.  If a
   message has multiple Author Addresses, ADSP Discovery SHOULD be
   performed independently.  This standard will not cover the
   consolidation of combined ADSP Discovery results.

3.1.  ADSP Discovery Results Usage

   A receiving host might obtain varying amounts of useful information
   through ADSP Discovery.  Such as:

   o  When a message has a Valid Author Signature, the ADSP Discovery
      result is of no benefit since the message is compliant with any
      possible ADSP assertion.

   o  When a message has a Valid Signature that is not also a Valid
      Author Signature, the ADSP Discovery result, in conjunction with
      the Key Domain of the Valid Signature, is directly relevant to
      message assessment.

   o  When a message is without a Valid Signature, the ADSP Discovery
      result at the Author Domain is directly relevant to message
      assessment.

3.2.  ADSP Discovery Results

   Author Domain Signing Practices Discovery at an Author Domain provide
   four possible results:

   o  Message contains an Author Domain that does not advertise
      practices.




Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   o  Message contains an Author Domain that advertises practices
      indicating they do not ensure messages are initially signed by an
      Author Key Domain.

   o  Message contains an Author Domain that advertises practices
      indicating they ensure messages are initially signed by an Author
      Key Domain.

   o  Message contains an Author Domain that advertises practices
      indicating they ensure messages are initially signed, and they
      recommend dismissing messages not signed by an Author Key Domain.


4.  Detailed Description

4.1.  DNS Representation

   Author Signing Practices records are published using the DNS TXT
   resource record type.

   NON-NORMATIVE DISCUSSION [to be removed before publication]:  There
      has been considerable discussion on the DKIM WG mailing list
      regarding the relative advantages of TXT and a new resource record
      (RR) type.  Read the archive for details.

   The RDATA for ADSP resource records is textual in format, with
   specific syntax and semantics relating to their role in describing
   Author Domain Signing Practices.  The "Tag=Value List" syntax
   described in section 3.2 of [RFC4871] is to be used.  Records not in
   compliance with that syntax or with the syntax of individual tags
   described in Section 4.3 MUST be ignored, although they MAY cause the
   logging of warning messages via an appropriate system logging
   mechanism.  If the RDATA contains multiple character strings, the
   strings are to be logically concatenated with no delimiters placed
   between the strings.

   The ADSP record for an Author Domain is published at a "_adsp."
   subdomain directly below the Author Domain; e.g., the ADSP record for
   "example.com" would be a TXT record that is published at
   "_adsp.example.com".  A domain MUST NOT publish more than one ADSP
   record; the semantics of an ADSP transaction returning multiple ADSP
   records for a single domain are undefined.  (Note that "example.com"
   and "mail.example.com" are different domains.)

4.2.  Publication of ADSP Records

   Author Domain Signing Practices are intended to apply to all mail
   containing the Author Domain.  As a defensive strategy against



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   subdomain spoofing, ADSP records can be placed at domains that might
   appear to support SMTP.

   Wildcards within a domain that is also publishing ADSP records will
   not pose a problem.  This is discussed in more detail in Section 6.3.

4.2.1.  Record Syntax

   ADSP records use the "tag=value" syntax described in section 3.2 of
   [RFC4871].  Terms used to describe signing practices employ a
   metaphor of a door to avoid connotations that might differ from
   definitions given in this document.

   Tags used in ADSP records are described below.  Unrecognized tags
   MUST be ignored.  In the ABNF below, the WSP token is imported from
   [RFC2822].  The ALPHA and DIGIT tokens are imported from [RFC5234].


   dkim=  practices (plain-text; REQUIRED).  Possible values are as
      follows:

      OPEN  (Default) The Author Domain practice permits unsigned
         outbound mail.

      CLOSED  The Author Domain practice always initially signs mail
         containing the Author Domain by an Author Key Domain.

      LOCKED  The Author Domain practice always initially signs mail
         containing the Author Domain by an Author Key Domain.
         Furthermore, when a message is received without a Valid Author
         Signature, receiving hosts are requested to dismiss such
         messages.

      ABNF:

                     adsp-dkim-tag = %x64.6b.69.6d *WSP "="
                         *WSP ("OPEN" / "CLOSED" / "LOCKED")

4.2.2.  Author Signing Practices Discovery Procedure

   Hosts performing ADSP Discovery should first exclude SMTP clients
   with a demonstrated history of abuse.  Also, the transactions needed
   for ADSP Discovery or DKIM signature validation should be subsequent
   to some confirmation that the Author Domain might support SMTP.  In
   addition, hosts may consider some domains to be exempt, such as Top
   Level Domains (TLDs) listed in [RFC2606], for example ".invalid".
   [RFC2606] does not represent a comprehensive list of all possible
   exempted domains which might also include ".local", therefore,



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   appending to a list of exempted domains may be required.

   For the purposes of this section, a "valid ADSP record" is one that
   is both syntactically and semantically correct; in particular, it
   matches the ABNF for a "tag-list" and includes a defined "dkim=" tag.

      _ADSP Discovery._ The host SHOULD query DNS for a TXT record
      corresponding to the Author Domain prefixed by "_adsp." (note the
      trailing dot).  The results returned by this operation would be
      the value of the "dkim" tag or the value of "MISSING" when none
      exist.


   NON-NORMATIVE DISCUSSION:  Rather than placing ADSP records below the
      "_domainkey." prefix used by DKIM, "_adsp." prefixed to the Author
      Domain reduces the number of DNS entities needed when ADSP records
      are desired at every address record.  Delegation of a domain at or
      below "_domainkey." and at "_adsp." may be required when
      consolidating control of DNS entries related to DKIM.

   When any of the DNS transactions involved in ADSP Discovery result in
   a temporary error condition, the algorithm terminates without
   returning a result; possible actions include queuing the message or
   returning an SMTP error indicating a temporary failure.

   NON-NORMATIVE NOTE:  Within a DNS transaction, as defined by
      [RFC1034] section 5.2.2 and [RFC4034] section 3, when a CNAME is
      returned, the alias name is to be processed as if it were the
      initial name.  [RFC2181] section 10.3 makes an exception for
      Exchange host names returned by MX records.  An Exchange host name
      must not return a CNAME.


5.  IANA Considerations

   ADSP introduces the "_adsp" name into currently unregistered name
   space.  Although domain names beginning with an underscore will not
   collide with host names, service names for [RFC2782] SRV records and
   labels for TXT records, defined by other protocols, reference
   underscore prefixed names to designate specific use.

   INFORMATIVE NOTE [to be removed before publication]:  If at the time
      of publication no registry has been established or is planned for
      underscore prefixed names, this section may be removed.







Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


6.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations in the Author Domain Signing Practices mostly
   relate to attempts on the part of malicious senders to represent
   themselves as sending messages from the Author Domain for whom they
   are not authorized to use in their message.  This is often done in an
   attempt to defraud recipients of the message.

   DKIM keys with a restrictive local-part template in the "g=" tag and
   value are likely to be employed for untrusted systems that are beyond
   the direct control of the Author Key Domain.  As a result, additional
   care should be taken when a restrictive local-part template does not
   match against the Author Address.  Signatures, where a restrictive
   local-part key "g=" tag and value and the Key Domain do not match
   against the Author Addresses, should be considered invalid.

   Signatures with restrictive local-part keys where the signing address
   is not that of the Author Address will be deceptive when marked as
   valid.  Recipients are often unaware of the signature's "on behalf
   of" identity that is not normally displayed.  In addition, these keys
   are prone to theft since they are also likely to be used by less
   secure mobile users, for example.

   Signatures with DKIM keys lacking a restrictive local-part template
   are only safely added when the Author Key Domain is able to directly
   evaluate signed header fields and content.  Recognition of directly
   controlled signing improves security in several ways:

      Discerns potentially deceptive signatures independent of ADSP
      Discovery.

      Permits the accurate indication of on whose behalf the signature
      was added, even when not on behalf of the Author Address.

      Permits the "on behalf of" identity to be derived from an account
      instead of being omitted when the Author Key Domain is unable or
      unwilling to affirm the identity of the Author Address.

      Permits the identity to track either the author or the account
      used.  This ability can be useful to third-parties who are
      attempting to isolate bot-net 0wned systems.  In response to a
      growing portion of the IP address space being blocked, bot-nets
      increasingly send their mail through a provider's outbound server
      after obtaining access to valid accounts.

   Additional security considerations regarding Author Domain Signing
   Practices are found in the DKIM threat analysis [RFC4686].




Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


6.1.  ADSP Threat Model

   Email recipients often have a core set of Author Domains that they
   trust.  Common examples include those of financial institutions with
   which they have an existing relationship and Internet web commerce
   sites with which they conduct business.  DKIM validation and ADSP
   Discovery results will not provide any benefit unless receiving hosts
   either treat the messages differently during delivery, or provide
   some indicator to the end recipient.  Such email annotation is out of
   scope for this document.

   Bad actors often seek to exploit the name-recognition of a trusted
   Author Domain.  This might be done by just spoofing display-names, or
   by placing user local-parts above subdomains or cousin domains in the
   From: header field.  This problem is made worse by popular MUAs that
   do not display actual email addresses.  As a result, there is no
   empirical evidence showing to what extent unauthorized use of a
   domain name contributes to recipient deception, nor that its
   elimination will provide a significant effect.  Nevertheless, the
   automated accrual of behavioural feedback that ignores invalid
   identifiers better ensures that systematic confidence is retained for
   trusted Author Key Domains.

   Training recipients to use automated folder placement could also help
   reduce deceptions that utilize domain look-alike and subdomain based
   tactics.  In addition, automated recognition facilitates optimized
   processing by receiver-side message filtering engines that attempt to
   curb unauthorized uses of domain names, organizations' names, and
   their logos elsewhere within the message.  These attacks and their
   mitigation are also outside the scope of this document.

   The ADSP Discovery algorithm performs one DNS transaction per Author
   Domain.  Since this transaction, as well as the ones needed to
   validate the DKIM signature, are driven by domain names in email
   message headers of possibly fraudulent email, receiving hosts
   attempting ADSP Discovery and DKIM validation can become participants
   in traffic multiplication attacks.

   These attacks often target servers consolidating and distributing
   behavioral information about bad-actor activities.  Such attacks may
   dramatically impact the cost of offering the protective service.  As
   a result, a reduction in number of those offering consolidated
   behavioral information places the remaining providers in greater
   jeopardy of receiving a larger portion of the abuse.







Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


6.2.  DNS Attacks

   An attack might be waged against DNS infrastructure in an attempt to
   disable services dependent upon DNS.  Such attacks could be made
   worse when receiving hosts employ ADSP Discovery and DKIM validation.
   A goal to "First, do no harm" is increasingly difficult to achieve
   when confronting massive bot-nets.  For this reason, SMTP should
   consider eventually making MX records mandatory for the acceptance of
   public exchanges.  The ADSP Discovery process is not expected to
   impact the likelihood of an attacker being successful at poisoning
   local DNS resolvers.  In addition, such DNS security issues are
   addressed by DNSSEC [RFC4033].

   Although a steady attack may not cause a denial of service, it can
   consume significant resources related to "in the cloud" consolidation
   and distribution of behavioral information.  A typical strategy used
   by bad actors employing bot-nets is to rapidly transition from an
   active to a dormant state.  The duration of activity experienced by
   an SMTP server is often brief, and is then followed by a fairly long
   dormant period.  This tactic proves challenging for defensive
   strategies attempted by individual hosts.  There is some evidence
   that there may be tens of millions of bot-net controlled systems in
   the active state, while hundreds of millions appear dormant to
   individual SMTP servers.

   Consolidating and distributing behavioral information offers
   receiving hosts a defensive tactic that can minimize the
   effectiveness of the blitzkrieg or fast-flux tactic.  Unfortunately,
   often part of a bad-actor's strategy is to inundate behavioral
   repositories with virtual identifiers.  For DKIM, the signature's
   identity, "i=" tag and value, and key selector, "s=" tag and value,
   can be synthesized since wildcard domain support is possible, unlike
   for the Key Domain "d=" tag and value, or the location of the ADSP
   record.

   Because ADSP operates within the framework of the legacy e-mail
   system, the default result in the absence of an ADSP record is for
   the Author Domain to be considered "OPEN" where not all messages are
   expected to be signed by a Author Key Domain.  It is therefore
   important that the ADSP clients distinguish a DNS failure such as
   "SERVFAIL" from other DNS errors, so that appropriate actions can be
   taken.

   It is likely that DKIM's and ADSP's combined roles will be to prevent
   deception when used in conjunction with automated folder placement of
   domains considered trustworthy.  To ensure message reception remains
   viable for crucial systems when DNS fails, the IP addresses of
   crucial SMTP clients should be white-listed.  This will allow ADSP



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   and DKIM to be selectively bypassed during such events.

6.3.  DNS Wildcards

   With the exception of wildcard MX records, wildcards within a domain
   that also publish ADSP records do not pose a significant problem.
   Although referencing SMTP related records will not provide "NXDOMAIN"
   results when a domain contains a wildcard, SMTP discovery records,
   such as MX or A records, still offer evidence of SMTP support.
   Whether AAAA records, absent MX or A records, can be considered
   evidence of SMTP support has not withstood widespread use of AAAA
   only servers.


   NON-NORMATIVE NOTE:  Complete ADSP coverage for all subdomains of a
      domain remains possible.  However, ADSP records would need to be
      published at every subdomain containing A records, in addition to
      subdomains containing MX records.  When SMTP adopts an MX record
      mandate for the acceptance of public exchanges, only then could
      ADSP records be limited to subdomains containing the MX records.
      This strategy would also shelter domains not publishing MX records
      from the additional transactions associated with any number of
      Author Addresses and DKIM signatures that might be generated per
      message.


7.  References

7.1.  References - Normative

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

   [RFC2606]  Eastlake, D. and A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS
              Names", BCP 32, RFC 2606, June 1999.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.




Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4686]  Fenton, J., "Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys
              Identified Mail (DKIM)", RFC 4686, September 2006.

   [RFC4871]  Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

7.2.  References - Informative

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC5016]  Thomas, M., "Requirements for a DomainKeys Identified Mail
              (DKIM) Signing Practices Protocol", RFC 5016,
              October 2007.


Appendix A.  Usage Examples

   These examples are intended to illustrate typical uses of ADSP.  They
   are not intended to be exhaustive, nor to apply to every domain's or
   mail system's individual situation.

   Administrators are advised to consider the ways that mail processing
   can modify messages in a manner that will invalidate existing DKIM
   signatures, such as mailing lists, courtesy forwarders, and other
   paths that could add or modify headers, or modify the message body.
   In that case, if these modifications invalidate DKIM signatures,
   receiving hosts will consider the mail not to have a Valid Author
   Signature, even though one was present when the mail was originally
   sent.

A.1.  Single Location Domains

   A common mail system configuration handles all of a domain's users'
   incoming and outgoing mail through a single MTA or group of MTAs.  In



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   that case, the MTA(s) can be configured to sign outgoing mail with an
   Author Signature.

   In this situation, it might be appropriate to publish a "CLOSED" ADSP
   record for the Author Domain, depending on whether users also send
   mail through other paths that do not apply an Author Key Domain
   signature.  Such paths could include MTAs at hotels or hotspot
   networks used by travelling users, or web sites that provide "mail an
   article" features.

A.2.  Bulk Mailing Domains

   Another common configuration uses a domain solely for bulk or
   broadcast mail, with no individual human users, again, typically
   sending all the mail through a single MTA or group of MTAs that can
   apply an Author Key Domain signature.  In this case, before
   publishing a "CLOSED" ADSP record, the domain's management should be
   confident that all of its outgoing mail will be sent through signing
   MTAs.  Because it lacks individual users, the domain is unlikely to
   participate in mailing lists, but could still send mail through other
   paths that might invalidate signatures.

   Domain owners often use specialist mailing providers to send their
   bulk mail.  In that case, the mailing provider needs access to a
   suitable signing key in order to apply an Author Key Domain
   signature.  One possible method would be for the Author Key Domain
   owner to exchange keys with the mailing provider.  Another would be
   for the Author Key Domain to delegate a subdomain below the
   "_domainkey." label to the mailing provider.  For example,
   "bigbank.example.com" might delegate
   "esp-00._domainkey.bigbank.example.com" to such a provider.  As a
   result, the provider could generate keys and DKIM DNS records itself
   and thereby provide Author Key Domain signatures.

A.3.  Commonly Forged Transactional Messages

   In some cases, a domain might sign all its outgoing mail with an
   Author Key Domain signature, but prefer that receiving host systems
   dismiss mail without a valid Author Key Domain signature to avoid
   confusion with mail sent from fraudulent sources that are unable to
   apply an Author Key Domain signature.  (This latter kind of mail is
   sometimes loosely called "forgeries".)  In that case, it might be
   appropriate to publish a "LOCKED" ADSP record.  Note that a domain
   SHOULD NOT publish a "LOCKED" ADSP record when it wishes to maximize
   the likelihood that its mail is delivered, since it could cause some
   fraction of the mail to become rejected or discarded.

   As a special case, if a domain sends no mail at all, it can safely



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   publish a "LOCKED" ADSP record, since any mail with this Author
   Domain would be a forgery.

A.4.  Third Party Senders

   Another common use case is for a third party to enter into an
   agreement whereby that third party will send bulk or other mail on
   behalf of a designated Author Domain, using that domain in the
   RFC2822 From: or other headers.  Due to the many and varied
   complexities of such agreements, third party signing is not addressed
   in this specification.


Appendix B.  Acknowledgements

   This document was based upon the draft-ietf-dkim-ssp-003.  Dave
   Crocker, Frank Ellermann, and Charles Lindsey inputs were valuable.
   However, inclusion of their names should not be misconstrued as an
   endorsement of this draft.  This draft is an individual submission
   intended to illustrate a comprehensive solution that might help
   foreclose protracted debate when there is otherwise general
   agreement.


Appendix C.  Update History

C.1.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-00

   o  Conditioned Author Signing Practices Discovery Procedure SMTP
      verification step to be made only when an MX record had not been
      found.

C.2.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-01

   o  Modified the Author Signing Practices Discovery Procedure to
      better conform with terms in RFC2821.  In addition, a note now
      covers the issue of CNAMEs.

C.3.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-02

   o  Modified the abstract to include the language recommended by Dave
      Crocker, clarified the relationship this document has with DKIM,
      SMTP and other protocols, and clarified the extent of DKIM
      identity parameter.  The general language describing the intent
      was taken from the WG charter.

   o  Included non retention of a valid signature and offered an
      admonishment to first validate from domain in the introduction.



Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   o  Added a separate definition for Valid Author Signatures by
      including the requirement the local-part template must match
      against the author addresses.

   o  Made a few minor changes to the Author Key Domain definition.

   o  Included the phrase "related to the use of DNS" to the operation
      Overview as well as expanding upon the term ADSP Discovery in
      several places.

   o  Modified ADSP Usage to Discovery Results Usage.  The information
      provided was reorganized from least to most useful.

   o  Modified the terms in ADSP Discovery Results to be consistent with
      advertised practices to align more closely with Dave Crocker's
      Abstract.

   o  The Record syntax now mentions the terms used are a metaphor for a
      door, and the terms modified to be in closer alignment with the
      abstract.

   o  The ADSP Discovery procedure now warns about unlimited application
      of this process, and suggests some domains may require exemption,
      and introduces the term MISSING when no ADSP record is discovered.

   o  The IANA considerations where shortened based upon the assumption
      a registry may not be established for underscore prefixed TXT
      records.

   o  Change the beginning of the security section to clarify the domain
      and not the author identity is assured by DKIM and ADSP.

   o  Changed the wording related to the key "g=" parameter to be more
      consistent throughout the document.

   o  Mention in the threat model annotation is required, but is out of
      scope.

   o  Modified the paragraph that describes exploitation of trust to be
      about the domain and not the author identity.

   o  Mention that the target of an attack is often directed to
      behavioral information services.

   o  Add paragraph describing the typical nature of bot-net behaviour,
      and how the DKIM "i=" represents a significant vulnerability for
      the accrual of behavioral information.




Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


   o  Add a sentence to highlight benefits using automatic folder
      placement.

   o  Expanded the DNS wildcard section to generally describe what might
      be involved when validating the domain's support of SMTP.

C.4.  Changes to draft-otis-dkim-adsp-03

   o  Clarify the definition of signing address when used in conjunction
      with restrictive local-part templates by adding a paragraph to
      Section 2.1.

   o  Modified the list in Section 3.2 to include the case where the
      Author Domain has no ADSP record.

   o  Give examples in Section 4.2.2 regarding possibly exempt TLDs.

   o  Expand upon the recognition of direct versus indirect control of
      the DKIM signing process, and how this relates to the use of the
      "on behalf of" identity by adding two paragraphs to Section 6.

   o  Made several minor grammatical changes.


Author's Address

   Douglas Otis
   Trend Micro, NSSG
   10101 N. De Anza Blvd
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.257-1500
   Email: doug_otis@trendmicro.com

















Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    ADSP                         June 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Otis                    Expires December 27, 2008              [Page 19]

