

OSPF Working Group                                            R. Ogier
Internet-Draft                                        October 19, 2006
Expires: April 19, 2007
Category: Informational

            OSPF Database Exchange Summary List Optimization
                    draft-ogier-ospf-dbex-opt-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a backward compatible optimization for the
   Database Exchange process in OSPFv2 and OSPFv3.  In this
   optimization, a router does not list an LSA in Database Description
   packets sent to a neighbor, if the same or a more recent instance of
   the LSA was listed in a Database Description packet already received
   from the neighbor.  This optimization reduces Database Description
   overhead by about 50% in large networks.  This optimization does not
   affect synchronization, since it only omits unnecessary information
   from Database Description packets.




Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF            October 2006


1.  Introduction

   In OSPFv2 [RFC2328] and OSPFv3 [RFC2740], when two neighboring
   routers become adjacent, they synchronize their link-state databases
   via the Database Exchange process.  Each router sends the other
   router a set of Database Description (DD) packets that describes the
   router's link-state database for the area.  This is done by listing
   each LSA (i.e., including the header of each LSA) in one of the sent
   DD packets.  This procedure allows each router to determine whether
   the other router has newer LSA instances that should be requested via
   Link State Request packets.

   The optimization simply observes that it is not necessary for a
   router (master or slave) to list an LSA in a DD packet if it knows
   the neighbor already has an instance of the LSA that is the same or
   more recent (and therefore will not request the LSA).  To avoid
   listing such LSAs in DD packets, when an LSA is listed in a DD packet
   received from the neighbor, and the Database summary list for the
   neighbor has an instance of the LSA that is the same as or less
   recent than the one received, the LSA is removed from the summary
   list.

   The optimization, called the Database Exchange summary list
   optimization, does not affect synchronization, since the LSAs that
   are omitted from DD packets are unnecessary.  The optimization is
   fully backward compatible with OSPF.  The optimization reduces
   Database Description overhead by about 50% in large networks in which
   routers are usually already nearly synchronized when they become
   adjacent, since it reduces the total number of LSA headers exchanged
   by about one-half in such networks.  The optimization is especially
   beneficially in large networks with limited bandwidth, such as large
   mobile ad hoc networks.

2.  Specification of Optimization

   The Database Exchange summary list optimization is defined by
   modifying Section 10.6 (Receiving Database Description Packets) of
   RFC 2328 as follows.  The second-to-last paragraph of Section 10.6 is
   replaced with the following augmented paragraph:

   When the router accepts a received Database Description Packet as the
   next in sequence, the packet contents are processed as follows.  For
   each LSA listed, the LSA's LS type is checked for validity.  If the
   LS type is unknown (e.g., not one of the LS types 1-5 defined by this
   specification), or if this is an AS- external-LSA (LS type = 5) and
   the neighbor is associated with a stub area, generate the neighbor
   event SeqNumberMismatch and stop processing the packet.  Otherwise,
   the router looks up the LSA in its database to see whether it also



Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF            October 2006


   has an instance of the LSA.  If it does not, or if the database copy
   is less recent, the LSA is put on the Link state request list so that
   it can be requested (immediately or at some later time) in Link State
   Request Packets.  In addition, if the Database summary list contains
   an instance of the LSA that is the same as or less recent than the
   listed LSA, the LSA is removed from the Database summary list.

   The above additional step (which updates the Database summary list)
   may be performed either before or after the router looks up the
   listed LSA in its database and possibly adds the LSA to the Link
   state request list.  However, to implement the optimization, the
   additional step must be performed for each LSA listed in the received
   DD packet (to fully update the Database summary list) before the next
   DD packet is sent in response.

   Although the optimization does not require that LSAs be listed in DD
   packets in any particular order, faster lookup of LSAs in the
   Database summary list may be possible if LSAs are listed in
   lexicographically increasing order of (LS type, Link State ID,
   Advertising Router).

3.  Example

   This section describes an example to illustrate the database exchange
   summary list optimization.  Assume that routers RT1 and RT2 already
   have identical databases when they start database exchange.  Also
   assume that the list of LSA headers for the database fits into two
   (but not one) DD packets.  Then the standard database exchange is as
   follows when RT1 is the first to change the neighbor state to
   ExStart.  Note that each router sends two full DD packets.

         RT1 (slave)                                      RT2 (master)

         ExStart      Empty DD (Seq=x,I,M,Master)
                    ------------------------------>
                      Empty DD (Seq=y,I,M,Master)         ExStart
                    <------------------------------
         Exchange     Full  DD (Seq=y,M,Slave)
                    ------------------------------>
                      Full  DD (Seq=y+1,M,Master)         Exchange
                    <------------------------------
                      Full  DD (Seq=y+1,Slave)
                    ------------------------------>
                      Full  DD (Seq=y+2, Master)
                    <------------------------------
          Full        Empty DD (Seq=y+2, Slave)
                    ------------------------------>
                                                          Full



Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF            October 2006


   If the optimization is used, when RT2 receives the first full DD
   packet from RT1, it removes from its summary list all LSAs that are
   listed in the DD packet, and sends a DD packet that lists the
   remaining LSAs (since all LSA headers fit into two DD packets).  When
   RT1 receives this DD packet, it removes these remaining LSAs from its
   summary list (causing it to be empty) and sends an empty DD packet to
   RT2.

   With the optimization, each router sends only one full DD packet
   instead of two, as shown below.

         RT1 (slave)                                      RT2 (master)

         ExStart      Empty DD (Seq=x,I,M,Master)
                    ------------------------------>
                      Empty DD (Seq=y,I,M,Master)         ExStart
                    <------------------------------
         Exchange     Full  DD (Seq=y,M,Slave)
                    ------------------------------>
                      Full  DD (Seq=y+1,Master)           Exchange
                    <------------------------------
          Full        Empty DD (Seq=y+1, Slave)
                    ------------------------------>
                                                          Full

4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not raise any new security concerns.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document specifies a simple backward compatible optimization for
   OSPFv2 and OSPFv3, which does not require any new number assignment.

6.  Draft Modifications

   The main changes from version 01 to version 02 are as follows:

   o  Options B and C have been removed.  Option A is no longer
      optional, but is part of the specification in Section 2.

   o  The specification in Section 2 clarifies that the new step
      (updating the Database summary list) may be performed either
      before or after the router looks up the listed LSA in its database
      and possibly adds the LSA to the Link state request list.

   The main changes from version 00 to version 01 are as follows:




Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF            October 2006


   o  Two options (B and C) have been added, which differ in whether the
      LSAs must be listed in lexicographical order and whether a router
      must fully process a received DD packet before sending its next DD
      packet.  (The previous version used option A.)

   o  An example is presented to illustrate the optimization.

   o  The router compares the received LSA to the database copy (instead
      of the copy on the Database summary list) in deciding whether to
      remove the LSA from the Database summary list.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2328] J. Moy. "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2740] R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, and J. Moy. "OSPF for IPv6", RFC
        2740, December 1999.

Author's Address

   Richard G. Ogier
   Email: rich.ogier@earthlink.net





























Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF            October 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.












Ogier                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 6]
