



IETF                                                         K. Moriarty
Internet-Draft                                         Dell Technologies
Intended status: Standards Track                          August 5, 2020
Expires: February 6, 2021


           ACME End User Client and Code Signing Certificates
                     draft-moriarty-acme-client-05

Abstract

   Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) core protocol
   addresses the use case of web server certificates for TLS.  This
   document extends the ACME protocol to support end user client, device
   client, and code signing certificates.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 6, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Identity Proofing for Client Certificates . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  End User Client Certificates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  CodeSigning Certificates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Pre-authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Challenge Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  One Time Password (OTP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       6.1.1.  HMAC-Based One-Time Password (HOTP) . . . . . . . . .   9
       6.1.2.  Time-Based One-Time Password (TOTP) . . . . . . . . .   9
       6.1.3.  Generic One Time Password (OTP) . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.2.  Public Key Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.3.  WebAuthn or Public/Private Key Pairs  . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.3.  URL References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Appendix B.  Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   ACME [RFC8555] is a mechanism for automating certificate management
   on the Internet.  It enables administrative entities to prove
   effective control over resources like domain names, and automates the
   process of generating and issuing certificates.

   The core ACME protocol defined challenge types specific to web server
   certificates with the possibility to create extensions, or additional
   challenge types for other use cases and certificate types.  Client
   certificates, such as end user and code signing may also benefit from
   automated management to ease the deployment and maintenance of these
   certificate types, thus the definition of this extension defining
   challenge types specific to that usage.

2.  Identity Proofing for Client Certificates

   As with the TLS certificates defined in the core ACME document <xref
   target="RFC8555"/>, identity proofing for ACME issued end user
   client, device client, and code signing certificates is a separate
   process outside of the automation of ACME.  Identity proofing may be
   an out-of-band process, if needed, and for this draft is likely tied
   to the credentials used for the defined challenge types.



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   Identity proofing for these certificate types present some challenges
   for process automation.  NIST SP 800-63 r3 [NIST800-63r3] serves as
   guidance for identity proofing further detailed in NIST SP 800-63A
   [NIST800-63A] that may occur prior to the ability to automate
   certificate management via ACME or may obviate the need for it
   weighing end user privacy as a higher concern and allowing for
   credential issuance to be decoupled from identity proofing (IAL1).
   Using this guidance, a CA might select from the identity proofing
   levels to assert claims on the issued certificates as described in
   NIST SP 800-63 r3 [NIST800-63r3].

   The certificate issuing CA may make this choice by certificate type
   issued.  Once identity proofing has been performed, in cases where
   this is part of the process, and certificates have been issued, NIST
   SP 800-63 r3 [NIST800-63r3] includes recommendations for
   authentication or in the context of ACME, management of issuance for
   subsequent client, device, or code-signing certificates:

   If federations and assertions are used for authorizing certificate
   issuance, NIST SP 800-63 C [NIST800-63C] may be referenced for
   guidance on levels of assurance.

   Existing PKI certification authorities (CAs) tend to use a set of ad
   hoc protocols for certificate issuance and identity verification.
   For each certificate usage type, a basic process will be described to
   obtain an initial certificate and for the certificate renewal
   process.  If higher assurance levels are desired, the guidance from
   NIST SP 800-63 r3 [NIST800-63r3] may be useful and out-of-band
   identity proofing options are possible options for pre-authorization
   challenges or notifications.

3.  End User Client Certificates

   A client certificate used to authenticate an end user may be used for
   mutual authentication in TLS, EAP-TLS, or messaging.  The client
   certificate in this case may be stored in a browser, PKCS-#11
   container, KMIP (possible, but just code signing and device client
   certificates in practice), or another key container.  To obtain an
   end user client certificate, there are several possibilities to
   automate authentication of an identity credential intended to be tied
   to an end user.

   [We need to determine if it is important in ACME to define an
   automated method that tests the identity or the user or to just have
   consistent credentials for the authentication challenges.  The
   credentials may be distributed through an out-of-band method that
   involves identity proofing.]




Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   [Several authentication options with identity proofing are
   intentionally provided for review and discussion by the ACME working
   group.]

   A trusted federated service that ties the user to an email address
   with a reputation of the user attached to the email may be possible.
   One such example might be the use of a JWT signed OAuth token.

   Risk based authentication used for identity proofing with red herring
   questions is a third option that could utilize public information on
   individuals to authenticate.  This would be similar to the signup
   process used in some financial applications.

   Existing credentials - for instance, FIDO.  FIDO uses a public key
   pair and does not perform identity proofing.  FIDO authentication
   provides a different key pair to each service using FIDO for
   authentication, which are generated at the client and registered by
   the server.  This may require using the FIDO credentials from a
   specific service for authentication to gain ACME issued crededentials
   (not advised based on how FIDO credentials are supposed to be used).
   Are there instances where the same provider would issue both sets of
   credentials?  You wouldn't want to expose your FIDO credentials to a
   different party, that's why each service has their own.  Would you
   set up a mechanism to get FIDO credentials to then obtain a
   certificate?  (What use cases would this be necessary?  When do you
   need a certificate where you already have a specific public/private
   key pair?)  This can be defined as an auth type, but should it be?

   One-time password (OTP) authentication is a secure option.  In cases
   where a higher assurance level is needed, OTP may be a good choice
   and many options exist today for OTP that could use an app on a phone
   for instance tied to an existing (or newly established) password.
   The OTP may be tied to an out-of-band process and may be associated
   with a username/password and other accounts.

   One consideration is to understand if the use case could just use
   FIDO and not create anything new (ACME client certificates).  FIDO
   provides a mechanism to have unique public key pair based access for
   client authentication to web sites and they are working on non-web.
   Identity proofing is intentionally decoupled from authentication in
   this model as that is in line with NIST 800-63r3 recommendations for
   privacy protections of the user.  The credential in this case is
   authenticated and would be consistent for it's use, but the identity
   proofing for that credential is not performed.  Obviously, identity
   proofing is more important for some services, like financial
   applications where tying the user to the identity for access to
   financial information is important.  However, is automated identity
   proofing important for any user certificate or should it remain



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   decoupled where it could be automated by a service offering or is
   there a need for a standardized mechanism to support it for user
   certificates?

   Three methods for ACME client authentication, not identity proofing,
   are proposed in the Challenge Type Section.

4.  CodeSigning Certificates

   The process to retrieve a code signing certificate is similar to that
   of a web server certificate, with differences primarily in the CSR
   request and the resulting certificate properties.  [The storage and
   access of a code signing certificate must be protected and is
   typically done through hardware, a hardware security module (HSM),
   which likely has a PKCS#11 interface.  A code signing certificate may
   either be a standard one or an extended validation (EV) certificate.]

   For automation purposes, the process described in this document will
   follow the standard process and any out-of-band preprocessing can
   increase the level of the issued certificate if the CA offers such
   options and has additional identity proofing mechanisms (in band or
   out-of-band).

   Strict vetting processes are necessary for many code signing
   certificates to provide a high assurance on the signer.  In some
   cases, issuance of a standard CodeSigning certificate will be
   appropriate and no additional "challenges" [RFC8555 Section 8] will
   be necessary.  In this case, the standard option could be automated
   very similar to Web server certificates with the only changes being
   in the CSR properties.  However, this may not apply to all scenarios,
   such as those requiring EV certificates with the possibility for
   required out-of-band initial authentication and identity proofing.

   EV code signing certificates have a distinct set of requirements from
   EV web certificates.  In particular, they don't have associated
   domain names, nor is CAA checking done.  The code signing certificate
   links a public key to an organization, not a domain.  CAs may chose
   different methods to enable the use of ACME for EV code signing
   certificates.  The intent of this work is to provide additional
   authentication challenge types that may enable their automation
   process.

   Organization validation is required for standard code signing
   certificates from most issuers.  The CSR is used to identify the
   organization from the included domain name in the request.  The
   resulting certificate, however, instead contains the organization's
   name and for EV certificates, other identifying information for the
   organization.  For EV certificates, this could require that the



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   domain is registered with the Certificate Authority provider, listed
   in CAA [RFC6844], and administrators for the account are named with
   provided portal access for certificate issuance and management
   options.

   While ACME allows for the client to directly establish an account
   with a CA, an initial out-of-band process for this step may assist
   with the additional requirements for EV certificates and assurance
   levels typically required for code signing certificates.  For
   standard certificates, with a recommendation for additional vetting
   through extended challenge options to enable ACME to establish the
   account directly.  In cases where code signing certificates are used
   heavily for an organization, having the portal access replaced with
   ACME authenticated client access with extra challenges for
   authentication may be an option to automate the functionality.

   [For standard certificates, is it worth defining SMS and email for
   the challenge?  Obviously, EV needs more, so a few choices are
   suggested in this revision.]

   To improve the vetting process, ACME's optional use of CAA [RFC6844]
   with the Directory "meta" data "caaIdentities" ([RFC8555]
   Section 9.7.6) assists with the validation that a CA may have issue
   certificates for any particular domain and is RECOMMENDED for use
   with code signing certificates for this additional level of
   validation checking on issued certificates.

   As noted in RFC8555, "the external account binding feature (see
   Section 7.3.4) can allow an ACME account to use authorizations that
   have been granted to an external, non-ACME account.  This allows ACME
   to address issuance scenarios that cannot yet be fully automated,
   such as the issuance of "Extended Validation" certificates."

   The ACME challenge object, [RFC8555] Section 7.1.5 is RECOMMENDED for
   use for Pre-authorization ([RFC8555] Section 7.4.1).  Additional
   challenge types are added to provide higher levels of security for
   this issuance verification step.  The use of OTP, FIDO credentials
   (public/private key pairs), or validation from a certificate issued
   at account setup time are defined in Section 8.  Pre-Authoriziation.

   Questions for reviewers:

   [Is there interest to set a specific or default challenge object for
   CodeSigning Certificates?  Or should this be left to individual CAs
   to decide and differentiate?  The current challenge types defined in
   RFC8555 include HTTPS (provisioning HTTP resources) and DNS
   (provisioning a TXT resource record).  Use of DNS may be possible,
   but the HTTP resource doesn't necessarily make sense.  Since the



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   process to retrieve an EV CodeSigning certificate usually requires
   proof of the organization and validation from one of 2 named
   administrators, some other challenge type like public/private key
   pairs or OTP may be needed as defined challenge types.  An
   organization may want to tie this contact to a role rather than a
   person and that consideration should be made in the design as well as
   implementation by organizations.]

   ACME provides an option for notification of the operator via email or
   SMS upon issuance/renewal of a certificate after the domain has been
   validated as owned by the requestor.  This option is RECOMMENDED due
   to the security considerations of code signing certificates as a way
   to limit or reduce the possibility of a third party gaining access to
   a code signing certificate inappropriately.  Development of
   additional challenge types is included in this document to support
   this for pre-authorization, which would better match the security
   considerations for this certificate type.  Additional types may be
   added if agreed upon by the working group.

   Since DNS is used to identify the organization in the request, the
   identifier "type" ([RFC8555]Section 7.4) is set to dns, not requiring
   any additions to the ACME protocol for this type of certificate.  The
   distinction lies in the CSR, where the values are set to request a
   CodeSigning certificate for a client certificate.  [Question: Is it
   helpful to define an identifier for the administrator or for the
   developer to distinguish the certificate type in ACME and not just
   the CSR?]

   KeyUsage (DigitalSignature) and ExtendedKeyUsage (CodeSigning) in the
   CSR MUST be set to the correct values for the CA to see the request
   is for a Code Signing certificate.  The Enhanced Key Usage SHOULD be
   set to show this is a client certificate., using OID
   "1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.2".  The CN MUST be set to the expected registered
   domain with the CA account.

   An advantage of ACME is the ability to automate rollover to allow for
   easy management of short expiry times on certificates.  The lifetime
   of CodeSigning certificates is typically a year or two, but
   automation could allow for shorter expiry times becoming feasible.
   However, lifetimes are less of an issue for code signing certificates
   than other certificate types. however there is a legitmate case for
   "one signature per certificate."  Automation might be helpful in this
   case if patches or software updates were frequent or to minimize the
   knowledge needed for the organization using this method.

   Automation of storage to an HSM, which typically requires
   authentication is intentionally left out-of-scope.




Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


5.  Pre-authorization

   Additional challenge types are defined here for the verification of
   administrators at an organization requesting CodeSigning
   certificates.  SMS and email are listed as possible in RFC8555 and
   may be used singularly or in combination as the ACME protocol allows
   for multiple pre-authorization challenges to be issued.  Additional
   pre-authorization types are defined that provide a higher level of
   assurance to authorize a request.

6.  Challenge Types

   The challenge types defined in the following subsections are to
   authenticate individuals or holders of specific pre-issued
   credentials (users acting in roles for an organization).  The
   challenge types can be used to obtain end user certificate types or
   as a pre-authorization challenges with certificate types such as the
   Code Signing Certificate.  Please note that the pre-authorization
   challenge is also coupled with the account certificate in ACME for
   verification.  The process for obtaining EV Code Signing Certificates
   typically requires authorization from one or more individuals in a
   role for the organization.  The use of pre-issued secure credentials,
   at an assurance level appropriate for the certificate type being
   issued, provides a way to automate the issuance and renewal process.

6.1.  One Time Password (OTP)

   There are numerous one time password technologies with slight
   variations between implementations.  The response to the challenge is
   entered in the provided URL, offering flexibility to those using this
   challenge type to acomodate the specific requirements of their
   solution.  Looking at 2 OTP solutions, the challenge response is
   provided via a tool or app without any user interaction of
   information required from the server to generate the challenge.  The
   2 solutions that operate in this manner include SecureID and Duo
   Security.  If a challenge is required to generate the response to be
   provided in the URL, the token can supply the challenge.

      type (required, string): The string "otp-01".

      token (required, string): A random value that uniquely identifies
      the challenge.  OTP types and input vary between technologies.
      The token value will match the type expected for the pre-issued
      OTP credential.  The user will be able to supply a response in the
      provided URL from this challenge.  It MUST NOT contain any
      characters outside the base64url alphabet and MUST NOT include
      base64 padding characters ("=").




Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


      {
        "type": "otp-01",
        "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
        "status": "pending",
        "token": "challenge"
      }

6.1.1.  HMAC-Based One-Time Password (HOTP)

   HOTP([RFC4226]) describes an algorithm for the generation of time-
   based password values.

      type (required, string): The string "hotp-01".

      token (required, string): The HOTP value.  This SHOULD be the 6
      digit representation.

       {
         "type": "hotp-01",
         "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
         "status": "pending",
         "token": "123456"
       }

6.1.2.  Time-Based One-Time Password (TOTP)

   TOTP([RFC6238]) describes an algorithm for the generation of time-
   based password values, an extension from HOTP.

      type (required, string): The string "totp-01".

      token (required, string): The TOTP value.  This SHOULD be the 6
      digit representation.

       {
         "type": "totp-01",
         "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
         "status": "pending",
         "token": "123456"
       }

6.1.3.  Generic One Time Password (OTP)

   There are numerous other one time password technologies with slight
   variations between implementations.  The response to the challenge is
   entered in the provided URL, offering flexibility to those using this
   challenge type to acomodate the specific requirements of their
   solution.  Looking at 2 OTP solutions, the challenge response is



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


   provided via a tool or app without any user interaction of
   information required from the server to generate the challenge.  The
   2 solutions that operate in this manner include SecureID and Duo
   Security.  If a challenge is required to generate the response to be
   provided in the URL, the token can supply the challenge.

      type (required, string): The string "otp-01".

      token (required, string): A random value that uniquely identifies
      the challenge.  OTP types and input vary between technologies.
      The token value will match the type expected for the pre-issued
      OTP credential.  The user will be able to supply a response in the
      provided URL from this challenge.  It MUST NOT contain any
      characters outside the base64url alphabet and MUST NOT include
      base64 padding characters ("=").

       {
         "type": "otp-01",
         "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
         "status": "pending",
         "token": "challenge"
       }

6.2.  Public Key Cryptography

   Certificates may be pre-issued and stored according to assurance
   level requirements for the purpose of identifying a user's identity.
   If a higher assurance level is needed for a user serving in a
   specific role or for that individual, it is possible for identity
   proofing to occur in person using identifiers acceptable for the
   specified process and the private key stored appropriately for the
   required assurance level.  PKCS#11 software or hardware tokens are
   both possible options.  This model assumes that there may be multiple
   authorized users with different certificates that can be used for the
   authorization or pre-authentication challenge.  As such, the user
   first provides the digital signature, so the account management can
   determine if one of the acceptable certificates was used to digitally
   sign the token.

      type (required, string): The string "cert-01".

      token (required, string): A random value that uniquely identifies
      the challenge.  The token for a certificate authentication
      challenge includes a value for the recipeint to digitally sign
      using their private key and post to the provided URL.  The ACME
      server then uses the digitally signed content to verify that the
      challenge was signed using authorized credentials (certificate
      issued and authorized for this challenge type).  It MUST NOT



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


      contain any characters outside the base64url alphabet and MUST NOT
      include base64 padding characters ("=").

      {
        "type": "cert-01",
        "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
        "status": "pending",
        "token": "Some challenge to digitally sign"
      }

6.3.  WebAuthn or Public/Private Key Pairs

   W3C's WebAuthn uses raw public/private key pairs that are issued
   specific to a service.  If WebAuthn or public/private key pairs
   (PPKP) are selected as the challenge type, the account and credential
   issuance will have to occur prior to use of this challenge type.  The
   WebAuthn or public/private key pair credentials would be specific to
   the certificate management account and would be created by the
   client, then registered with the service as occurs with normal
   WebAuthn regisration of credentials.  As with normal WebAuthn and
   public/private key pairs, the token or challenge is digitally signed
   to prove possession of the private key.

      type (required, string): The string "ppkp-01".

      token (required, string): A random value that uniquely identifies
      the challenge.  This challenge will operate much in the same way
      as the certificate challenge as the operations are largely the
      same.  The user will be able to supply a response in the provided
      URL from this challenge.  It MUST NOT contain any characters
      outside the base64url alphabet and MUST NOT include base64 padding
      characters ("=").

      {
        "type": "ppkp-01",
        "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/WrV_H87EyD3",
        "status": "pending",
        "token": "Some challenge to sign"
      }

7.  Security Considerations

   This will likely be full of considerations and is TBD for this
   revision until challenge types are settled.







Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


8.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA, yet.

9.  Contributors

   Thank you to reviewers and contributors who helped to improve this
   document.  Thank you to Thomas Peterson who added the one-time
   password types, HOTP and TOTP.  Thank you to Tim Hollebeek for your
   early review and added text specific to EV certificate issuance and
   one time use code signing certificates.  Thank you to Andrei Popov
   and Deb Cooley for your reviews and suggestions made in -04.  Thank
   you to those who reviewed the CAA text removed in version -05
   including: Carl Mehner, Roland Shoemaker, Ben Schwartz, and Ryan
   Sleevi.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4226]  M'Raihi, D., Bellare, M., Hoornaert, F., Naccache, D., and
              O. Ranen, "HOTP: An HMAC-Based One-Time Password
              Algorithm", RFC 4226, DOI 10.17487/RFC4226, December 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4226>.

   [RFC6238]  M'Raihi, D., Machani, S., Pei, M., and J. Rydell, "TOTP:
              Time-Based One-Time Password Algorithm", RFC 6238,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6238, May 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6238>.

   [RFC7030]  Pritikin, M., Ed., Yee, P., Ed., and D. Harkins, Ed.,
              "Enrollment over Secure Transport", RFC 7030,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7030, October 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7030>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8555]  Barnes, R., Hoffman-Andrews, J., McCarney, D., and J.
              Kasten, "Automatic Certificate Management Environment
              (ACME)", RFC 8555, DOI 10.17487/RFC8555, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8555>.



Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-acme-ip]
              Shoemaker, R., "ACME IP Identifier Validation Extension",
              draft-ietf-acme-ip-08 (work in progress), October 2019.

10.3.  URL References

   [NIST800-63A]
              US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
              "https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
              NIST.SP.800-63a.pdf".

   [NIST800-63B]
              US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
              "https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
              NIST.SP.800-63b.pdf".

   [NIST800-63C]
              US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
              "https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
              NIST.SP.800-63c.pdf".

   [NIST800-63r3]
              US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
              "https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
              NIST.SP.800-63-3.pdf".
























Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        draft-moriarty-acme-client-04          August 2020


Appendix A.  Change Log

   Note to RFC Editor: if this document does not obsolete an existing
   RFC, please remove this appendix before publication as an RFC.

   02 draft added subsections contributed from Thomas Peterson on HOTP
   and TOTP.

Appendix B.  Open Issues

   Note to RFC Editor: please remove this appendix before publication as
   an RFC.

Author's Address

   Kathleen M. Moriarty
   Dell Technologies
   176 South Street
   Hopkinton
   US

   EMail: Kathleen.Moriarty@dell.com





























Moriarty                Expires February 6, 2021               [Page 14]
