



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Henry
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                                    Y. Lee
Expires: 12 October 2021                                         Comcast
                                                           10 April 2021


             Randomized and Changing MAC Address Framework
                  draft-henry-madinas-framework-01

Abstract

   To limit the association between a device traffic and its user,
   client vendors have started implementing MAC address rotation.  When
   such rotation happens, some in-network states may break, which may
   affect network efficiency and the user experience.  At the same time,
   devices may continue sending other stable identifiers, defeating the
   MAC rotation purposes.  This document lists various network
   environements and a set of network services that may be affected by
   such rotation.  This docuemnt then examines settings where the user
   experience may be affected by in-network state disruption, and
   settings where other machine identifiers may expose the user privacy.
   Last, this document examines solutions to maintain user privacy while
   preserving user quality of experience and network operation
   efficiency.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 October 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  MAC Adress as an Identity: User vs. Device  . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  The Actors: Network Functional Entities and Human Entities  .   6
     3.1.  Network Functional Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Human-related Entities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  The Trust and the Environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  The Purpose of Device Identification and Associated
           Problems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.5.  Scenario Mapping Table  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.6.  Problem Statment Formulation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Appendix A.  Existing Solutions Directions  . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   It has become easier for attackers to track the activity of a
   personal device, particularly when traffic is sent over a wireless
   link.  Once the association between a device and its user is made,
   identifying the device and its activity is sufficient to deduce
   information about what the user is doing, without the user consent.

   To reduce the risks of correlation between a device activity and its
   owner, multiple vendors have started to implement Randomized and
   Changing MAC addresses (RCM).  With this scheme, an end-device
   implements a different RCM over time when exchanging traffic over a
   wireless network.  By randomizing the MAC address, the association
   between a given traffic flow and a single device is made more
   difficult, assuming no other visible unique identifiers are in use.

   However, such address change may affect the user experience and the
   efficiency of legitimate network operations.  For a long time, the
   unicity of the association between a device and a MAC address was



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   assumed, despite the emergence of tools to flush out the MAC address
   to bypass some network policies.  When this association is broken,
   elements of network communication may also break.  For example,
   sessions established between the end-device and network services may
   be lost and packets in translation may suddenly be without clear
   source or destination.  As multiple clients implements fast-paced RCM
   rotations, network services may be over-solicited by a small number
   of stations that appear as many clients.

   At the same time, some network services rely on the client station
   providing an identifier, which can be the MAC address or another
   value.  If the client implements MAC rotation but continues sending
   the same static identifier, then the association between a stable
   identifier identifier and the station continues despite the RCM
   scheme.  There may be environements where such continued association
   is desirable, but others where the user privacy has more value than
   any continuity of network service state.

   There is a need to enumerate services that may be affected by RCM,
   and evaluate possible solutions to maintain both the quality of user
   experience and network efficiency while RCM happens and user privacy
   is reinforced.  This document presents such assessment and
   recommendations.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 RFC 2119 [RFC2119] RFC 8174 [RFC8174] when, and only when, they
   appear in all capitals, as shown here.

2.  MAC Adress as an Identity: User vs. Device

   Any device member of an IEEE 802 network [IEEE.802-1D.1993] includes
   several operating layers.  Among them, the Media Access Control (MAC)
   layer defines rules to control how the device accesses the shared
   medium.  In a network where a machine can communicate with one or
   more other machines, one such rule is that each machine needs to be
   identified, either as the target destination of a message, or as the
   source of a message (and thus the target destination of the answer).
   Initially intended as a 48-bit (6 octets) value, later versions of
   the Standard [IEEE.802.15.4P_2014] allowed this address to take an
   extended format of 64 bits (8 octets), thus enabling a larger number
   of MAC addresses to coexist as the 802 technologies became widely
   adopted.





Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   Regardless of the address length, different networks have different
   needs, and several bits of the first octet are reserved for specific
   purposes.  In particular, the first bit is used to identify the
   destination address either as an individual (bit set to 0) or a group
   address (bit set to 1).  The second bit, called the Universally or
   Locally Administered (U/L) Address Bit, indicates whether the address
   has been assigned by a local or universal administrator.  Universally
   administered addresses have this bit set to 0.  If this bit is set to
   1, the entire address (i.e., 48 bits) has been locally administered
   [IEEE.802-1Y.1990] Section 5.2.1.

   The intent of this provision is important for the present document.
   The 802 Standard recognized that some devices may never travel and
   thus, always attaching to the same network, would not need a globally
   unique MAC address.  To accommodate for this relaxed requirement, the
   second bit of the MAC address first octet the MAC address format was
   designed to express whether the address was intended to be globally
   unique, or if significance was only local.  The address allocation
   method was not defined in the Standard in this later case, but the
   mechanism was defined in the same clause that defined that an address
   should be unique so as to avoid collision.

   It is also important to note that the purpose of the Universal
   version of the address was to avoid collisions and confusion, as any
   machine could connect to any network, and each machine needs to
   determine if it is the intended destination of a message or its
   response.  The same clause 5.2.1 reminds network designers and
   operators that all potential members of a network need to have a
   unique identifier (if they are going to coexist in the network).  The
   advantage of a universal address is that a node with such an address
   can be attached to any Local Area Network (LAN) in the world with an
   assurance that its address is unique.

   With the rapid development of wireless technologies and mobile
   devices, this scenario became very common.  With a vast majority of
   802 networks implementing radio technologies at the access, the MAC
   address of a wireless device can appear anywhere on the planet and
   collisions should still be avoided.  However, the same evolution
   brought the distinction between two types of devices that the 802
   Standard generally referred to as 'nodes in a network'.  Their
   definition is found in the 802E Recommended Practice (clause 6.2).
   One type is a shared service device, which functions are used by a
   number of people large enough that the device itself, its functions
   or its traffic cannot be associated with a single or small group of
   people.  Examples of such devices include switches in a dense
   network, 802.11 (WLAN) access points in a crowded airport, task-
   specific (e.g. barcode scanners) devices, etc.  Another type is a
   personal device, which is a machine, a node, primarily used by a



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   single person or small group of people, and so that any
   identification of the device or its traffic can also be associated to
   the identification of the primary user or their traffic.  Quite
   naturally, the unique identification of the device is trivial if the
   device expresses a universally unique MAC address.  Then, the
   detection of elements directly or indirectly identifying the user of
   the device (Personally Identifiable Information, or PII) is
   sufficient to tie the universal MAC address to a user.  Then, any
   detection of traffic that can be associated to the device becomes
   also associated with the known user of that device (Personally
   Correlated Information, or PCI).

   This possible identification or association presents a serious
   privacy issue, especially with wireless technologies.  For most of
   them, and in particular for 802.11, the source and destination MAC
   addresses are not encrypted even in networks that implement
   encryption (so that each machine can easily detect if it is the
   intended target of the message before attempting to decrypt its
   content, and also identify the transmitter, so as to use the right
   key when multiple unicast keys are in effect).

   This unique identification of the user associated to a node was
   clearly not the intent of the 802 MAC address.  A logical solution to
   remove this association is to use a locally administered address
   instead, and change the address in a fashion that prevents a temporal
   association between one MAC address and some PII to be maintained
   fruitfully.  However, other network devices on the same LAN
   implementing a MAC layer also expect the unicity of the MAC address.
   When a device changes its MAC address, other devices on the same LAN
   may fail to recognize that the same machine is attempting to
   communicate with them.  Additionally, multiple layers implemented at
   upper OSI layers have been designed with the assumption that each
   node on the LAN, using these services, would have a unique MAC
   address.  This assumption sometimes adds to the PII confusion, for
   example in the case of Authentication, Association and Accounting
   (AAA) services authenticating the user of a machine and associating
   the authenticated user to the device MAC address.  Other services
   solely focus on the machine (e.g.  DHCP), but still expect each
   device to use a single MAC address.  Changing the MAC address may
   disrupt these services.











Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


3.  The Actors: Network Functional Entities and Human Entities

   The risk of service disruption is thus weighted against the privacy
   benefits.  However, the plurality of actors involved in the exchanges
   tends to blurry the boundaries of what privacy should be protected
   against.  It might therefore be useful to list the actors to the
   network exchanges.  Some actors are functional entities, some others
   are humans (or related) entities.

3.1.  Network Functional Entities

   Wireless access network infrastructure devices (e.g.  WLAN access
   points or controllers): these devices participate in 802 LAN
   operations.  As such, they need to uniquely identify machines as a
   source or destination so as to successfully continue exchanging
   frames.  Part of the identification includes recording, and adapting
   to, devices communication capabilities (e.g. support for specific
   protocols).  As a device changes its network attachment (roams) from
   one access point to another, the access points can exchange
   contextual information (e.g. device MAC, keying material) allowing
   the device session to continue seamlessly.  These access points can
   also inform devices further in the wired network about the roam, to
   ensure that OSI model Layer 2 frames are redirected to the new device
   access point.

   Other network devices operating at the MAC layer: many wireless
   network access devices (e.g., 802.11 access points) are conceived as
   Layer 2 devices, and as such they bridge a frame from one medium
   (e.g., 802.11 or Wi-Fi) to another (e.g., 802.3 or Ethernet).  This
   means that a wireless device MAC address often exists on the wire
   beyond the wireless access device.  Devices connected to this wire
   also implement 802 technologies, and as such operate on the
   expectation that each device is associated to a unique MAC address
   for the duration of continuous exchanges.  For example, switches and
   bridges associate MAC addresses to individual ports (so as to know
   which port to send a frame intended for a particular MAC address).
   Similarly, authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA)
   services can validate the identity of a device and use the device MAC
   address as a first pointer to the device identity (before operating
   further verification).  Similarly, some networking devices offer
   Layer-2 filtering policies that may rely on the connected MAC
   addresses. 802.1X-enabled devices may also selectively block the data
   portion of a port until a connecting device is authenticated.  These
   services then use the MAC address as a first pointer to the device
   identity to allow or block data traffic.  This list is not
   exhaustive.  Multiple services are defined for 802.3 networks, and
   multiple services defined by the IEEE 802.1 working group are also
   applicable to 802.3 networks.  Wireless access points may also



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   connect to other mediums than 802.3, which also implements mechanism
   under the umbrella of the general 802 Standard, and therefore expect
   the unique association of a MAC address to a device.

   Network devices operating at upper layers: some network devices
   provide functions and services above the MAC layer.  Some of them
   also operate a MAC layer function: for example, routers provide IP
   forwarding services, but rely on the device MAC address to create the
   appropriate frame structure.  Other devices and services operate at
   upper layers, but also rely upon the 802 principle of unique MAC-to-
   device mapping.  For example, DHCPv4 services commonly provide a
   single IP address per MAC address (they do not assign more than one
   IPv4 address per MAC address, and assign a new IPv4 address to each
   new requesting MAC address).  ARP and reverse-ARP services commonly
   expect that, once an IP-to-MAC mapping has been established, this
   mapping is valid and unlikely to change for the cache lifetime.
   DHCPv6 services commonly do not assign the same IPv6 address to two
   different requesting MAC addresses.  Hybrid services, such as EoIP,
   also assume stability of the device-to-MAC-and-IP mapping for the
   duration of a given session.

3.2.  Human-related Entities

   Over the air (OTA) observers: as the transmitting or receiving MAC
   address is usually not encrypted in wireless 802-technologies
   exchanges, and as any protocol-compatible device in range of the
   signal can read the frame header, OTA observers are able to read
   individual transmissions MAC addresses.  Some wireless technologies
   also support techniques to establish distances or positions, allowing
   the observer, in some cases, to uniquely associate the MAC address to
   a physical device and it associated location.  It can happen that an
   OTA observer has a legitimate reason to monitor a particular device,
   for example for IT support operations.  However, it is difficult to
   control if another actor also monitors the same station with the goal
   of obtaining PII or PCI.

   Wireless access network operators: some wireless access networks are
   only offered to users or devices matching specific requirements, such
   as device type (e.g., IoT-only networks, factory operational
   networks).  Therefore, operators can attempt to identify the devices
   (or the users) connecting to the networks under their care.  They can
   use the MAC address to represent an identified device.

   Network access providers: wireless access networks are often
   considered beyond the first 2 layers of the OSI model.  For example,
   several regulatory or legislative bodies can group all OSI layers
   into their functional effect of allowing network communication
   between machines.  In this context, entities operating access



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   networks can see their liability associated to the activity of
   devices communicating through the networks that these entities
   operate.  In other contexts, operators assign network resources based
   on contractual conditions (e.g., fee, bandwidth fair share).  In
   these scenarios, these operators may attempt to identify the devices
   and the users of their networks.  They can use the MAC address to
   represent an identified device.

   Over the wire internal (OTWi) observers: because the device wireless
   MAC address continues to be present over the wire if the
   infrastructure connection device (e.g. access point) functions as a
   Layer 2 bridge, observers may be positioned over the wire and read
   transmission MAC addresses.  Such capability supposes that the
   observer has access to the wired segment of the broadcast domain
   where the frames are exchanged.  In most networks, such capability
   requires physical access to an infrastructure wired device in the
   broadcast domain (e.g. switch closet), and is therefore not
   accessible to all.

   Over the wired external (OTWe) observers: beyond the broadcast
   domain, frames headers are removed by a routing device, and a new
   Layer 2 header is added before the frame is transmitted to the next
   segment.  The personal device MAC address is not visible anymore,
   unless a mechanism copies the MAC address into a field that can be
   read while the packet travels onto the next segment (e.g. pre-
   [RFC4941] and pre- [RFC7217] IPv6 addresses built from the MAC
   address).  Therefore, unless this last condition exists, OTWe
   observers are not able to see the device MAC address.

3.3.  The Trust and the Environments

   The surface of PII exposures that can drive MAC address randomization
   depends on the environment where the device operates.  Therefore, a
   device can express an identity (such as a MAC address) that can be
   stable over time if trust is established, or that can be temporal if
   an identity is required for a service in an environment where trust
   has not been established.  Trust is not a binary currency.  Thus it
   is useful to distinguish what trust a personal device may establish
   with the different entities at play in a L2 domain:

   1.  Full trust: there are environments where a personal device
       establishes a trust relationship and can share a stable device
       identity with the access network devices (e.g., access point and
       WLC), the services beyond the access point in the L2 broadcast
       domain (e.g.  DHCP, AAA).  The personal device (or its user) has
       confidence that its identity is not shared beyond the L2
       broadcast domain boundary.




Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   2.  Selective trust: in other environments, the device may not be
       willing to share a stable identity with some elements of the
       Layer 2 broadcast domain, but may be willing to share a stable
       identity with other elements.  For example, a device may want to
       change the MAC address it uses to communicate with the access
       point while maintaining the same IP address across the MAC
       address rotation (thus expressing a stable identity to the DHCP
       server).  That stable identity may or may not be the same for
       different services.

   3.  Zero trust: in other environments, the device may not be willing
       to share any stable identity with any entity reachable through
       the Layer 2 broadcast domain, and may express a temporal identity
       to each of them.  That temporal identity may or not be the same
       for different services.

   This trust relationship naturally depends on the relationship between
   the user of the personal device and the operator of the service.
   Thus, it is useful to observe the typical trust structure of common
   environments:

   A.  Residential settings under the control of the user: this is
       typical of a home network with Wi-Fi in the LAN and Internet
       connection.  In this environment, the MAC address activity may be
       detectable beyond the home walls.  However, if traffic is
       encrypted (e.g.  WPA3), some protection for OTA eavesdropping can
       be assumed.  The wire segment within the broadcast domain is
       under the control of the user, and is therefore usually not at
       risk of hosting an eavesdropper.  Full trust is typically
       established at this level.  The device trusts the access point
       and all L2 domain entities beyond the access point.  Traffic over
       the Internet does not expose the MAC address if it is not copied
       to another field before routing happens.

   B.  Managed residential settings: examples of this type of
       environment include shared living facilities and other collective
       environments where an operator manages the network for the
       residents.  The OTA exposure is similar to that of a home.  A
       number of devices larger than in a standard home may be present,
       and the operator may be requested to provide IT support to the
       residents.  Therefore, the operator may need to identify a device
       activity in real time, but may also need to analyze logs so as to
       understand a past reported issue.  For both activities, a device
       identification associated to the session is needed.  Full trust
       is often established in this environment, at the scale of a
       series of a few sessions.





Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   C.  Public guest networks: public hotspots, such as in shopping
       malls, hotels, stores, trains stations and airports are typical
       of this environment.  The guest network operator may be legally
       mandated to identify devices or users or may have the option to
       leave all devices and users untracked.  In this environment,
       trust is commonly not established with any element of the L2
       broadcast domain (Zero trust model by default).

   D.  Enterprises (with BYOD): users may be provided corporate devices
       or may bring their own devices.  The devices are not directly
       under the control of a corporate IT team.  Trust may be
       established as the device joins the network.  Some enterprise
       models will mandate full trust, others, considering the BYOD
       nature of the device, will allow selective trust.

   E.  Managed enterprises: in this environment, users are typically
       provided with corporate devices, and all connected devices are
       managed, for example through a Mobile Device Management (MDM)
       profile installed on the device.  Full trust is created as the
       MDM profile is installed.

3.4.  The Purpose of Device Identification and Associated Problems

   Many network functional devices offering a service to a personal
   device use the device MAC address to maintain service continuity.


























Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   Wireless access points and controllers use the MAC address to
   validate the device connection context, including protocol
   capabilities, confirmation that authentication was completed, QoS or
   security profiles, encryption key material.  Some advanced access
   points and controllers also include upper layer functions which
   purpose is covered below.  A device changing its MAC address, without
   another recorded device identity, would cause the access point and
   the controller to lose these parameters.  As such, the Layer 2
   infrastructure does not know that the device (with its new MAC
   address) is authorized to communicate through the network.  The
   encryption keying material is not identified anymore (causing the
   access point to fail decrypting the device traffic, and fail
   selecting the right key to send encrypted traffic to the device).  In
   short, the entire context needs to be rebuilt, and a new session
   restarted.  The time consumed by this procedure breaks any flow that
   needs continuity or short delay between packets on the device (e.g.
   real-time audio, video, AR/VR etc.)  The 802.11i Standard recognizes
   that a device may leave the network and come back after a short time
   window.  As such, the standard suggests that the infrastructure
   should keep the context for a device up to one hour after the device
   was last seen.  MAC address rotation in this context can cause
   resource exhaustion on the wireless infrastructure and the flush of
   contexts, including for devices that are simply in temporal sleep
   mode.

   Other devices in the Layer 2 broadcast domain also use the MAC
   address to know whether and where to forward frames.  MAC rotation
   can cause these devices to exhaust their resources, holding in memory
   traffic for a device which port location can no longer be found.  As
   these infrastructure devices also implement a cache (to remember the
   port position of each known device), too frequent MAC rotation can
   cause resources exhaustion and the flush of older MAC addresses,
   including for devices that did not rotate their MAC.  For the RCM
   device, these effects translate into session discontinuity and return
   traffic losses.

   In wireless contexts, 802.1X authenticators rely on the device and
   user identity validation provided by a AAA server to open their port
   to data transmission.  The MAC address is used to verify that the
   device is in the authorized list, and the associated key used to
   decrypt the device traffic.  A change in MAC address causes the port
   to be closed to the device data traffic until the AAA server confirms
   the validity of the new MAC address.  Therefore, MAC rotation can
   interrupt the device traffic, and cause a strain on the AAA server.

   DHCP servers, without a unique identification of the device, lose
   track of which IP address is validly assigned.  Unless the RCM device
   releases the IP address before the rotation occurs, DHCP servers are



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   at risk of scope exhaustion, causing new devices (and RCM devices) to
   fail to obtain a new IP address.  Even if the RCM device releases the
   IP address before the rotation occurs, the DHCP server typically
   holds the released IP address for a certain duration, in case the
   leaving MAC would return.  As the DHCP server cannot know if the
   release is due to a temporal disconnection or a MAC rotation, the
   risk of scope address exhaustion exists even in cases where the IP
   address is released.

   Routers keep track of which MAC address is on which interface.  MAC
   rotation can cause MAC address cache exhaustion, but also the need
   for frequent ARP and inverse ARP exchanges.

   In residential settings (environments type A), policies can be in
   place to control the traffic of some devices (e.g. parental control,
   block-list devices).  These policies are often based on the device
   MAC address.  Rotation of the MAC address removes the possibility for
   such control.

   In residential settings (environments type A) and in enterprises
   (environments types D and E), device recognition and ranging may be
   used for IoT-related functionalities (door unlock, preferred light
   and temperature configuration, etc.)  These functions often rely on
   the detection of the device wireless MAC address.  MAC address
   rotation breaks the services based on such model.

   In managed residential settings (environments types B) and in
   enterprises (environments types D and E), the network operator is
   often requested to provide IT support.  With MAC address rotation,
   real time support is only possible if the user is able to provide the
   current MAC address.  Service improvement support is not possible if
   the MAC address that the device had at the (past) time of the
   reported issue is not known at the time the issue is reported.

3.5.  Scenario Mapping Table

   Section 3.4 discusses different environments, different settings, and
   the expectations of users and network operators.  Table 1 summarizes
   the expected degree of trust, network adim responsbilitly, complexity
   of supported network services and network support expectation from
   the user










Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   +==================+========+=========+==========+=================+
   | Network Location | Trust  | Network | Network  | Network Support |
   |                  | Degree |  Admin  | Services |   Expectation   |
   +==================+========+=========+==========+=================+
   |       Home       |  High  |   User  |  Medium  |       Low       |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |  Campus (BYOD)   | Medium |    IT   | Complex  |      Medium     |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   | Enterprise (MDM) |  High  |    IT   | Complex  |       High      |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |   Hospitality    |  Low   |    IT   |  Simple  |      Medium     |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |   Public WiFi    |  Low   |   ISP   |  Simple  |       Low       |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+

                     Table 1: Scenario Mapping Table

   Not surprising, Table 1 shows that users have different experience
   and expectations for each environment.  For exaxmple: Home network is
   considered to be trusted and safe.  The home user expects simple
   procedures to setup and connect devices to the home networks.  Once
   onboard, devices in the home network should be able to communicate
   (e.g., play music from a mobile device to a wireless speaker over
   WiFi) without further action.  In other words, the device should be
   able to use the network continuously with minimal overhead.  Privacy
   within the Layer 2 domain in the home network is not a major concern.
   The Home network can also include many IoT devices, which need to be
   simple to onboard and manage.  The home user usually expects the
   network operator to protect the home network from external threats
   (attacks from the Internet).  The home user also usually expects
   simple policy features (e.g., Parental Control).  Sometimes, the home
   user may want to onboard certain devices temporarily (e.g., guest
   network).  The setup is similar to Hospitality network but not as
   heavily adminstrated as Hospitality network.  Most home users do not
   have deep networking skill to manage the network.

   On the other end of the spectrum, Public WiFi is often considered to
   be untrusted.  Privacy is the number one concern for the user.  Most
   users connect to Public WiFi only require simple Internet
   connectivity service, and expect only limited to no technical
   support.

   There are legitimate reasons for the network to identify devices in
   order to provide serivces.  Likewise, the user may want to
   authenticate the network before giving an identity.






Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


3.6.  Problem Statment Formulation

   The section describes the problem statement for Randomized MAC
   address Changes:

   PS1  The network must not make any assumption about client MAC
        address persistence.  MAC address change must happen while
        allowing for service continuity.  If a service is interrupted
        during the RCM process, there must be a formal mechanism for the
        client and the network to exchange about the interruption.

   PS2  During duration of the services, the device shoud not change the
        identity.  Any change of identity may result re-authentication
        and interrupt of the current network services.

   PS3  Survey the current standards that use MAC address as a device
        identifier in the protocol.  Make recommendation to the working
        groups to remove the dependency

   PS4  Work as liaison with external standard bodies such as IEEE, BBF
        and WBA to align with use cases and requirements.

   PS5  Define a secure mechanism to authenticate and exchange network
        identity to the device.

   PS6  Define a secure mechanism to inform the device about the type of
        network the device is connecting to (e.g. public Wi-Fi,
        enterprise, home), allowing the user to select the device
        identity (or identities) accordingly.

   PS7  Define a secure mechanism for the network to request device
        identity.  Upon successful authenticatoin, the network may
        provide the device a temporary network-based marker to use the
        network services.

   PS8  Define a secure mechanism for the device to notify the network
        prior to update the MAC address.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

5.  Security Considerations

   Privacy considerations are discussed throughout this document.

6.  Normative References




Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

7.  Informative References

   [IEEE.802-1D.1993]
              Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              "Information technology - Telecommunications and
              information exchange between systems - Local area networks
              - Media access control (MAC) bridges", IEEE Standard
              802.1D, July 1993.

   [IEEE.802-1Y.1990]
              Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, "Source
              Routing Tutorial for End System Operation", IEEE Standard
              802.1Y, September 1990.

   [IEEE.802.15.4P_2014]
              IEEE, "IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area
              networks - Part 15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area
              Networks (LR-WPANs) - Amendment 7: Physical Layer for Rail
              Communications and Control (RCC)", IEEE 802.15.4p-2014,
              DOI 10.1109/ieeestd.2014.6809836, 2 May 2014,
              <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/
              opac?punumber=6809834>.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, DOI 10.17487/RFC4941, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4941>.

   [RFC5176]  Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., and B.
              Aboba, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 5176,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5176, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5176>.

   [RFC7217]  Gont, F., "A Method for Generating Semantically Opaque
              Interface Identifiers with IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", RFC 7217,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7217, April 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7217>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.



Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


Appendix A.  Existing Solutions Directions

   Because the possible network disruptions related to frequent RCM have
   been envisioned in the past, several directions have been suggested
   to alleviate these disruptions.  None of them are formal enough to
   form a complete solution set.  However, it may be useful to list them
   to provide a general suggested-solutions context.

   In full trust environments (settings of type a, b, d and/or e), the
   device or its user may have confidence that over the air
   eavesdropping does not present a threat.  In that case, usage of a
   fixed MAC address per SSID is a possibility.  Of coruse, devices that
   intelligently control the power of their WLAN signals also lower the
   risk that neighboring devices (not part of the trusted network) track
   the device activity.

   In other cases in the same environments, over the air eavesdropping
   may be a concern.  In that case, the device may be able to express,
   in a protected frame, a stable identity to the wireless
   infrastructure.  The format of the container of this identity,
   encapsulated into a Layer 2 element, is protocol-specific and can be
   defined by the associated protocol standard designers.  In that case,
   the device expresses a randomized and changing MAC address (RCM) over
   the air, but a stable identity to the wireless infrastructure.

   In networks implementing 802.1X/EAP, a AAA server may be informed
   that a device presenting a new MAC address expresses the same device
   identity as the same device with a previous MAC address.  That AAA
   server may then inform the access network, for example with a RADIUS
   [RFC5176] CoA message, of the unique identity of the device across
   RCMs.

   In the cases where the unicity of the station identity is expressed
   through a protected mean to the trusted access infrastructure, the
   infrastructure could also express a single MAC address for the device
   toward the wired part of the network.  In such setting, the device
   first connects to the wireless infrastructure and expresses a stable
   identity.  The wireless infrastructure, acting as a proxy, generates
   a locally-administered MAC address for the device.  That MAC address
   is used to represent the device toward services in the other elements
   of the wired network.  Next, when the device rotates its over-the-air
   MAC address and informs the wireless infrastructure of its stable
   identity, the wireless infrastructure identifies that the new MAC
   address matches the same device as the previous MAC address, and
   continues using the previously generated locally-administered MAC
   address to represent the device to wired infrastructure services.





Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   In environments of type 2, the device may share different identities
   with different services.  For example, the device may express an
   over-the-air RCM, a stable encapsulated identity to the wireless
   infrastructure, a device identity to a AAA server, and a different
   client identity to a DHCP server.  In a multi-link scenario, it may
   also happen that the device expresses more than one identity to the
   DHCP server, with connections going through the same wireless
   infrastructure.  Because the device may express a stable identity to
   one or more network services, because this identity may be shareable
   with the wireless infrastructure, the wireless infrastructure may use
   a single MAC to represent the device, using one of the stable
   identities expressed by that device.  Because different identities
   can be expressed, and because the role of the wireless infrastructure
   is not to monitor closely all activities from the device, the
   wireless infrastructure could use, as the device stable identity, the
   stable identity expressed to the wireless infrastructure, if it is
   available.  If such identity is not available, the infrastructure
   could use the stable identity expressed to the AAA server, if it is
   available and shared back with the wireless infrastructure.  If such
   identity is not available, the wireless infrastructure could use a
   stable identity expressed to the DHCP server, if such identity is
   available and visible to the wireless infrastructure.  These
   possibilities recognize the fact that the wireless infrastructure has
   visibility into all traversing non-protected traffic.  As such, the
   wireless infrastructure may be able to read identifiers sent in
   unprotected DHCP requests.  Additionally, the wireless infrastructure
   would also see, for example, a device with a new MAC address
   expressing the same DHCP identity, or requesting the same IP address,
   as another device previously connected through the same wireless
   system.  Therefore, the device may not be able to obfuscate its DHCP
   identity from the wireless infrastructure if DHCP exchanges are not
   encrypted.  Additionally, and because the wireless infrastructure may
   not be able to distinguish a device rotating its MAC and attempting
   to obtain the same DHCP address as with its previous MAC address,
   from a malicious device attempting to steal the DHCP identity from
   another device, mechanisms on the infrastructure may prevent such
   requests for already assigned resources from being forwarded
   successfully.

   In all environments where a device uses a rotating and changing
   locally-administered MAC address, rotation from one address to the
   next could be preceded by a release of network resources, such as
   open connections closure and DHCP address releases.

Authors' Addresses






Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   April 2021


   Jerome Henry
   Cisco Systems
   United States of America

   Email: jerhenry@cisco.com


   Yiu L. Lee
   Comcast
   1800 Arch Street
   Philadelphia, PA 19103
   United States of America

   Email: yiu_lee@comcast.com





































Henry & Lee              Expires 12 October 2021               [Page 18]
