




          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


                             SMTP Service Extensions

                             Thu Sep 10 08:32:12 1992


                                 Marshall T. Rose
                           Dover Beach Consulting, Inc.
                              mrose@dbc.mtview.ca.us

                                Einar A. Stefferud
                       Network Management Associates, Inc.
                                   stef@nma.com

                                 David H. Crocker
                                The Branch Office
                           dcrocker@mordor.stanford.edu




          1.  Status of this Memo

          This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are
          working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
          (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that other
          groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
          Drafts.

          Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may
          be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
          time.  (The file 1id-abstracts.txt on nic.ddn.mil describes
          the current status of each Internet Draft.) It is not
          appropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
          cite them other than as a "work in progress".


          2.  Abstract

          This memo defines a framework for extending the SMTP service
          by defining a means whereby a server SMTP can inform a client
          SMTP as to the service extensions it supports.  Standard
          extensions to the SMTP service are registered with the IANA.








                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 1]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


          3.  Introduction

          The Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) [1] has provided a
          stable, effective basis for the relay function of message
          transfer agents.  Although a decade old, SMTP has proven
          remarkably resilient.

          From SMTP's perspective, it relays a mail object containing an
          envelope and a content.

          (1)  The SMTP envelope is straight-forward: it consists of an
               originator address (to which error reports should be
               directed); a delivery mode (e.g., deliver to recipient
               mailboxes); and, one or more recipient addresses.

          (2)  The SMTP content has two parts: the headers and the body.
               The former is a collection of field/value pairs
               structured according to RFC 822 [2], whilst the latter,
               if structured, is defined according to MIME [3].  The
               content is textual in nature, expressed using the US
               ASCII repertoire.

          Although SMTP is widely and robustly deployed, some parts of
          the Internet community might wish to extend the SMTP service.
          This memo defines a means whereby a server SMTP can inform a
          client SMTP as to the service extensions that it supports.

          It must be emphasized that any extension to the SMTP service
          should not be considered lightly.  SMTP's strength comes
          primarily from its simplicity.  Experience with many protocols
          has shown that:

               protocols with few options tend towards ubiquity, whilst
               protocols with many options tend towards obscurity.

          This means that each and every extension, regardless of its
          benefits, must be carefully scrutinized with respect to its
          implementation, deployment, and interoperability costs.  In
          many cases, the cost of extending the SMTP service will likely
          outweigh the benefit.










                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 2]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


          4.  The EHLO command

          A client SMTP should start an SMTP session by issuing the EHLO
          command instead of the HELO command.

          The syntax for this command, using the ABNF notation of [2],
          is:

               ehlo-cmd ::= "EHLO" SP domain CR LF

          If successful, the server SMTP responds with code 250.  On
          failure, the server SMTP responds with code 550.  On error,
          the server SMTP responds with one of codes 500, 501, 502, or
          421.

          This command is issued instead of the HELO command, and may be
          issued at any time in which a HELO command would be
          appropriate.  That is, if the EHLO command is issued, and a
          successful response is returned, then a subsequent HELO or
          EHLO command will result in the server SMTP replying with code
          501.

          A client SMTP must not cache any information returned if the
          EHLO command succeeds.  That is, a client SMTP must issue that
          EHLO command at the start of each SMTP session if information
          about extended facilities is needed.


          4.1.  Successful response

          If the server SMTP implements and is able to perform the EHLO
          command, it will return code 250.  This indicates that both
          the server and client SMTP are in the initial state, that is,
          there is no transaction in progress and all state tables and
          buffers are cleared.

          Normally, this response will be a multiline reply.  Each line
          of the response contains a keyword and, optionally, one or
          more parameters.  The syntax for a positive response, using
          the ABNF notation of [2], is:

               ehlo-ok-rsp  ::=      "250"  [ SP greeting ] CR LF
                              / (    "250-"      greeting   CR LF
                                  *( "250-"      ehlo-line  CR LF )
                                     "250"    SP ehlo-line  CR LF   )





                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 3]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


                            ; the usual HELO chit-chat
               greeting     ::= 1*<any character other than CR or LF>

               ehlo-line    ::= ehlo-keyword *( SP ehlo-param )

               ehlo-keyword ::= (ALPHA / DIGIT) *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-")

                            ; syntax and values depend on ehlo-keyword
               ehlo-param   ::= 1*<any CHAR other than CR, LF, or SP>

               ALPHA        ::= <any one of the 52 alphabetic characters
                                 (A through Z in upper case, and,
                                  a through z in lower case)>
               DIGIT        ::= <any one of the 10 numeric characters
                                 (0 through 9)>

               CR           ::= <the carriage-return character
                                 (ASCII decimal code 13)>
               LF           ::= <the line-feed character
                                 (ASCII decimal code 10)>
               SP           ::= <the space character
                                 (ASCII decimal code 32)>

          The IANA maintains a registry of standard SMTP service
          extensions.  Associated with each such extension is a
          corresponding EHLO keyword value.  Each service extension
          registered with the IANA is defined by a standards-track RFC,
          and such a definition includes:

          (1)  the textual name of the SMTP service extension;

          (2)  the EHLO keyword value associated with the extension;

          (3)  the syntax and possible values of parameters associated
               with the EHLO keyword value; and,

          (4)  how support for the extension affects the behavior of a
               server and client SMTP.

          In addition, any EHLO keyword value that starts with an upper
          or lower case "X" refers to a local SMTP service extension,
          which is used through bilateral, rather than standardized,
          agreement.







                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 4]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


          4.2.  Failure response

          If for some reason the server SMTP is unable to list the
          service extensions it supports, it will return code 502.

          In the case of a failure response, the client SMTP should
          issue either the HELO or QUIT command.


          4.3.  Error responses

          If the server SMTP does not recognize the EHLO command, it
          will return code 500.

          If the server SMTP recognizes the EHLO command, but the
          command argument is unacceptable, it will return code 501.

          If the server SMTP recognizes, but does not implement, the
          EHLO command, it will return code 502.

          If the server SMTP determines that the SMTP service is no
          longer available (e.g., due to imminent system shutdown), it
          will return code 421.

          In the case of any error response, the client SMTP should
          issue either the HELO or QUIT command.


          5.  Initial IANA Registry

          The IANA's initial registry of SMTP service extensions
          consists of these entries:

            Service Extension  EHLO keyword  parameters       behavior
            -----------------  ------------  ----------  ------------------
            Send                 SEND           none     defined in RFC 821
            Send or Mail         SOML           none     defined in RFC 821
            Send and Mail        SAML           none     defined in RFC 821
            Expand               EXPN           none     defined in RFC 821
            Help                 HELP           none     defined in RFC 821
            Turn                 TURN           none     defined in RFC 821

          which correspond to those SMTP commands which are defined as
          optional in [4].






                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 5]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


          6.  Usage Example

          (1)  An interaction of the form:

               S: <wait for connection on TCP port 25>
               C: <open connection to server>
               S: 220 dbc.mtview.ca.us SMTP service ready
               C: EHLO baiji.dbc.mtview.ca.us
               S: 250 dbc.mtview.ca.us says hello
                ...

               indicates that the server SMTP implements only those SMTP
               commands which are defined as mandatory in [4].


          (2)  In contrast, an interaction of the form:

               S: <wait for connection on TCP port 25>
               C: <open connection to server>
               S: 220 dbc.mtview.ca.us SMTP service ready
               C: EHLO baiji.dbc.mtview.ca.us
               S: 250-dbc.mtview.ca.us says hello
               S: 250-EXPN
               S: 250-HELP
               S: 250-8BIT
               S: 250-AMSS 100000
               S: 250-XONE
               S: 250 XVRB

               indicates that the server SMTP also implements the SMTP
               EXPN and HELP commands, two standard service extensions
               (8BIT and AMSS), and two non-standard service extensions
               (XONE and XVRB).


          7.  Acknowledgements

          The authors acknowledge the comments of Harald T. Alvestrand,
          Ned Freed, John C. Kleinsen, Keith Moore, and, Julian P.
          Onions










                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 6]





          draft              SMTP Service Extensions              Sep 92


          8.  References

          [1]  J.B. Postel.  Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.  Request for
               Comments 821, (August, 1982).

          [2]  D.H. Crocker.  Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet
               Text Messages.  Request for Comments 822, (August, 1982).

          [3]  N.S. Borenstein, N. Freed.  Multipurpose Internet Mail
               Extensions.  Request for Comments 1341, (June, 1992).

          [4]  R.T. Braden.  Requirements for Internet Hosts -
               Application and Support.  Request for Comments 1123,
               (October, 1989).




































                              Expires March 10, 1993            [Page 7]

