
IAB                                                         B. Carpenter
Internet Draft                                                  (editor)
January 1996



                Architectural Principles of the Internet



                                 Abstract

                        draft-iab-principles-01.txt

   The Internet and its architecture have grown in evolutionary fashion from
   modest beginnings, rather than from a Grand Plan. While this process of
   evolution is one of the main reasons for the technology's success, it
   nevertheless seems useful to record a snapshot of the current
   principles of the Internet architecture. This is intended for general
   guidance and general interest, and is in no way intended to be a
   formal or invariant reference model.

   Discussion of this draft should take place on the ietf@ietf.org list



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).


   Table of Contents:

      Status of this Memo.............................................1
      1. Constant Change..............................................2
      2. Is there an Internet Architecture?...........................2
      3. General Design Issues........................................5
      4. Name and address issues......................................6
      5. External Issues..............................................6
      6. Related to Confidentiality and Authentication................6
      7. Security considerations......................................7
      Acknowledgements................................................7
      References......................................................8
      Editor's Address................................................8





Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


1. Constant Change

   In searching for Internet architectural principles, we must remember
   that technical change is continuous in the information technology
   industry. The Internet reflects this.  Over the 25 years since the
   ARPANET started, various measures of the size of the Internet have
   increased by factors between 1000 (backbone speed) and 1000000
   (number of hosts). In this environment, some architectural principles
   inevitably change.  Principles that seemed inviolable a few years ago
   are deprecated today. Principles that seem sacred today will be
   deprecated tomorrow. The notion of a fixed Reference Model into which
   all designs must fit is anathema to the Internet. The principle of
   constant change is perhaps the only principle of the Internet that
   should survive indefinitely.

   A good analogy for the development of the Internet is that of
   constantly renewing the individual streets and buildings of a city,
   rather than razing the city and rebuilding it. The architectural
   principles therefore aim to provide a framework for creating
   cooperation and standards, as a small "spanning set" of rules that
   generates a large, varied and evolving space of technology.

   Some current technical triggers for change include the limits to the
   scaling of IPv4, the fact that gigabit/second networks and multimedia
   present fundamentally new challenges, and the need for quality of
   service and security guarantees in the commercial Internet.

   As Lord Kelvin stated in 1895, "Heavier-than-air flying machines are
   impossible." We would be foolish to imagine that the principles
   listed below are more than a snapshot of our current understanding.



2. Is there an Internet Architecture?

   2.1 Many members of the Internet community would argue that there is
   no architecture, but only a tradition, which was not written down for
   the first 25 years (or at least not by the IAB).  However, in very
   general terms, the community believes that the goal is connectivity,
   the tool is the Internet Protocol, and the intelligence is end to end
   rather than hidden in the network.

   The current exponential growth of the network seems to show that
   connectivity is its own reward, and is more valuable than any
   individual application such as mail or the World-Wide Web.  This
   connectivity requires technical cooperation between service
   providers, and flourishes in the increasingly liberal and competitive
   commercial telecommunications environment.

   The key to global connectivity is a single protocol at the inter-
   networking layer.  The key to exploiting this single protocol over
   diverse hardware providing global connectivity is the "end to end
   argument".

   2.2 It is generally felt that there should be one, and only one,


Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


   protocol at the Internet level (but perhaps two versions for an
   extended period during transition).  There can be many protocols at
   other levels.

   This single protocol must be independent of the hardware medium and
   hardware addressing.  This approach allows the Internet to exploit
   any new digital transmission technology of any kind, and to decouple
   its addressing mechanisms from the hardware. It allows the Internet
   to be the easy way to interconect fundamentally different
   transmission media, and to offer a single platform for a wide variety
   of Information Infrastructure applications and services. There is a
   good exposition of this model, and other important fundemental
   issues, in [Clark].

   2.3 It is also generally felt that end-to-end functions can best be
   realised by end-to-end protocols.

   The end-to-end argument is discussed in depth in [Saltzer].  The
   basic argument is that, as a first principle, certain required end-
   to-end functions can only be performed correctly by the end-systems
   themselves. A specific case is that any network, however carefully
   designed, will be subject to failures of transmission at some
   statistically determined rate. The best way to cope with this is to
   accept it, and give responsibility for the integrity of communication
   to the end systems. Another specific case is end-to-end security.

   To quote from [Saltzer], "The function in question can completely and
   correctly be implemented only with the knowledge and help of the
   application standing at the endpoints of the communication system.
   Therefore, providing that questioned function as a feature of the
   communication system itself is not possible. (Sometimes an incomplete
   version of the function provided by the communication system may be
   useful as a performance enhancement.)"

   This principle has important consequences if we require applications
   to survive partial network failures. An end-to-end protocol design
   should not rely on the maintenance of state (i.e. information about
   the state of the end-to-end communication) inside the network. Such
   state should be maintained only in the endpoints, in such a way that
   the state can only be destroyed when the endpoint itself breaks
   (known as fate-sharing). An immediate consequence of this is that
   datagrams are better than classical virtual circuits.  The network's
   job is to route datagrams as efficiently and flexibly as possible.
   Everything else should be done at the fringes.

   To perform its services, the network maintains some state
   information: routes, QoS guarantees that it makes, session
   information where that is used in header compression, compression
   histories for data compression, and the like. This state must be
   self-healing; adaptive procedures or protocols must exist to derive
   and maintain that state, and change it when the topology or activity
   of the network changes. The volume of this state must be minimized,
   and the loss of the state must not result in more than a temporary
   denial of service given that connectivity exists.



Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


   2.4 Fortunately, nobody owns the Internet, there is no centralized
   control, and nobody can turn it off. Its evolution depends on rough
   consensus about technical proposals, and on running code.
   Engineering feed-back from real implementations is more important
   than any architectural principles




















































Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


3. General Design Issues

   3.1 Heterogeneity is inevitable and must be supported by design.
   Multiple types of hardware must be allowed for, e.g. transmission
   speeds differing by at least 7 orders of magnitude, various computer
   word lengths, and hosts ranging from memory-starved microprocessors
   up to massively parallel supercomputers. Multiple types of
   application protocol must be allowed for, ranging from the simplest
   such as remote login up to the most complex such as distributed
   databases.

   3.2 If there are several ways of doing the same thing, choose one.
   If a previous Internet design has successfully solved the same
   problem, choose the same solution unless there is a good technical
   reason not to.  Duplication of the same protocol functionality should
   be avoided as far as possible, without of course using this argument
   to reject improvements.

   3.3 All designs must scale readily to very many nodes per site and to
   many millions of sites.

   3.4 Performance and cost must be considered as well as functionality.

   3.5 Keep it simple. When in doubt during design, choose the simplest
   solution. If you can keep things separate, do so.

   3.6 In many cases it is better to adopt an almost complete solution
   now, rather than to wait until a perfect solution can be found.

   3.7 Avoid options and parameters whenever possible.  Any options and
   parameters should be configured or negotiated dynamically rather than
   manually.

   3.8 Be strict when sending and tolerant when receiving.
   Implementations must follow specifications precisely when sending to
   the network, and tolerate faulty input from the network. When in
   doubt, discard faulty input silently, without returning an error
   message unless this is required by the specification.

   3.9 Be parsimonious with unsolicited packets, especially multicasts
   and broadcasts.

   3.10 Circular dependencies must be avoided.

     For example, routing must not depend on look-ups in the
     Domain Name System (DNS), since the updating of DNS servers
     depends on successful routing.

   3.11 Objects should be self decribing (include type and size), within
   reasonable limits. Only type codes and other magic numbers assigned
   by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) may be used.

   3.12 All specifications should use the same terminology and notation,
   and the same bit- and byte-order convention.



Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


   3.13 And perhaps most important: Nothing gets standardised until
   there are multiple instances of running code.



4. Name and address issues

   4.1 Avoid any design that requires addresses to be hard coded or
   stored on non-volatile storage (except of course where this is an
   essential requirement as in a name server or configuration server).
   In general, user applications should use names rather than addresses.

   4.2 A single naming structure should be used.

   4.3 Public (i.e. widely visible) names should be in case-independent
   ASCII.

   4.4 Addresses must be unambiguous (unique within any scope where they
   may appear).

   4.5 Upper layer protocols must be able to identify end-points
   unambiguously. In practice today, this means that addresses must be
   the same at start and finish of transmission.



5. External Issues

   5.1 Prefer unpatented technology, but if the best technology is
   patented and is available to all at reasonable terms, then
   incorporation of patented technology is acceptable.

   5.2 The existence of export controls on some aspects of Internet
   technology is only of secondary importance in choosing which
   technology to adopt into the standards. All of the technology
   required to implement Internet standards can be fabricated in each
   country, so world wide deployment of Internet technology does not
   depend on its exportability from any particular country or countries.

   5.3 Any implementation which does not include all of the required
   components cannot claim conformance with the standard.

   5.4 Designs should be "internationally user-friendly". In particular,
   there should be a uniform approach to character set support for
   information content.



6. Related to Confidentiality and Authentication

   6.1 All designs must fit into the IP security architecture.

   6.2 Confidentiality and authentication are the responsibility of end
   users and must be implemented in the protocols used by the end users.
   Endpoints should not depend on the confidentiality or integrity of


Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 6]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


   the carriers, and in particular, it is not the responsibility of the
   carriers to ensure confidentiality. Carriers may choose to provide
   some level of protection, but this is secondary to the primary
   responsibility of the end users to protect themselves.

   6.3 Wherever a cryptographic algorithm is called for in a protocol,
   the protocol should be designed to permit alternative algorithms to
   be used and the specific algorithm employed in a particular
   implementation should be explicitly labeled. Official labels for
   algorithms are to be recorded by the IANA.

   (It can be argued that this principle could be generalised beyond the
   security area.)

   6.4 In choosing algorithms, the algorithm should be one which is
   widely regarded as strong enough to serve the purpose. Among
   alternatives all of which are strong enough, preference should be
   given to algorithms which have stood the test of time and which are
   not unnecessarily inefficient.



7. Security considerations

   We just did that.



Acknowledgements

   This document is a collective work of the Internet community,
   published by the Internet Architecture Board. Special thanks to Fred
   Baker, Noel Chiappa, Donald Eastlake, Frank Kastenholz, and Neal
   McBurnett.























Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 7]

Internet Draft Architectural Principles of the Internet     January 1996


References

   Note that the references have been deliberately limited to two
   fundamental papers on the Internet architecture.

   [Clark] The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols,
   D.D.Clark, Proc SIGCOMM 88, ACM CCR Vol 18, Number 4, August 1988,
   pages 106-114 (reprinted in ACM CCR Vol 25, 1995, pages 102-111).

   [Saltzer] End-To-End Arguments in System Design, J.H. Saltzer,
   D.P.Reed, D.D.Clark, ACM TOCS, Vol 2, Number 4, November 1984, pp
   277-288.



Editor's Address


       Brian E. Carpenter
       Group Leader, Communications Systems      Phone:  +41 22 767-4967
       Computing and Networks Division           Fax:    +41 22 767-7155
       CERN
       European Laboratory for Particle Physics  Email: brian@dxcoms.cern.ch
       1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

































Carpenter (ed.)            Expires July 1996                    [Page 8]

