INTERNET DRAFT                                              V. Madisetti
Date: May 20, 2002                                           A. Argyriou
Expires: November 20, 2002               Georgia Institute of Technology


                  Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks
           <draft-madisetti-argyriou-voice-video-mip-00.txt>            


Status of this memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract


   Transmission of voice, video and other  real-time multimedia
   data over IP networks is gaining much importance, and Quality of
   Service (QoS) issues are further compromised when wireless and 
   mobility issues are also included into the picture. A unified 
   approach, VoMo, to addressing QoS through consideration of 
   appropriate signaling, control and data transmission is presented, 
   that has the additional benefits of compliance with current IP 
   network infrastructure through recently proposed IETF protocols, such
   as Stream Control Tranmission Protocol (SCTP)[RFC2960] and Session 
   Initiation Protocol (SIP)[RFC2543]. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS

   1. Introduction............................................... 2
	1.1 Problem statement...................................... 2
	1.2 Current approach: Mobility with SIP.................... 3
   2. Requirements............................................... 3
      2.1 General requirements................................... 3
      2.2 QoS requirements........................................3



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 1]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   3. Proposed protocol...........................................4
      3.1 Network architecture....................................4
	3.2 VoMo protocol...........................................5
      3.3 Detailed operation......................................5
      3.4 Movement detection scheme...............................7
      3.5 Base Station topology...................................7
	3.6 An example..............................................7
   4. QoS benefits................................................8
      4.1 Improvement of the overall delay........................8
      4.2 Integrated Services/RSVP considerations.................9
   5. Handoff improvement.........................................9
      5.1 Subnet handoff..........................................9
      5.2 Domain handoff.........................................10
      5.3 Technology handoff.....................................10
   6. Implementation details.....................................11
	6.1 The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)........11
	6.2 Mapping protocol functionality to SCTP operations......11
	6.3 Achieving better scalability...........................12
   7. Additional benefits from the use of SCTP...................12
	7.1 Unified transport level approach.......................12
	7.2 Security benefits......................................12
	7.3 Binding updates optimization...........................12
   8.Conclusions.................................................13
   9.References..................................................13
   10.Intellectual property statement............................14
   11.Authors's addresses........................................14



1. Introduction

   1.1  Problem statement

   Ensuring toll quality Voice or Video over IP requires strict control
   over path delay, jitter, packet loss and other other impediments that
   burden IP networking. Thus, meeting Quality of Service (Qos) 
   guarantees is of paramount importance. These problems are compounded 
   in the case of a wireless network, where new problems arise due to 
   the implied mobility of the users as well as the nature of the 
   current IP protocols that support IP-based mobility, combined with 
   lossy and interrupt-prone nature of the communications channel. 
   Handoff delay, and overheads of Mobile IP's triangular routing, 
   triangular registration, and IP encapsulation are major issues that 
   must be resolved prior to wide spread acceptability of real-time 
   interactive multimedia communications over the wired or wireless IP 
   network. Moreover, the reduced processing requirements and low-power 
   operation of handsets, set additional constraints to a wireless 
   device. We believe that the problem is more amenable to solution 
   through a unified approach that links a number of layers of the 
   network software, from link to application, while ensuring support 
   for traditional networking and telecommunications applications. 



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 2]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   1.2 Current approach: Mobility with SIP

   Currently, promising approaches that provide service and user level 
   mobility for media data over wireless links are based on SIP 
   (Session Initiation Protocol)[SIPMUL] and Mobile IP standards. 

   SIP relies on the usage of SIP's registration mechanism for 
   providing terminal and user mobility. Every user has a URI, which 
   could be an e-mail address (e.g., burdell@gatech.edu). When the user 
   moves to a new place, it registers its new position with the SIP 
   registrar, so that the the SIP registrar server knows the user's 
   current position. This kind of registration can provide user-level 
   mobility. In order to achieve terminal mobility a SIP mobility 
   implementation could poll the OS in order to find out if handoff 
   took place so that the SIP will register with the new SIP registrar 
   after handoff [SIPMUL].

   SIP based mobility, thus, offers attractive benefits when used in 
   mobile multimedia applications. However, there are some inherent
   problems with this approach that make the adoption of this scheme
   difficult. For example it cannot handle mid-call subnet changes, 
   since it is an application layer solution. This is where it requires
   the support of a lower level mobility protocol, e.g., Mobile IP. One
   other important issue is that of inter-operability with mobile IP. 
   Home Agent and Foreign Agent registrations in mobile IP serve the 
   same purpose with the SIP REGISTER messages. And because as we said 
   before SIP needs the support from Mobile IP, their joint deployment 
   becomes problematic.

2. Requirements

   In this section we briefly outline the requirements that may realize 
   acceptable performance for IP-based real-time multimedia and wired 
   and wireless applications. 

   2.1 General requirements

   A solution targeting the multimedia Internet must be scalable in
   terms of mobile nodes connected to the network, their respective
   traffic loads, and associated QoS. For the wireless applications, 
   the solution should also be compliant (with as minimal modifications 
   as possible) with applications relying on Mobile IP. An additional 
   desired requirement is to create a unified mobility framework for, 
   both, reliable and unreliable transfer of multimedia data.  

   2.2 QoS requirements

   Providing QoS in multimedia applications over wireless links, is
   probably one of the most challenging tasks in mobile communications.
   The delivered QoS is related primarily to the overall network delay, 
   and robustness of the communications medium, both of which are 



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 3]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   considered in this document. 

   For those cases where we assume the usage of mobile IP this delay 
   consists of three components: triangular routing, triangular 
   registration, and IP encapsulation. Total delay is also heavily
   affected by the handoff delay. Minimizing this part of the total 
   delay is also considered in this document.

3. Proposed protocol

   This section presents the proposed protocol 

   3.1 Network architecture

   In Figure 1, we present the network architecture that we assume 
   a mobile node MN is attached to. Note that we do not require this 
   specific network architecture. This figure just serves as a point of 
   reference throughout the rest of this document, and the technology is 
   easily applicable to GPRS and 3G networks as well.

   We assume that the Base Station (BS) is attached to a router. A MN 
   could modify its IP address while it is moving from BS to BS inside 
   a subnet, and so it will have to invoke the Mobile IP handoff 
   mechanism. However it could also have just one IP address per subnet, 
   and so it will just have to suffer Link Layer (L2) handoff. But when 
   the MN moves from one subnet to the other it has of course to get a 
   new IP address.

             +-------INTERNET------+
             |                     |
             |                     |
           __|__                 __|__   +-----+
          /     \               /     \--| FA  |
         /       \             /       \ +-----+
        / Router  \           / Router  \  |
        \ Subnet1 /           \ Subnet2 /  |
         \       /             \       /   |
       +--\_____/----+       +--\_____/----+
       |             |       |             |
   +-----+        +-----+  +-----+       +-----+
   | BS  |        | BS  |  | BS  |       | BS  |
   +-----+        +-----+  +-----+       +-----+
       |             |                      |
       |             |                      |
       |             |                      |
    +-----+        +-----+               +-----+
    | MN  |=======>| MN  | =============>|  MN |
    +-----+        +-----+               +-----+
     (1) Intra-domain         (2) Inter-domain
         movement                     movement




Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 4]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


                     Figure 1.

   3.2 VoMo protocol 

   The VoMo protocol has two distinct phases. The initialization 
   process, performed at each subnet even when no MNs are inside a cell.
   The connection process which handles all the necessary steps that a 
   MN has to go through in order to connect to the wireless network.

   Phase 1: Initialization of the network

   All contiguous cells to the currently active cell, will be 
   automatically included in the neighborhood_list, thus the handoff 
   will be smoother, since we know that we can add and prune cells, 
   based on the movement and it will provide the necessary lag for 
   efficient handoff. This kind of lookahead additions to the 
   neighborhood_list can help QoS, at the cost of additional network 
   traffic.

   Phase 2: The connection process

   Step 1: Mobile Node enters a subnet and sends a registration
           request.
   Step 2: A central server (e.g. DHCP) provides a list_of_addresses
           based on the neighborhood_list.
   Step 3: the MN uses as its _primary Care-of-Address the
           one of the list_of_addresses that corresponds to its
           current point of attachment.

   When the MN moves to another point of attachment (BS) two cases
   arise:

   Step 4a:When the MN movement is inside the subnet, it MUST switch
           to another IP of its list_of_addresses according to
           movement detection information.
   Step 4b:When MN is moving to a new subnet, it sends a registration
           request to the other subnet requesting new 
           list_of_addresses.
   Step 5: The MN decides when it has changed BS by using movent
           detection info from either L2 or L3 protocol layers.
   Step 6: Upon its decision, the MN, and having moved to a new subnet
           it discards the old list_of_addresses, and starts
           using a new_primary_address from the newly allocated 
	     list_of_addresses.

   3.3 Detailed operation

   The basis of the VoMo is the exploitation of the mobile node's 
   neighborhood of Base Stations (BS). With the term neighborhood we 
   mean all the Base Stations that could possibly be the next point of 
   attachment of the mobile node (MN). A central server/manager of such



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 5]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   a neighborhood, must operate in such way that it provides the MN 
   with addresses that correspond to different physical paths in the 
   wired network. For example, when a MN is attached to a BS, it obtains 
   addresses form a specific DHCP server, and when it moves to a new BS 
   it gets addresses from another DHCP server. These two cases 
   correspond to different wired paths that reach the BS in each case. 
   However, these paths are not all active at the same time, but they 
   can be activated in the near future if the mobile node moves. The 
   existence of this kind of paths leading to the MN is a crucial 
   requirement for the proposed protocol to work.

   As we said, a central server in the subnet can be used in order to
   assign addresses to mobile hosts and keep track of the mapping 
   between assigned addresses and hosts. In the case of mobile IPv4 
   this server may be the Foreign Agent [RFC2002], and in the case of 
   mobile IPv6 this could be a DHCP server. We believe that in both 
   cases, the distribution of addresses from the server should be 
   intelligent in the way we explained before, and it this requirement 
   is not compromised by the usage of either IPv4 or IPv6.

   Let us see in more detail how the multiple addresses MUST be used by 
   the MN. Each IP address, will have to correspond to a different path
   leading to a different BS. Initially the MN is assigned a _primary 
   address that guarantees routing of packets from its current point of 
   attachment. However, as we said, the server must provide the MN with 
   a list_of_addresses that correspond to paths related to the MN's 
   neighbor point of attachment. The MN should utilize, if possible, 
   these addresses for every active connection well as every new 
   connection.

   A Correspondent Node (CN) requesting communication with the MN, will 
   first try to reach the MN through its home_address. The home network 
   will inform the CN about the current location of the MN. The CN can 
   then directly connect to the MN from its current location. When the 
   MN moves to a new point of attachment, it will use one of the 
   pre-allocated addresses. It is obvious now that this form of 
   allocation saves the MN valuable time of requesting address every 
   time it has to suffer handoff.

   Now that the MN decided to use a new_primary_address it must notify
   the CN about the new addresses from which the other endpoint (MN) is
   reachable now. The new protocol additionally requires from the 
   MN to inform the CN about the list_of_addresses that it has as soon 
   as the MN receives them. This means that the CN must be able to use
   any of the remote addresses, that correspond to different paths, in 
   order to reach the MN. In this way direct communication takes place 
   directly between the CN and the MN. Triangular routing, the primary 
   overhead of mobile IP, is eliminated in this way.

   This part of the protocol makes sure that a CN is notified as soon 
   as possible from the MN about the MN's new_primary_address, so that 



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 6]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   direct communication exist at all times.

   3.4 Movement detection scheme

   Movement detection is important, for the protocol to work 
   efficiently. The address changes for a MN are triggered when 
   movement is identified. It is thus important to have information 
   about when a MN moved, and if is about to happen via a network layer 
   or link layer handoff.

   Let us consider the case where the mobile node moves, and it is 
   heading towards a new point of attachment. The problem that arises 
   now is which address will be the next primary address that will be 
   used by the MN. This decision depends on the direction of the Mobile
   Node's  movement. In draft [MSCTP] they propose the use of two 
   network interface cards. Alternatively, as proposed in [MIP6] lower, 
   link layer information can be used in order to decide a node when to
   switch to a new BS and a new  care-of IP address. Movement detection 
   information can also be used from the network layer (Mobile IP)[RFC]. 
   In our case, if the mobile Node decides to switch, it must update, 
   and change, if possible, for a current connection the address being 
   used. It must also discard most of the previously allocated 
   addresses.

   3.5 Base station topology

   In order for the central server to distribute intelligently IP
   addresses, according to our approach, it must has precise knowledge 
   of the base station topology. Since this is a rather complicated 
   issue we assume here that this information is already available at 
   the server when it is (re)configured initially. This is not such an 
   important restriction as it may seem. If for example we assume the 
   existence of 6-edge cells, then we know initially which is the 
   mapping of cells to 6 distinct BS. An approach for dynamically 
   acquiring the BS topology is presented in [SCAMOB].

   3.6 An example

   Now let us go through an example of a Mobile node using VoMo. The 
   usage of Mobile IPv4 and DHCP is also assumed. When IPv4 is used, 
   the MN must obtain a co-located address in order to have an address 
   that is separately routable. As stated previously, key concept in 
   the protocol is that the MN should get more than one (a list of) 
   co-located addresses. This may be a problem in the case when IPv4 is 
   used, due to the limited address space, but it is not the case with 
   IPv6.

   Now, let us describe the DHCP operation. The MN sends a broadcast
   message DHCPDISSCOVER to the DHCP server(s). The MN should not select
   one address but a list of them and send back a DHCPREQUEST to the
   DHCP server(s) that it has selected and reside in its current subnet.
   


Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 7]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   Then the DHCP server has to sent a DHCPCK message back to acknowledge
   the receipt of the addresses. However, if the MN gets IP addresses
   from different DHCP servers, they will be probably be useless, since
   each DHCP server just provides addresses, but possibly not the 
   correct one that corresponds to a different path and Base Station. 
   That is why the distribution process MUST be handled centrally by 
   only one server which knows the base station topology. After the MN 
   has acquired an IP address it can add it to its list of addresses 
   and start using it when it needs to.

4. QoS benefits

   4.1 Improvement of the overall delay

   Providing QoS, is very important requirement for real-time multimedia
   applications. Triangular routing, handoff delay, increased error 
   rate, reduced amount of available resources makes QoS in a wireless 
   network a very tough and challenging issue. The existence of multiple
   paths in the proposed protocol could provide a mechanism for 
   optimizing the provided QoS to a MN.

   The most important requirement for a real-time application is to 
   minimize the overall delay between the communication endpoints. By 
   utilizing the above protocol delay and the respective jitter can be
   minimized even more compared to the case where mobile IP/TCP are 
   used.

   A mobile node, immediately preceding the handover, based on low
   level criteria as stated before (link layer information), will 
   try to switch to a new point of attachment by using an already
   pre-allocated address. The CN will be notified by the MN that the 
   current path is inactive. It will then try to send the data stream
   to the address that has become primary now. The important point here
   is that the MN when it actually is hooked up to the new network, with
   the new IP, it must inform immediately the correspondent Node that 
   it will have to modify the current IP address and change it to the
   new one. When the MN informs the Correspondent Node about its new 
   address, then communication can exist directly between them and no 
   tunnelling is required. In this way triangular routing delay becomes
   zero. This is of primary importance for the applications we are 
   interested. Moreover, the fact that the new address was pre-allocated 
   and the MN does not have to reacquire new address at every handoff, 
   reduces the handoff delay.

   What we actually doing here is just like a resource reservation 
   mechanism, where our resources are IP addresses. However this is a 
   two dimensional problem since we do not only care about the number of
   IP addresses that a MN acquires but in which access points each of 
   them correspond. It is like reserving a slot in each subnet for the 
   MN, so that it will not go through the process of requesting an IP 
   when it actually reaches this point. This kind of reservation can 
   


Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 8]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   have as we saw, direct impact in the reduction of the overall delay.

   4.2 Integrated Services/RSVP considerations

   Integrated Services model, requires the exchange of information
   between endpoints about the required QoS of a data flow. RSVP is a
   protocol that can carry this information and deliver it to all the
   routers, that will deliver the QoS. More specifically, RSVP offers a 
   mechanism for network resource reservation, just before actual data 
   transfer takes place.

   An interesting approach would be to use IP-multicast with RSVP in a
   way similar to [SCAMOB]. A multicast tree could be created, which
   will have as its leaves IP addresses of a MS's association list. But
   if the addresses are pre-allocated, in the way that we described
   earlier, then when then node moves it will be in one address of the
   multicast tree. This means that reservation process does not have to
   be invoked throughout the path from the CN to the MN, but it will
   only be applied locally. The will just subscribe to a multicast
   address and unsubscribe according to our proposed approach. This
   approach has the problem of reserving resources in advance even if 
   they are not needed.

5. Handoff improvement

   Handoff is arguably a primary overhead in wireless IP network 
   performance, since it introduces delay and processing overhead on
   both the wireless and wired nodes. Low latency handoff is even more
   important in our case, where we are focusing in VoIP applications.
   Three kinds of handoff are discussed in the sections that follow. 
   The applicability of the proposed approach under these cases is 
   analyzed and evaluated.

5.1 Subnet handoff

   Intra-subnet handoff occurs when a MN moves from one base station to
   another, but both the base stations are connected to the same router.
   Under this case the IP address of the mN could remain the same or it
   could possibly change to new address from the same subnet.

   Let us now describe, operation of the neighborhood-based technology
   under subnet handoff. The mobile node would normally require
   registration with a DHCP server again [SIPMUL], which incurs a
   round-trip delay. The proposed protocol requires the pre-allocation 
   of IP addresses for a mobile node. When the MN moves, to a new point
   of attachment, it can use directly the IP address that already has. 
   Moreover, if there is a notification from the L2 or MIP layer about 
   imminent handoff, the MN MUST change the primary address in the 
   association and make it be an address that corresponds to the new 
   base station, just before the time of handoff. The important point
   is that the CN does not have to be re-invited [SIPMUL] or 



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                            [Page 9]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002

   
   re-establish a broken communication with the MN,  but it can simply
   continue communication by just using a different route. The result 
   of this handoff will be just a few lost packets, which in the case
   of a reliable protocol will be retransmitted again. In the case 
   that we use an unreliable protocol, operation under subnet handoff
   is greatly optimized. As it is obvious RTT delay does not exist any
   more. So in the case of voice data that utilize  UDP or any other
   Unreliable protocol, just a few packets will be lost but the
   communication will continue without significant interruption.

5.2 Domain handoff

   Operation when we move to a different Domain is nearly the same. The
   only difference is that the mobile node must have already acquired an
   IP address from a different domain. This means that an association
   will have to include addresses from a different domain. The only
   penalty that a MN would have to suffer in such a case would be the
   admission control to the new domain, because it would have to be
   authenticated first. However, inside a domain authentication does not 
   have to happen in every handoff, but only once, during MN startup.

5.3 Technology handoff

   Using different wireless access technologies from the same terminal 
   must be an important consideration for the future wireless devices. 
   The user must have the flexibility of selecting the technology that 
   he will use according to the provided QoS, cost, availability etc.

   Two issues arise in the case where multiple access technologies are
   available. The first issue is the problem of selecting one of all 
   the possible access technologies and second is the handoff between 
   them. Next we briefly describe a scenario where we describe how the
   proposed protocol could handle the above problems.

   We consider the case where a mobile node has established a connection
   with a WLAN and it moves to an area where it also has access to a
   GPRS service. The mobile node can choose one of the two technologies 
   according to user criteria, as said before. GPRS does nearly the same
   work with mobile IP. That is, they both offer terminal mobility. They
   take care of the handoff process when a mobile node moves between 
   cells. However, the proposed protocol could as well be applied in 
   this case where mobile IP will not be used. The only requirement from
   our protocol is that the device will access the GPRS network using 
   IP. An additional requirement from the user would be the 
   non-interruption of an existing connection now that there has to be 
   technology handoff. So, what we actually want to do is to switch from
   a mobile IP WLAN network to a GPRS network using IP.

   According to the proposed protocol, the mobile node MUST have made
   a pre-registration to another network, which in this case would be a 
   GPRS network. The MN must first perform a GPRS attachment procedure



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                           [Page 10]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   [GPRS]. This process has primary to do with authenticating the user
   and proving an IP address. The provided IP address will be used the
   same way as before by the protocol. The protocol just needs IP 
   addresses that correspond to different paths and is thus technology
   unaware. The protocol will treat the two different networks as two
   different points of attachment

6. Implementation details

   6.1 The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)

   SCTP is a new IETF transport level protocol [RFC], that offers a
   number of advanced features. It introduces the idea of multihoming, 
   where a host has multiple addresses from which it is reachable. An
   association between two endpoints can exist between any of these
   addresses. If one of the paths that corresponds to one address fails
   then an alternative can be used without interrupting the connection
   between the endpoints. The two endpoints can monitor the status of
   the paths by sending a special kind of SCTP messages called Heartbeat
   messages. Primary goal of the above protocol property was error
   resilience. However, as we will see in the next section this features
   helped us to implement part of the proposed protocol functionality.

   6.2 Mapping protocol functionality to SCTP operations

   In this section we describe in detail how someone could use SCTP in
   an implementation of the proposed protocol.

   Initially, a mobile node creates an SCTP association when it connects
   with a Correspondent Node. This SCTP association could be the place
   where we store the address list obtained form the attached network.
   The MN initially makes use of just one address from the association
   which is called primary. Since SCTP is multihomed, a MN could 
   possibly use any of the addresses in its association. Our protocol
   will decide when the MN must start using another address by making
   it the primary. This can happen only when the mobile node moves to a
   new point of attachment.

   By utilizing multiple IP addresses for a single association, SCTP
   realizes the idea of the existence of multiple paths between the
   CN-BS-MN. However, as we said we said our protocol uses just one
   path every time, and all the others exist but they are not active.
   To monitor the status of the inactive paths, the new protocol uses
   SCTP HEARTBEAT messages. This messages are send to all the existing
   addresses in a single association that are not currently used. By
   utilizing information about the reachability of specific paths, the
   protocol decides when to switch to a new address.

   Our protocol can also, initiate the switching to a new address
   according to predefined criteria. For example even if a MN is still
   attached in a subnet, but is approaching another one, then the 



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                           [Page 11]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   protocol could initiate handoff procedure and change the primary
   address in the SCTP association list.

   Moreover, the protocol could operate in a way similar to a QoS 
   mapper, which maps specific QoS requirements to SCTP parameters. E.g.
   high QoS could require large number of SCTP heartbeat messages and
   increased number of IP's. This SW could be intermediate stage between
   a QoS aware application and the actual association setup.

   6.3 Achieving better scalability

   In order to achieve better scalability with this architecture, 
   information about movement detection must be used if it is available,
   so that the number of allocated IP addresses is reduced. Also, when a
   MN reaches a new point of attachment it should deallocate all the
   previously allocated addresses from its association, except the last
   address being used. In this way addresses are released

7. Additional benefits from the use of SCTP

   7.1 Unified transport level approach

   The need for a unified mobility framework is needed for all the 
   classes of applications (reliable/unreliable). We identified
   previously the problems that can be caused by the simultaneous use
   of SIP and mobile IP for serving different classes of applications.
   We propose the usage of the unreliable extension of SCTP (USCTP)
   found in [USCTP]. The primary advantage of this approach would be
   the existence of a neighborhood even for unreliable applications.
   For example, at the time of handoff, USCTP packets will be redirected
   to the new IP of the MN. This does not require any buffering at the
   old base station of USCTP packets. or if it requires, the amount of
   data will be very small. Another important advantage is that this is
   a transport level solution, totally transparent to the application 
   layer.

   7.2 Security benefits

   We did not tried to address explicitly security issues with the
   proposed approach. However the adoption of SCTP has on its own some
   enhanced features that provide better security. The most important of
   them is the usage of the cookie mechanism in order to avoid blind
   Denial of Service (DoS) attacks [RFC2960]. More advanced security
   features, such as IPsec are integrated in the IPv6 protocol as header
   extensions, whereas Mobile IPv4 could use a separate protocol for
   registrations.

   7.3 Binding updates optimization

   If there is an existing association transferring data at the time
   of handover, then the MN will obtain, as previously said a new IP



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                           [Page 12]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


   address. However the MN does not have to send this IP address
   instantaneously to the home network in order to make an update. It 
   can continue communication with the exiting association but simply 
   adding the new IP in the  association list and making it primary. 
   When then new link is established and works properly, it can send 
   an update to the nome network so that future requests for the MN will
   know its current Care-of-Address.

8. Conclusions

   A new protocol, VoMo, for improving performance of voice/video 
   applications over mobile IP-based network is introduced. The idea of
   exploiting a Mobile Node's neighborhood in wireless network is the
   basis of the proposed approach. Primary goal of the protocol is the 
   reduction of the overall delay and jitter, since these are the 
   primary factors for the delivered QoS. We also suggested an 
   implementation of the protocol based on the Stream Control 
   Transmission Protocol.

9. References

[RFC2960]   R. R. Stewart et al., "Stream Control Transmission
            Protocol", RFC 2960, November 2000.

[RFC2543]	M. Handley et al.,"SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",
		RFC 2543, March 1999.

[ADDIP]     R. R. Stewart, Q. Xie, M. Tuexen, I. Rytina, "SCTP Dynamic
            Addition of IP Addresses", <draft-ietf-tsvwg-addip-
            sctp-04.txt>, January 2002.

[SCTPOVER]  L. Ong, Y. Yoakum, "An Overview of the SCTP", <draft-ong-
            sigtran-sctpover-02.txt>, January 2002.

[USCTP]     Q. Xie et al, "SCTP Unreliable Data Mode Extension",
            <draft-ietf-tsvwg-usctp-00.txt>, October 2001.

[SCTPAPPL]  L. Coene et al., "Stream Control Transmission Protocol
            Applicability Statement", <draft-ietf-sigtran-sctp-
            applicability-08.txt>, November 2001.

[RFC2002]   C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, October 1996.

[MIP6]      C. Perkins, "Mobility Support in IPv6",
            <draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-17.txt>, May 2002.

[ROUTEOPT]  C. Perkins et al., "Route Optimization in Mobile IP",
            draft-ietf-mobileip-optim-11.txt, September 2001.

[SIPMUL]    F. Vakil et al, "Supporting Mobility for Multimedia with
            SIP", <draft-itsumo-sipping-mobility-multimedia-01.txt>,



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                           [Page 13]



INTERNET-DRAFT      Voice & Video over mobile IP Networks       Nov 2002


            July 2001.

[SCAMOB]    Seisho Yasukawa et al, "Scalable Mobility and QoS Support
            Mechanism for IPv6-base Real-time Wireless Internet
            Traffic", in Proc of GLOBECOM '01. IEEE , 2001.

[MSCTP]     M. Riegel, "Mobile SCTP", <draft-riegel-tuexen-mobile-sctp
		-00.txt>, February 2002. 

[GPRS]	Christian Bettstetter, "GSM Phase 2+ General Packet Radio 
		Service GPRS: Architecture, Protocols, and Air Interface 
		<http://www.comsoc.org/livepubs/surveys/public/3q99issue/
		bettstetter.html>

[RFC2026]   S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
            RFC 2026, October 1996.

10. Intellectual property statement

Georgia Tech may have patent rights on technology described in this 
document which employees of Georgia Tech contribute for use in IETF 
standards discussions. In relation to any IETF standard incorporating 
any such technology, Georgia Tech hereby agrees to license on fair, 
reasonable and non-discriminatory terms, based on reciprocity, any 
patent claims it owns covering such technology, to the extent such 
technology is essential to comply with such standard.

11. Authors' addresses

Vijay K. Madisetti
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
30332 Atlanta
GA, USA
e-mail: vijay.madisetti@ece.gatech.edu

Antonios D. Argyriou
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
30332 Atlanta
GA, USA
E-mail: anargyr@ece.gatech.edu








                This Internet Draft expires November 20, 2002.



Madisetti, Argyriou.                                          [Page 14]
