

Network Working Group                Osama Aboul-Magd (Nortel Networks) 
Internet Draft                            Curtis Brownmiller (WorldCom) 
Expiration Date: December 2001     Sudheer Dharanikota (Nayna Networks) 
                                    Naganand Doraswamy (PhotonEx Corp.) 
                                          John Drake (Calient Networks) 
                                             Georgios Ellinas (Tellium) 
                                        Rohit Goyal (Axiowave Networks) 
                                        Riad Hartani (Caspian Networks) 
                                       Bilel Jamoussi (Nortel Networks) 
                                             John Labourdette (Tellium) 
                                       Jonathan Lang (Calient Networks) 
                                              Eric Mannie (Ebone (GTS)) 
                                       Babu Narayanan (Nortel Networks) 
                                Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel IPO-NSG) 
                                             Bala Rajagopalan (Tellium) 
                                      Rajiv Ramaswami (Nortel Networks) 
                                         Vasant Sahay (Nortel Networks) 
                                             Ed Snyder (PhotonEx Corp.) 
                                              Yong Xue (UUNET/WorldCom) 
                                                                        
                                Editor: Andre Fredette (PhotonEx Corp.) 
                                                                        
                                                              June 2001 
                                      
                                      
                TITLE:  Optical Link Interface Requirements 
                                      
                        draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt 
                                      
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [RFC2026]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    

                                                              [Page 1] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
ABSTRACT 
   The emergence of transparent optical switches, together with a 
   movement towards more dynamic, multi-vendor networks, has introduced 
   a need for information sharing between optical line systems and 
   client devices.  The information that needs to be shared includes 
   link status and link properties.  We call this interface the Optical 
   Link Interface (OLI).  In this document, we provide high-level 
   requirements for the OLI. 
    
    
CONTENTS 
   ABSTRACT...........................................................2 
   CONTENTS...........................................................2 
   SUMMARY FOR SUB-IP RELATED INTERNET DRAFTS.........................3 
   1. Introduction and Overview.......................................5 
   2. Fault Detection and Notification for PXCs.......................7 
   3. Discovery of Link Properties....................................7 
   4. Requirements for the Optical Link Interface.....................8 
   4.1. OLI General Principles........................................8 
   4.2. General OLI Characteristics...................................9 
   4.3. OLI Functionality.............................................9 
   4.3.1. Neighbor Discovery..........................................9 
   4.3.2. Control Channel Maintenance................................10 
   4.3.3. OLI Synchronization........................................10 
   4.3.4. Connectivity Discovery.....................................10 
   4.3.5. Fault Management...........................................10 
   4.3.5.1. Fault Notification.......................................11 
   4.3.5.2. Trace Monitoring.........................................11 
   4.3.5.3. Alarm Suppression........................................12 
   4.3.6. Link Property Information..................................12 
   5. References.....................................................14 
   6. Author Contact Information.....................................15 
    
    


















                                                              [Page 2] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
SUMMARY FOR SUB-IP RELATED INTERNET DRAFTS 
(Section Requested by Bert and Scott) 
    
   The emergence of transparent optical switches, together with a 
   movement towards more dynamic, multi-vendor networks, has introduced 
   a need for information sharing between optical line systems and 
   client devices.  The information that needs to be shared includes 
   link status and link properties.  We call this interface the Optical 
   Link Interface (OLI).  In this document, we provide high-level 
   requirements for the OLI. 
    
   This work is motivated by two main issues.  The first is the need to 
   enhance the fault detection and recovery support for photonic 
   switches (PXCs), and the second is to enhance the discovery of link 
   characteristics for optical networks in general.  These issues are 
   discussed separately in this document.  We then provide more 
   specific requirements for an interface between the optical line 
   system (OLS) and OLS client proposed to solve these issues called 
   the Optical Link Interface (OLI). 
    
   NOTE:  This document was requested by the CCAMP co-chairs based on 
   discussions regarding the below mentioned drafts at the last two 
   IETF meetings. 
    
   RELATED DOCUMENTS 
    
   http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-fredette-lmp-wdm-01.txt 
   http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-sahay-ccamp-ntip-00.txt 
   http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-mpls-lmp-02.txt 
    
    
   WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK 
    
   A protocol that would satisfy the OLI requirements would fit in the 
   Control part of the sub-ip work. 
    
    
   WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG 
    
   An OLI would enhance the ability of circuit switches and routers 
   using MPLS-based control protocols to dynamically discover link 
   properties and to learn about link status.  The link properties can 
   be useful during signalling of paths, and the link status 
   information is essential for fault detection and recovery.  
   Furthermore, the OLI is independent of any signalling protocol, so 
   it can be used by both distributed control system, such as GMPLS, 
   and centralized management systems. 
    
   Therefore, an OLI would support the following CCAMP objectives: 
    


                                                              [Page 3] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
     .  Define signalling protocols and measurement protocols such that 
        they support multiple physical path and tunnel technologies 
        (e.g. O-O and O-E-O optical switches, ATM and Frame Relay 
        switches, MPLS, GRE) using input from technology-specific 
        working groups such as MPLS, IPO, etc. 
    
     .  Define signalling and measurement protocols that are 
        independent of each other. This allows applications other than 
        the signalling protocol to use the measurement protocol; it 
        also allows the signalling protocol to use knowledge obtained 
        by means other than the measurement protocol. 
    
     .  Abstract link and path properties needed for link and path 
        protection. Define signalling mechanisms for path protection, 
        diverse routing and fast path restoration. Ensure that multi-
        layer path protection and restoration functions are achievable 
        using the defined signalling and measurement protocols, either 
        separately or in combination. 
    
     .  Define how the properties of network resources gathered by the 
        measurement protocol can be distributed in existing routing 
        protocols, such as OSPF and IS-IS. 
    
    
   JUSTIFICATION 
    
   draft-fredette-lmp-wdm-01.txt (lmp-wdm) and draft-sahay-ccamp-ntip-
   00.txt (ntip) are both protocol proposals to satisfy the OLI 
   requirements.  lmp-wdm has been discussed in the past two ccamp 
   sessions and ntip was discussed in the last one.  There has been a 
   great deal of interest in this work by both network operators and 
   vendors.  Given the competing proposals and some general questions 
   about the specific requirements that the proposals were intended to 
   solve, the CCAMP co-chairs asked the authors of lmp-wdm and ntip 
   (and other interested people) to work together on a set of 
   requirements. This document describes those requirements. 
    
    














                                                              [Page 4] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
1. Introduction and Overview 
    
   Optical networks being deployed today consist of the following three 
   basic types of devices:  service delivery platforms (e.g., routers, 
   ATM switches, and SONET/SDH devices), optical switches (OXCs), and 
   Optical Line Systems (OLSs), as shown in Figure 1. 
    
    
                    +-OLI-+                       +-OLI-+ 
                    |     |                       |     | 
                    |    +-------------------------+    | 
                 +----+  |+----+     OLS     +----+|  +----+ 
          SONET--|    |--||    | +---+ +---+ |    ||--|    |--SONET 
            ATM--|OXC1|--||DWDM|=|Amp|=|Amp|=|DWDM||--|OXC2|--ATM 
         Routerûû|    |--||  1 | +---+ +---+ |  2 ||--|    |--Router 
            |    +----+  |+----+             +----+|  +----+    | 
            |     |  |   +-------------------------+   |  |     | 
            |     |  |                                 |  |     | 
            +-LMP-+  +---------------LMP---------------+  +-LMP-+ 
                                      
                        Figure 1:  Optical Network 
    
    
   Before continuing, a few definitions are provided to describe 
   salient information about the above network. 
    
     .  Opaque Device:   
        A device that terminates a connection electrically.  An opaque 
        device is sometimes called an O-E-O device because it receives 
        an optical signal, converts it to an electrical signal, then 
        regenerates a new optical signal.  It is also usually must be 
        aware of the type of traffic and bandwidth being carried and 
        has a specific physical interface for that type of traffic and 
        bandwidth.  An example is a SONET or SDH device. 
    
     .  Transparent Optical Device:   
        A device that transmits/propagates an optical signal without 
        terminating it.  These devices are sometimes referred to as O-
        O-O devices, because they receive an optical signal, switch it 
        optically, then transmit the same optical signal without ever 
        converting it to an electrical signal.  An example is a MEMS-
        based photonic switch in which both the interfaces and 
        switching fabric are transparent.  Transparent devices, in 
        theory, can operate independent of traffic type and bandwidth. 
    
     .  Optical Cross Connect (OXC):   
        A cross connect that switches optical connections.  The term 
        OXC is used as a generic term that may apply to both opaque and 
        transparent devices.  Whenever the material applies to both 
        opaque and transparent devices, we use the term OXC, as opposed 
        to the more specific PXC term defined below. 

                                                              [Page 5] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
    
     .  Photonic Cross Connect (PXC):   
        A transparent OXC.  An example is a MEMS-based photonic switch 
        in which both the interfaces and switching fabric are 
        transparent.  Whenever the material in this document applies 
        specifically to transparent devices, we used the term PXC, as 
        opposed to the more generic term OXC defined above. 
    
     .  Optical Line System (OLS):   
        An optical line system is used to transmit data over long 
        distances.  There are various classes including long-haul, 
        ultra-long haul, metro, however, we do not differentiate 
        between the classes in this document.  Most OLSs being deployed 
        today use wave division multiplexing (WDM), or dense division 
        multiplexing (DWDM) techniques to multiplex many channels over 
        a single pair of fibers.  Therefore, the OLS is also commonly 
        referred to as a DWDM transmission system.  An OLS typically 
        contains multiple types of nodes including DWDM and Optical 
        Amplifier (OA) nodes.  Although an OLS contains multiple nodes, 
        they work as a single system, and for the purposes of this 
        document, we treat the OLS as a single system.  Note that an 
        OLS may be either opaque or transparent, however, in this 
        document we only address opaque OLSs. 
    
     .  OLS Client:   
        Any device that attaches to an OLS for the purpose of using its 
        data transmission services.  An OLS client may be either opaque 
        or transparent.  In Figure 1, the OXC is shown as an OLS client 
        with the service delivery platforms connected to the OXC; 
        however, the service delivery platforms may also be direct OLS 
        clients.  Whenever the material in this document applies to any 
        OLS client, we use this most general term. 
    
     .  Link:   
        The term link refers to a circuit or logical connection between 
        two peer OLS clients.  The OLS transmits the data on a link 
        between the two peer OLS clients.  A link may be uni-
        directional or bi-directional. 
    
     .  Port:   
        Place where an OLS client attaches to an OLS.  A link requires 
        that both OLS clients are attached to corresponding ports on 
        the OLS. 
    
   This work is motivated by two main issues.  The first is the need to 
   enhance the fault detection and recovery support for PXCs, and the 
   second is to enhance the discovery of link characteristics for 
   optical networks in general.  These issues are discussed separately 
   below.  We then provide more specific requirements for an interface 
   between the OLS and OLS client proposed to solve these issues called 
   the Optical Link Interface (OLI). 

                                                              [Page 6] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
    
   DISCLAIMER:  The name ôOLIö, introduced in [OIF2000.254], has been 
   chosen due to the lack of a better name at this time.  Not all of 
   the co-authors agree on the name OLI. 
    
    
2. Fault Detection and Notification for PXCs 
    
   Standard SONET/SDH equipment provides extensive fault detection, 
   reporting and handling capabilities.  These SONET/SDH standards can 
   be employed by opaque devices using SONET/SDH overhead messaging; 
   however, as networks transition to the use of more transparent 
   optical networking devices, such as PXCs, access to the SONET/SDH 
   overhead may not exist in every node.  Once a connection is 
   established, PXCs have only limited visibility into the health of 
   the connection.  Even though the PXC is all-optical, an opaque OLS 
   terminates channels electrically and regenerate them optically, 
   which presents an opportunity to monitor the health of a channel 
   between PXCs.  The elements of an OLS also typically communicate 
   over an internal control channel.  This can provide a system wide 
   view of OLS client-to-client link health.  In a sense, the OLI 
   allows the OLSs to become the ôeyes and the earsö of the PXC. 
    
   The typical OLS located between a pair of PXCs monitors for 
   degradation and faults along the entire fiber path. Expensive 
   electronic circuitry monitors such degradations at the SONET/SDH and 
   wavelength level at various points along the fiber path. Repeaters 
   and Amplifiers detect fiber cuts and pass along the information to 
   other equipment along the path.  SONET/SDH-level failures can be 
   detected as well. To use the SONET/SDH-level fault reporting 
   methods, all devices require the expensive electronic circuitry. A 
   PXC can avoid the use of SONET/SDH circuitry to provide a more cost 
   effective solution.  In this perspective, an OLI between the OLS and 
   PXC can provide the same fault information to a non-SONET/SDH 
   client, while reducing the cost of that client, and, therefore 
   overall network cost. 
    
    
3. Discovery of Link Properties 
    
   The establishment of connections in an optical network may be 
   accomplished either through a centralized management system or a 
   distributed control system, such as GMPLS. 
    
   A great deal of information about a link between two clients is 
   known by the OLS.  Exposing this information to the control plane 
   can improve network usability by further reducing required manual 
   configuration and also greatly enhancing fault detection and 
   recovery.   
    


                                                              [Page 7] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
   The configuration and management of todayÆs transport networks are 
   largely driven by significant human intervention, which increases 
   the time to turn up revenue generating services and is prone to 
   errors and inefficiencies.  Even where management systems provide 
   automation for some provisioning and management tasks, the 
   management systems are still largely proprietary and cumbersome.  
   Furthermore, optical networks are more commonly being deployed with 
   equipment from multiple vendors which further burdens the user with 
   multiple management systems.  A standard interface between the OLS 
   and its clients can simplify the users job by allowing some 
   provisioning functions to be accomplished by just the client 
   management application. 
    
   The Generalized Multi-protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) body of work 
   [GMPLS-ARCH] is being specified in the IETF to provide a standard 
   automated and distributed IP control plane for optical networks.  
   The use of GMPLS will enable the dynamic provisioning of resources 
   and provide network survivability using protection and restoration 
   techniques.  The main intent of GMPLS is to make optical networks 
   more manageable, scalable and efficient, while maintaining or 
   improving on their current high availability characteristics.  GMPLS 
   protocols define standard control interfaces between service 
   delivery platforms and OXCs to exchange routing [GMPLS-OSPF, GMPLS-
   ISIS] and signaling [GMPLS-SIG, GMPLS-RSVP, GMPLS-LDP] information, 
   and perform link management functions [LMP].  An interface with the 
   OLS can allow GMPLS devices to automatically learn information about 
   the links, and therefore, will reduce required manual configuration. 
    
    
4. Requirements for the Optical Link Interface 
    
   In this section we define more specific requirements for an Optical 
   Link Interface (OLI) between the OLS and its clients.  As described 
   above, the OLI is required to provide fast failure detection and 
   notification for PXCs, as well as to provide much-needed information 
   for the operation of both centralized and GMPLS-controlled optical 
   networks. 
    
4.1. OLI General Principles 
    
     .  In optical networks there will be a management plane and a 
        control plane. The fundamental purpose of the control plane is 
        to accurately and rapidly create, maintain, and delete 
        connections within the optical network; while the purpose of 
        the management plane is to provide operators with capabilities 
        such as root cause analysis, service definition, and SLA 
        verification.  The OLI is targeted at the information that is 
        required for the control plane to accomplish its task. 
    



                                                              [Page 8] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
     .  The OLI should be a simple protocol mechanism for reporting the 
        health and properties of OLSs based on a well-defined set of 
        parameters. 
    
     .  The OLI-defined parameters should be accessible via query by 
        both the control and the management plane of the network 
        regardless of the architecture used (i.e., distributed or 
        centralized). 
    
     .  The OLI should be extensible so that we can start with a set of 
        most-needed parameters initially, and be able to extend later 
        by adding new parameter types and new parameters within a type.  
        In particular, the initial focus is on opaque OLSs.  However, 
        the OLS should be extensible for use with all optical networks 
        containing PXCs and transparent OLSs. 
    
     .  The initial focus of the OLI is on SONET and SDH equipment.  
        However, the OLI must be extensible to support other types of 
        equipment such as Ethernet and G.709. 
    
     .  All the intelligence such as data collection, analysis, 
        triggering, routing decisions, etc. should reside in the 
        network control and management plane functions. What and how 
        the OLI-parameters are used is totally up to the control and 
        management plane design. In effect, this will allow OLI to be 
        decoupled from any particular control plane protocol such as 
        GMPLS. 
    
     .  In general, care must be taken to make the OLI implementable on 
        existing OLS hardware, while still being flexible enough to 
        allow enhanced operations with future generations of OLS 
        hardware.  This desire may make it necessary to specify some 
        optional OLI features. 
    
    
4.2. General OLI Characteristics 
    
     .  The OLI must be reliable. 
    
     .  The OLI must provide security measures. 
    
     .  The OLI must not assume a one-to-one relationship between OLS 
        and client.  I.e., an OLS client will most likely be attached 
        to multiple different OLSs, and a single OLS may have multiple 
        different clients at a single location. 
    
    
4.3. OLI Functionality 
    
4.3.1. Neighbor Discovery 
    

                                                              [Page 9] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
     .  It should be possible for adjacent nodes to use the OLI with as 
        little configuration as possible. 
    
     .  The OLI should support discovery and negotiation of optional 
        features. 
    
    
4.3.2. Control Channel Maintenance 
    
     .  The OLI must support the use of out-of-band communications for 
        all messages (except for the specific in-band signals for 
        connectivity discovery described in Section 4.3.4). 
     .  The OLI must provide a mechanism to maintain the OLI 
        session/control channel between neighboring nodes.  For 
        example, a simple hello or keep-alive protocol could be used.  
        If a session fails it should be reestablished and the 
        information should be resynchronized as described in Section 
        4.3.3. 
    
4.3.3. OLI Synchronization 
    
     .  The OLI must specify a process for the OLS and OLS client to 
        resynchronize if the session is disrupted for any reason (such 
        as a reboot or temporary loss of control channel connectivity).   
    
     .  The resynchronization process should be defined such that the 
        OLS does not need to remember the instructions issued by the 
        OLS client. The client should re-issue the 
        instructions/commands to OLS during the resynchronization. 
    
    
4.3.4. Connectivity Discovery 
    
     .  The OLI must provide a protocol including in-band signals for 
        auto discovery of optical connectivity. 
    
     .  The OLI must support control over link transparency. 
    
    
   Link transparency control is used by OLS clients to control whether 
   the OLS terminates the in-band messages, or allows them to pass 
   through so that the OLS client can discover its peer at a higher 
   layer. 
    
4.3.5. Fault Management 
    
     .  Fault reporting must be both event-driven and available on 
        request (e.g., polling). 
    
     .  The defect notification must be fast enough to support switch 
        times in the range of a few 10Æs of milliseconds. 

                                                             [Page 10] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
    
                                    
   Note:  The OLS does not participate in end-to-end fault isolation.   
    
   It is the role of the control plane to determine whether switching 
   is done on the section or path level and to make the protection 
   switching decisions. 
    
     .  The OLI should support the aggregation of fault reporting.  For 
        example, the failure of a single fiber could cause the failure 
        of 100Æs to 1000Æs of ports simultaneously.  If possible, it 
        would be better to send a single message to report all 
        failures. 
    
    
4.3.5.1. Fault Notification 
    
   At a minimum, the following fault granularity must be provided: 
    
     .  Signal Okay (OK): Port is operational. 
    
     .  Signal Fail (SF): A hard signal failure including (but not 
        limited to) loss of signal (LOS), loss of frame (LOF), Line 
        AIS, or a BER (BIP-8 measure through B1/B2) exceeding a 
        specified value. 
    
     .  Signal Degrade (SD): A soft failure caused by a BER exceeding a 
        preselected threshold.  The specific BER used to define the 
        threshold is may be configured, but is typically in the range 
        of 10-5 to 10-9. 
    
     .  It should be possible to negotiate a line behavior for the 
        above failures.  For example, it may be more advantageous to a 
        PXC for the OLS to turn off its laser than to insert AIS-L when 
        a failure is detected. 
    
     .  It is expected that the thresholds necessary (e.g., BER) for 
        detecting the above failures are provisioned at the OLS.  It 
        may also be useful to support the negotiation of some of these 
        thresholds. 
    
    
4.3.5.2. Trace Monitoring 
    
   Trace monitoring is an important feature, especially for PXCs.  The 
   trace monitoring features described in this section, allow the PXC 
   to do basic trace monitoring on circuits by using the capabilities 
   on the attached OLSs 
    
     .  It must be possible for an OLS Client to request the OLS to 
        monitor a link for a specific pattern in the overhead.  An 

                                                             [Page 11] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
        example of this overhead is the SONET Section Trace message 
        transmitted in the J0 byte.  If the actual trace message does 
        not match the expected trace message, the OLS must report the 
        mismatch condition. 
    
     .  It must be possible for an OLS client to request the value of 
        the current trace message on a given port. 
    
     .  It should be possible for an OLS client to request the OLS to 
        insert a trace message.  It is optional for an OLS to provide 
        this service. 
    
    
4.3.5.3. Alarm Suppression 
    
     .  It must be possible to enable a port in an unequipped state on 
        an OLS, but suppress alarms.  This allows the OXC to have a 
        port/wavelength ready, but not necessarily operational. 
    
    
4.3.6. Link Property Information 
    
   The link property advertisement provides information known to 
   transport systems that would otherwise need to be configured at the 
   OLS client.  Link properties, in general, constitute the information 
   needed by the control plane for constraint-based routing and 
   connection establishment. Additionally, the information advertised 
   in the Link Property advertisement is intended to be more-or-less 
   static, as opposed to the more dynamic information available in the 
   Performance Information Advertisement described in the next section. 
    
   The OLI should provide a mechanism for advertising the following 
   information: 
    
     .  Link Descriptor 
    
     .  Signal Type:  The overhead termination type (e.g., STM-16 or 
        OC-48). 
    
     .  Bandwidth Encoding:  Bandwidth supported on the link. 
    
     .  Shared Risk Link Group Identifier (SRLG):  SRLGs to which the 
        link is a member.  This information may be manually configured 
        on the OLS by the service providers.  It may also be derived 
        based on information known to the OLS (e.g., all circuits 
        sharing a single fiber).  The SRLG can be used for diverse path 
        computation. See [GMPLS-OSPF] or [GMPLS-ISIS] for more details 
        on SRLGs. 
    



                                                             [Page 12] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
     .  Span Length:  Distance of fiber in the OLS.  May be used as a 
        routing metric or to estimate delay.  This value may either be 
        estimated by the OLS, or provisioned at the OLS. 
    
     .  Administrative Group (Color). 
    
    
     












































                                                             [Page 13] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
5. References 
    
   [GMPLS-ARCH]  E. Mannie, Editor, ôGeneralized Multi-Protocol Label 
                 Switching (GMPLS) Architectureö, Internet Draft, 
                 draft-many-gmpls-architecture-00.txt, (work in 
                 progress), February 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-ISIS]  Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A., Drake, J., 
                 Bernstein, G., Fedyk, D., Mannie, E., Saha, D., and 
                 Sharma, V., ôIS-IS Extensions in Support of 
                 Generalized MPLSö, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-isis-
                 gmpls-extensions-02.txt, (work in progress), February 
                 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-LDP]   Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, ôGeneralized MPLS Signaling - 
                 CR-LDP Extensionsö, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-
                 generalized-cr-ldp-01.txt, (work in progress), 
                 February 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-OSPF]  Kompella, K., et. al, ôOSPF Extensions in Support of 
                 Generalized MPLSö, Internet Draft, draft-kompella-
                 ospf-gmpls-extensions-01.txt, (work in progress), 
                 February 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-SIG]   Berger, L., Ashwood-Smith, Peter, editors, 
                 ôGeneralized MPLS - Signaling Functional Descriptionö, 
                 Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
                 02.txt, (work in progress), March 2001. 
    
   [LMP]         Lang, J., et. al, ôLink Management Protocol (LMP)ö, 
                 Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-lmp-02.txt, (work in 
                 progress), March 2001. 
    
   [LMP-WDM]     A. Fredette, et al., ôLink Management Protocol (LMP) 
                 for WDM Transmission Systems,ö Internet Draft, draft-
                 fredette-lmp-wdm-01.txt, (work in progress), March 
                 2001. 
    
   [NTIP]        V. Sahay et al., ôNetwork Transport Interface Protocol 
                 (NTIP) for Photonic Cross Connects (PXC),ö Internet 
                 Draft, draft-sahay-ccamp-ntip-00.txt, (work in 
                 progress), February 2001. 
    
   [OIF2000.254] Drake, J., Blumenthal, D., Ceuppens, L., et al., 
                 ôInterworking between Photonic (Optical) Switches and 
                 Transmission Systems over Optical Link Interface (OLI) 
                 using Extensions to LMPö, OIF Contribution 
                 oif2000.254,  (work in progress), November 2000. 
    
   [RFC2026]     Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- 
                 Revision 3," BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 

                                                             [Page 14] 

Internet Draft       draft-many-oli-reqts-00.txt            June 2001 
                                     
6. Author Contact Information 
 
    
   Osama Aboul-Magd                    John Labourdette 
   Nortel Networks                     Tellium 
   osama@nortelnetworks.com            jlabourdette@tellium.com 
                                        
   Curtis Brownmiller                  Jonathan Lang 
   WorldCom                            Calient Networks 
   Curtis.Brownmiller@wcom.com         jplang@calient.net 
                                        
   Sudheer Dharanikota                 Eric Mannie 
   Nayna Networks                      Ebone (GTS) 
   sudheer@nayna.com                   Eric.Mannie@ebone.com 
                                        
   John Drake                          Babu Narayanan 
   Calient Networks                    Nortel Networks 
   jdrake@calient.net                  bon@nortelnetworks.com 
                                                                        
   Naganand Doraswamy                  Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   PhotonEx Corp.                      Alcatel IPO-NSG 
   naganand@photonex.com               dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be 
                                        
   Georgios Ellinas                    Bala Rajagopalan 
   Tellium                             Tellium 
   gellinas@tellium.com                BRaja@tellium.com 
                                        
   Andre Fredette                      Rajiv Ramaswami 
   PhotonEx Corp.                      Nortel Networks 
   fredette@photonex.com               rajiv@nortelnetworks.com 
                                        
   Rohit Goyal                         Vasant Sahay 
   Axiowave Networks                   Nortel Networks 
   rgoyal@axiowave.com                 vasants@nortelnetworks.com 
                                        
   Riad Hartani                        Ed Snyder 
   Caspian Networks                    PhotonEx Corp. 
   rhartani@caspiannetworks.com        esnyder@photonex.com 
                                        
   Bilel Jamoussi                      Yong Xue 
   Nortel Networks                     UUNET/WorldCom 
   jamoussi@nortelnetworks.com         yxue@UU.NET 
                                        









                                                             [Page 15] 
