

IETF Next Steps in Signaling                                    S. Jeong
Working Group                                                       HUFS
Internet-Draft                                                    S. Lee
Expires: April 26, 2004                                          J. Bang
                                                                  BJ Lee
                                                             SAMSUNG AIT
                                                        October 27, 2003


                     Mobility Functions in the NTLP
                 draft-jeong-nsis-mobility-ntlp-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The lower general layer in the NSIS protocol suite, called the NSIS
   Transport Layer Protocol (NTLP), is intended to provide a general
   transport service for signaling messages. One of the items on the
   list of desired features for the NTLP is mobility support. This
   document identifies possible mobility functions in the NTLP according
   to the mobility requirements for future signaling protocols.






Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Interactions with the NSLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Detection of Route Change Caused by Mobility . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Crossover Node (CRN) Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Dead Peer Discovery (DPD)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Interworking with Mobility Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 17





































Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


1. Introduction

   The lower general layer in the NSIS signaling protocol suite, called
   the NSIS Transport Layer Protocol (NTLP), is intended to provide a
   general transport service for signaling messages. The actual
   signaling messages are generated within upper layer signaling
   applications, each having its own NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol
   (NSLP) [2]. The main functionality of the NTLP is to discover
   appropriate NSIS nodes and to deliver the signaling messages to them.

   Mobility support is considered as one of the desired features of the
   NTLP [3, 13, 15, 21, 22]. This document attempts to identify
   mobility functions that may need to be supported in the NTLP. In this
   document, the mobility functions in the NTLP refer to the functions
   which are used to support mobility in NSIS signaling. The possible
   mobility (-related) functions in the NTLP include interactions with
   the NSLP, detection of route change caused by mobility, crossover
   node discovery, dead peer discovery (e.g., dead crossover node
   discovery), interworking with mobility protocols, and so on. This
   document mainly discusses possible issues related to each of the
   mobility functions in the NTLP.

1.1 Terminology

   AR: Access Router

   CARD: Candidate Access Router Discovery

   CN: Correspondent Node

   CoA: Care of Address

   CRN: Crossover Node

   CT: Context Transfer

   DPD: Dead Peer Discovery

   MN: Mobile Node

   NE: NSIS Entity

   NF: NSIS Forwarder

   NI: NSIS Initiator






Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   NSLP: NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol

   NTLP: NSIS Transport Layer Protocol

   PD: Peer Discovery

   PD Requestor: an NE which sends a PD request message

   PD Responder: an NE which receives the PD request message and sends
      the PD response message

   QoS-NSLP: NSLP for QoS Signaling







































Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


2. Interactions with the NSLP

   In this section, we identify possbile interactions between the NTLP
   and the NSLP, which can also be applied in mobile scenarios. An
   incoming NSIS signaling message will first be captured and processed
   by the NTLP. Any NSIS message related to the associated NSLP (e.g.,
   QoS-NSLP) will be passed to the NSLP via an API from the NTLP.
   Upon reception of any notification or trigger from the NTLP, the NSLP
   needs to decide its next behavior on its own. For example, the
   QoS-NSLP may need to update QoS-NSLP state information or initiate
   necessary actions such as removal of old QoS reservation states. The
   change of NTLP states may also trigger the associated NSLP to create,
   update, or release related NSLP states.

   To trigger the NSLP, the NTLP first needs to detect any triggering
   events. For example, the NTLP may be able to generate a trigger after
   detecting that a route change due to mobility has occurred. In this
   case, the triggering message may need to include information about
   sessions that are impacted by the route change. The NSLP is then
   responsible for deciding necessary actions for the impacted sessions.
   The NSLP will also trigger the NTLP via an API to deliver necessary
   signaling messages to the next NSIS peer node.

   When a mobility event such as a handover (e.g., fast handover in
   Mobile IPv6) is initiated, the NTLP/NSLP should operate to
   re-establish the states along the new path as quickly as possible.
   For this purpose, the interactions with seamoby protocols may be
   necessary (see Section 5 for further details). It may not be possible
   to re-establish states (e.g., since the necessary resources are not
   available on the new path). In this case, it may be desired that the
   NTLP/NSLP needs to get service availability (e.g., QoS resource
   availability) in advance or before the handover is completed.

   The NTLP/NSLP states established on the old path should be removed
   immediately after re-establishing the states along the new path
   because the old states should not be maintained any longer. To do
   this, the NSLP of an appropriate NSIS entity (NE) (e.g., crossover
   node) may ask the associated NTLP to deliver a teardown message to
   the NEs on the old path. In this case, the NTLP should know where to
   send the teardown message on the obsolete path.











Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


3. Detection of Route Change Caused by Mobility

   In mobile scenarios, a route change (rerouting) may occur due to a
   mobility event that can be characterized by the change of the IP
   address (e.g., care-of-address (CoA)) of one of the end points (e.g.,
   an MN) due to a handover. Link or node failure (or management-related
   operations) may also cause a route change. However, this document
   considers only route changes due to mobility-related events such as
   an MN's handover.

   A route change caused by mobility should be detected by the NTLP for
   necessary state creation, update, or removal. A route change can be
   detected when the NTLP of an NE finds out that the route taken by a
   flow has changed (e.g., by checking the incoming interface). To
   provide fast adaptation to route changes for particular destinations,
   the NTLP may be in interaction with routing protocols.

   The route change event detected by the NTLP will then be used to
   trigger the NSLP associated with the sessions which are impacted by
   the route change. When the NSLP receives a trigger from the NTLP, it
   sends necessary NSLP messages along the new route with the help of
   the NTLP.

   Although the route change caused by a mobility event may be
   considered similar to the normal route change, the main difference
   from the normal route change is the fact that the flow identifier
   should be updated at the NEs involved with the session along the
   end-to-end signaling path. To do this, the crossover node (CRN), the
   merging point of the old and new signaling paths, should be
   discovered first, and the NTLP of the CRN needs to forward a state
   update message further towards the other end point (e.g., CN). The
   NTLP of the CRN should also send a state installation message on the
   new path and a state teardown message on the obsolete path. The
   detailed discussion about the crossover node discovery can be found
   in the following section.
















Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


4. Crossover Node (CRN) Discovery

   In this section, we discuss how to find the CRN in general and the
   role of the CRN (especially in QoS re-establishment). We also discuss
   possible use of seamoby protocols such as CT or CARD for the CRN
   discovery during handover.

   When a route change due to a handover occurs, the NTLP signaling for
   the NSIS peer discovery and service (e.g., QoS) re-establishment
   should be localized to improve scalability and reduce signaling
   overhead. To achieve this, the CRN should be discovered quickly by
   the NTLP, and the NSLP (e.g., QoS-NSLP) should be triggered by the
   NTLP for necessary actions (such as QoS re-establishment on the new
   path and teardown of old reservation states on the obsolete path).
   For the CRN discovery, some information including the MOBILITY
   object, the session identifier, the flow identifier, and the incoming
   interface can be used.

   The MOBILITY object may be defined in the NTLP message (e.g., GIMPS
   payload) to notify any mobility event explicitly. The MOBILITY object
   may contain various mobility-related fields such as the handover_init
   field and the mobility_event_counter field. The handover_init field
   can be used to explicitly notify that a handover is initiated for
   fast state re-establishment. The mobility_event_counter field can be
   used to detect the latest hanover event to avoid confusion about
   where to send a confirmation message which indicates that the CRN has
   been found. This type of confirmation may be needed when the MN moves
   toward the second new AR immediately after it experiences a handover
   to the first new AR from the old AR, because the CRN discovery
   message from the second new AR may arrive earlier that that of the
   first new AR. The MOBILITY object may also be defined in the NSLP in
   a similar way. In this case, there should be some relationship
   between the MOBILITY objects of the NTLP and the NSLP.

   The session identifier can be very useful for the crossover node
   discovery. It should be globally unique and independent from the IP
   address of an end node (e.g., MN) to identify the involved session
   easily even after a change of the CoA due to a handover to a new AR.
   It is important that for the duration of a data flow, the session
   identifier has to remain the same while the flow identifier (see
   below) information associated with the same data flow may change.

   The flow identifier is normally used to identify a particular data
   flow for which the specific service (e.g., QoS) is requested from the
   network. For example, a flow identifier may consist of a combination
   of source IP address, destination IP address, and flow label in
   IPv6-based networks. This flow identifier may also be used to specify
   the relationship between the address information and the state



Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   re-establishment (e.g., QoS-NSLP state re-establishment).

   Additionally, the incoming interface may also be used for the CRN
   discovery together with the unique session identifier if the CRN is
   the NSIS-aware merging point of the old and new paths. If the merging
   point is not NSIS-aware and can't act as a CRN, the nearest (from the
   merging point) NSIS-aware node along the joined/common/unchanged path
   can act as a CRN for the involved session. In this case, the incoming
   interface may not be useful for the CRN discovery because the
   NSIS-aware node is no longer a merging point of the old and new
   paths. Therefore, in this case, other identifiers (e.g., flow
   identifier, MOBILITY Object, and so on) may also be needed to
   discover the crossover node on the joined/common/unchanged path.

   When a route change caused by mobility occurs, the CRN can be
   recognized by comparing the existing session identifier with the
   session identifier of the flow received from an incoming interface.
   If the session identifier is still the same and the flow identifier
   or interface number has been changed, the current NSIS-aware node is
   recognized as a CRN. As mentioned above, the MOBILITY object can also
   be used to indicate that the MN has experienced a handover and a
   route has occurred.

   The CRN discovery may also be initiated during handover (i.e., before
   the handover is completed), for instance, for fast QoS-NSLP
   re-establishment or pre-establishment. However, in this case, an
   efficient mechanism is needed to find a candidate CRN. For example,
   after a mobility event is detected by the NTLP, the current AR may
   use a candidate access router discovery (e.g., CARD [10]) protocol to
   transfer the context for QoS-NSLP re-establishment immediately. After
   candidate ARs are found, a context transfer mechanism (e.g., CT [9])
   can be used to transfer the context including the QoS-NSLP session
   information to re-establish QoS-NSLP states quickly. If an
   appropriate AR is found and the context transfer is completed, a
   candidate CRN can be discovered easily since the candidate CRN
   discovery is basically the same as above.

   In some cases, however, it may not be possible to use
   mobility-related protocols such as CT and CARD. In this case, the MN
   can initiate the CRN discovery only after it changes the point of
   attachment. To expedite the discovery process, it may be useful to
   transmit the peer discovery message (by the NTLP) and the first
   binding update message at the same time.








Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


5. Dead Peer Discovery (DPD)

   It may be possible that the CRN may be found dead before
   re-establishing states on the new path or removing the old states on
   the obsolete path. It is also possible that the old AR cannot
   communicate with the MN (the peer node of the OAR) any longer after a
   handover is initiated. Therefore, an efficient mechanism (which
   should be used by the NTLP) is needed to find dead peers immediately
   to minimize service interruption. This section first discusses a
   possible way of finding live NSIS peers and then how to discover dead
   NSIS peers.

   Before the delivery of any NTLP messages, the NE (e.g., NI, NF, or
   NR) first needs to launch the peer discovery (PD) mechanism which
   sends a PD request message (e.g., Scout message in CASP [4]) to its
   neighboring nodes along the signaling path to detect its NSIS peer.
   The transmission of PD messages by the NTLP may be separated from the
   transmission of regular signaling messages since PD messages may be
   difficult to protect. It is also possible to combine both types of
   messages for efficiency in message delivery. For example, the
   detection of an NSIS peer and establishment of a QoS-NSLP state can
   be performed by sending an NSIS message.

   An NE which sends a PD request message is called a PD requestor, and
   an NE which receives the PD request message and sends an
   acknowledgement (ACK) message is called a PD responder. Upon
   receiving a PD request message, the PD responder sends an ACK. The
   ACK message includes a cookie for security protection. The PD
   requestor needs to check the cookie to make sure security protection.
   In this way, NSIS peers can be found securely and easily.

   Note that NEs may not always transmit signaling messages successfully
   to its NSIS peer along the signaling path. For example, signaling
   messages may not be delivered to its peer when an NF (or NR) is
   temporarily or permanently disconnected from the network due to the
   failure of communication links (or processors), system rebooting,
   node congestion, or a mobile node's handover, causing the change of
   signaling path in the network. Therefore, dead peers which are no
   longer reachable should be detected. To do this, the PD requestor
   periodically transmits a ferret message (i.e., a PD request message)
   to its neighboring peers. The PD requestor must receive an ACK
   message from its peer (i.e., the PD responder) within a certain
   amount of time to determine if its peer is still alive.

   If the PD requestor does not receive any ACK message from the PD
   responder within a certain amount of time (i.e., the PD timer
   expires), the PD requestor retransmits the same PD message to the PD
   responder one more time. If the PD requestor does not still receive



Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   any ACK message from the PD responder, the PD requestor will consider
   the PD responder as a dead peer. In this case, the PD requestor will
   send a new PD message to find its new peer. This rediscovery process
   is actually the same as the PD mechanism described above. If the peer
   node failure (due to a link or node processor failure) causes any
   route change, the NTLP may need to interact with a routing protocol
   to determine where to send the new PD message.

   If an MN acts as an NI or NR, a route change in the network may occur
   (e.g., due to handover). In this case, the old AR will find that its
   peer (i.e., MN) is not alive any longer since it will not receive any
   ACK from the MN in response to the periodic transmission of PD
   request messages. However, in this case, the NTLP of the old AR
   should not generate any error message to avoid teardown of existing
   states before the CRN initiates a teardown message on the obsolete
   path. The old AR can be considered as the actual last node on the old
   path after the MN changes the point of attachment.

   It is important to verify the correctness of PD messages for security
   purposes. For example, an efficient mechanism may need to be used in
   order to determine if the PD message has been received from the
   authorized peer. If the PD request message is found to be valid, the
   PD responder sends an ACK message immediately. Upon receiving the ACK
   message from the PD responder, the PD requestor may need to inspect
   the cookie of the received ACK message from the PD responder for
   security protection.

























Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


6. Interworking with Mobility Protocols

   The NSIS protocol needs to efficiently handle the path change due to
   mobility in order to support existing fast and seamless mobility
   mechanisms although the NSIS protocol is not to be coupled tightly
   with mobility protocols (e.g., FMIPv6, HMIPv6, or MIPv6). To do this,
   the movement of an MN should be detected first by the NTLP of an MN
   or AR. For example, the NTLP of an MN can detect movement  with the
   help of monitoring layer 2 connections, and the NTLP of an AR can
   also detect movement by receiving a handover initiation message
   (e.g., 'RtSolPr' message in Fast Handover for MIPv6). The NSLP is
   then triggered by the NTLP to act appropriately. For example, the
   QoS-NSLP may appropriately set the MOBILITY object of an outgoing
   QoS-NSLP message for fast QoS state re-establishment [24].

   After receiving the information on the mobility event, the NTLP of
   the AR may interact with a candidate access router discovery protocol
   (e.g., CARD) to find an appropriate AR (an NSIS-aware node) before
   the handover is completed. After the appropriate AR is discovered,
   the NTLP may trigger the NSLP, and the NSLP may need to interact with
   the context transfer (CT) protocol to transfer the NSLP state
   information to the newly discovered AR.

   After handover, the NTLP of a new AR may detect handover completion,
   which can be used to minimize the service re-establishment delay and
   the data packet loss. For instance, when an MN begins to transmit
   first Binding Update (BU) message to its CN (or MAP in case of
   HMIPv6), the NTLP may initiate peer discovery and send NSLP messages
   at the same time to create a new state on the new signaling path for
   the same signaling application.





















Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


7. Security Considerations

   The NTLP may rely on the security mechanisms described in [4].
   Securing the NTLP can be provided by CMS which allows resource
   objects and related objects defined in this document to be
   encapsulated and protected by CMS. Therefore, no separate
   specification within the NTLP may be necessary to describe the format
   of these objects. This allows some flexibility in including protected
   objects to link the authorization step of different protocols and to
   transport local information within domains. The functionality
   described in [19] and [20] can be provided without substantial
   protocol modification/extensions.







































Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


8. Summary

   This document identified what kind of mobility functions should be
   supported in the NTLP according to the mobility requirements for
   future signaling protocols. Possible mobility functions for the NTLP
   include interactions with the NSLP, detection of route change caused
   by mobility, crossover node discovery, dead peer discovery,
   interworking with mobility protocols, and so on. There are still some
   issues to be addressed in further detail, including the last NSIS
   node detection, crossover node discovery in receiver- and
   sender-initiated modes, IP-in-IP encapsulation, interworking with
   seamoby protocols, security and AAA, and etc.







































Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


References

   [1]   Brunner, M., "Requirements for Signaling Protocols",
         draft-ietf-nsis-req-09 (work in progress), August 2003.

   [2]   Hancock, R., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework",
         draft-ietf-nsis-fw-04 (work in progress), September 2003.

   [3]   Chaskar, H., "Requirements of a Quality of Service (QoS)
         Solution for Mobile IP", RFC 3583, September 2003.

   [4]   Schulzrinne, H., "CASP - Cross-Application Signaling Protocol",
         draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-01 (work in progress), March 2003.

   [5]   Schulzrinne, H., "A Quality-of-Service Resource Allocation
         Client for CASP", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-qos-01 (work in
         progress), March 2003.

   [6]   McDonald, A., "A Quality of Service NSLP for NSIS",
         draft-mcdonald-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), June 2003.

   [7]   Bosch, S., "NSLP for Quality-of-Service signaling",
         draft-ietf-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), September 2003.

   [8]   Schulzrinne, H., "GIMPS: General Internet Messaging Protocol
         for Signaling", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-ntlp-00 (work in
         progress), June 2003.

   [9]   Loughney, J., "Context Transfer Protocol",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-ctp-04 (work in progress), October 2003.

   [10]  Liebsch, M., "Candidate Access Router Discovery",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-card-protocol-04 (work in progress),
         September 2003.

   [11]  Tschofenig, H. and D. Kroeselberg, "Security Threats for NSIS",
         draft-ietf-nsis-threats-02 (work in progress), July 2003.

   [12]  Buchli, M., "A Network Service Layer Protocol for QoS
         signaling", draft-buchli-nsis-nslp-00 (work in progress), June
         2003.

   [13]  Fu, X., "Mobility Issues in Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS)",
         draft-fu-nsis-mobility-01 (work in progress), October 2003.

   [14]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-08 (work in progress), October
         2003.



Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   [15]  Lee, S., "QoS Signaling for IP-based Radio Access Networks",
         draft-lee-nsis-signaling-ran-00 (work in progress), June 2003.

   [16]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. Jamin,
         "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
         Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [17]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F. and S.
         Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions", RFC
         2961, April 2001.

   [18]  Westberg, L., "A Proposal for RSVPv2",
         draft-westberg-proposal-for-rsvpv2-01 (work in progress),
         November 2002.

   [19]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B. and H. Shieh, "Framework for Session
         Set-up with Media Authorization", RFC 3521, April 2003.

   [20]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B., Kosinski, B. and H. Shieh, "Session
         Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, April 2003.

   [21]  Shen, C., "Several Framework Issues Regarding NSIS and
         Mobility", draft-shen-nsis-mobility-fw-00 (work in progress),
         July 2002.

   [22]  Chaskar, H. and C. Westphal, "QoS Signaling Framework for
         Mobile IP", draft-westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip-00 (work in
         progress), June 2002.

   [23]  Schulzrinne, H., "GIMPS: General Internet Messaging Protocol
         for Signaling", draft-ietf-nsis-ntlp-00 (work in progress),
         October 2003.

   [24]  Lee, S., "Mobility Functions in the QoS-NTLP",
         draft-jeong-nsis-mobility-ntlp-00 (work in progress), October
         2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Seong-Ho Jeong
   Hankuk University of FS
   89 Wangsan Mohyun
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-791
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 330 4642
   EMail: shjeong@hufs.ac.kr







Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   Sung-Hyuck Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: starsu.lee@samsung.com


   Jongho Bang
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: jh0278.bang@samsung.com


   Byoung-Joon (BJ) Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 280 9626
   EMail: bj33.lee@samsung.com




















Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Mobility Functions in the NTLP         October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Jeong, et al.            Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 18]


