


NETLMM Working Group                                          A. Muhanna
Internet-Draft                                                    Nortel
Intended status: Standards Track                             S. Krishnan
Expires: August 21, 2008                                        Ericsson
                                                                K. Leung
                                                                   Cisco
                                                                B. Patil
                                                  Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                       February 18, 2008


            Proxy MIPv6 support for transient registrations
        draft-muhanna-netlmm-pmipv6-support-transient-coa-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 is a network-based mobility protocol which provides
   IP mobility for a regular IPv6 mobile node without the involvement of
   the IPv6 host.  This document specify an enhancement to enable Proxy



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


   MIPv6 protocol to support a transient proxy care-of address
   registration.  This process allows the target mobile access gateway
   to request the local mobility anchor which host the mobile node
   binding cache entry to register a transient proxy care-of address and
   the direction of the associated traffic to enable the LMA to receive
   uplink traffic from two different proxy care-of addresses at the same
   time during the mobile node inter-MAG active handoff.


Table of Contents

   1.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Transient Care of Address Registration Procedure  . . . . . . . 4
   4.  LMA Operation with transient binding cache entries  . . . . . . 4
   5.  Removal of transient binding cache entries  . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8




























Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


1.  Conventions used in this document

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

   All the general mobility terminologies and abbreviations are to be
   interpreted as defined in IPv6 Mobility Support specification [RFC-
   3775] and Proxy Mobile IPv6 [PMIP6-Base].


2.  Introduction

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 is a network-based mobility protocol which provides
   IP mobility for a regular IPv6 mobile node without the involvement of
   the IPv6 host.  Whenever a mobile node is attached to a PMIPv6 domain
   via a mobility access gateway, MAG, it appears to the mobile node as
   if it is attached to the same home link and thus the mobile node may
   think that it is not roaming away from home.  In the case of mobile
   node active handoff between two different MAGs, the target MAG
   usually sends a proxy BU message to the mobile node local mobility
   anchor to update the mobile node BCE with a new care-of address.  As
   soon as the LMA receives and successfully process the proxy BU from
   the target MAG, LMA updates the mobile node BCE with the new care of
   address and starts sending the mobile node downlink traffic to the
   new care of address hosted at the target MAG and forward all of the
   mobile node uplink reverse IP traffic to the internet as long as it
   comes from the new care of address.  However, during active handoff
   scenario, some of the mobile node uplink traffic may be still in
   transient through the previous MAG.  Currently, the LMA forwards a
   mobile node reverse uplink traffic to the internet as long as the
   following two conditions are met:

   o  The mobile node has an active BCE with its current care of
      address.

   o  The uplink traffic is received from the care of address saved in
      the mobile node BCE.


   This document defines a mechanism which allows Proxy MIPv6 to support
   a transient care-of address registration which enables the mobile
   access gateway to register an address as a transient proxy care-of
   address for a short period of time during inter-MAG active handoff.
   This new transient registration will enable the LMA to receive uplink
   traffic for the same MN from two different MAGs at the same time.  As
   soon as inter-MAG handoff is complete, the mobile node BCE will be
   updated to reflect the latest mobile node care of address and the



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


   transient pCoA will be removed from the binding cache.


3.  Transient Care of Address Registration Procedure

   When the target MAG sends a PBU for the new MN that attaches it sets
   a new value (6: Handoff with transient uplink) in the Handoff
   Indicator field in the PBU.  When the LMA receives this PBU, it
   creates a new BCE entry with a new bit called the "Transient bit".
   The LMA responds with a PBA message containing the same handoff
   indicator value.  If the LMA is not capable of performing transient
   registrations it can ignore the transient registration and instead
   process the message as if it contained the HI value of 3 (Handoff
   between mobile access gateways for the same interface).


4.  LMA Operation with transient binding cache entries

   When an uplink packet is received from the MN through the target MAG,
   the LMA MUST verify if the source address of the packet (i.e. the
   pCoA of the target MAG) matches the transient pCoA.  If the address
   matches, the LMA MUST consider the packet to be valid and MUST
   forward the packet appropriately based on the contents of the
   decapsulated packet.  The LMA SHOULD NOT use the transient binding
   cache entries for sending out downlink traffic to the MN through the
   target MAG.


5.  Removal of transient binding cache entries

   The transient binding cache entry, which was created by the procedure
   described in this document, needs to be short lived. i.e. for the
   duration of the handover.  After the handover completes, this entry
   needs to either be removed or promoted to a full blown binding cache
   entry.  There are three ways by which this can happen

   1.  The target MAG sends a new PBU with HI value 3 (Handoff between
       mobile access gateways for the same interface): The transient
       binding cache entry is converted into a full blown binding cache
       entry and the BCE for the old MAG is removed

   2.  The old MAG sends a deregistraion PBU: The transient binding
       cache entry is converted into a full blown binding cache entry
       and the BCE for the old MAG is removed

   3.  A configurable timer expires: The transient binding cache entry
       is converted into a full blown binding cache entry and the BCE
       for the old MAG is removed



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


   Alternately, if none of these happen, the transient binding cache
   entry can simply be removed after a configurable timer expires.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA interaction.




7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not present any new security requirement on the
   top of the security requirements listed in [PMIPv6-Base].  It only
   present an a mechanism to allow a mobile node to be transitionally
   multihomed at two care of addresses during an inter-MAG active
   handoff using the same security requirements as per [PMIPv6-Base].




8.  Acknowledgements

   The ideas presented in the document came out of a discussion during
   IETF70 at Vancouver in December 2007.  The following people were
   involved in the discussion (listed by last name) Kuntal Chowdhury,
   Vijay Devarapalli, Sri Gundavelli, Lalit Kotecha, Suresh Krishnan,
   Kent Leung and Ahmad Muhanna.




9.  Normative References


   [RFC-2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [PMIP6-Base] Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury,
   K., and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-netlmm-proxymip6-05
   (work in progress), September 2007.

   [RFC-3775] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., Arkko, J., "Mobility Support in
   IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.






Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


10.  Informative References



   [RFC-2131] Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC
   2131, March 1997.

   [RFC-3315] Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6).  R.
   Droms,Ed., J. Bound, B. Volz, T. Lemon, C. Perkins, M. Carney.  July
   2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Ahmad Muhanna
   Nortel Networks
   2221 Lakeside Blvd.
   Richardson, TX  75082
   USA

   Phone: +1 (972) 685-1416
   Email: amuhanna@nortel.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 (514) 345-7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Kent Leung
   Cisco
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: kleung@cisco.com










Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: basavaraj.patil@nsn.com












































Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        PMIPv6 Transient Registration        February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 8]

