


Network Working Group                                  V. Narayanan, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                            Qualcomm, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                              May 18, 2007
Expires: November 19, 2007


  IPsec Gateway Failover and Redundancy - Problem Statement and Goals
                    draft-vidya-ipsec-failover-ps-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Recovering from failure of IPsec gateways maintaining large numbers
   of SAs may take several minutes, if they need to re-establish the
   IPsec SAs by re-running the key management protocol, IKEv2.  A
   similar problem arises in the event of a network outage resulting in
   the failure of several gateways and servers.  The latency involved in
   this approach is significant, leading to a need for a faster and yet
   secure failover solution.  This document describes the problem
   statement and the goals for an IPsec/IKEv2 gateway failover/



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


   redundancy solution.


Table of Contents

   1.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Motivation and Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Use of IPsec in 3G Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       4.1.1.  Mobile IPv6 in 3G Networks and IPsec State Related
               Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Mobile IPv6 Home Agent Reliability and IPsec Failover  . .  7
   5.  Applicability and Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  Failover Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  IPsec Failover Redundancy Solution Goals . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15



























Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


1.  Contributors

   This document reflects contributions from and active discussions
   among the following individuals (in alphabetical order):

      Lakshminath Dondeti (ldondeti@qualcomm.com)

      Paul Hoffman (paul.hoffman@vpnc.org)

      Tero Kivinen (kivinen@iki.fi)

      Gregory Lebovitz (gregory.ietf@gmail.com)

      Marcus Leech (mleech@nortel.com)

      Cheryl Madson (cmadson@cisco.com)

      Michael Richardson (mcr@sandelman.ottawa.on.ca)

      Sheela Rowles (srowles@cisco.com)

      Yaron Sheffer (yaronf@checkpoint.com)

      Marcus Stenberg (mstenber@cisco.com)

      Brian Weis (bew@cisco.com)


2.  Introduction

   The IKEv2 protocol, while more efficient and involves fewer round
   trips compared to its predecessor is quite computationally intensive,
   especially when entity authentication is by way of public-key based
   certificates.  IKEv2 also needs 2-3 roundtrips when using PSKs or
   public keys for authentication and 4 or more roundtrips when EAP is
   used for client authentication.  Thus, the process of setting up
   IPsec SAs is an expensive process, in terms of the number of messages
   exchanged between the initiator and responder.

   Aside from the number of messages, IKEv2 also uses Diffie-Hellman for
   key negotiation.  Network or gateway failures that result in a large
   number of clients reconnecting to a gateway will potentially lead to
   expensive computation on the gateway due to too many D-H exchanges
   within a short time span.

   When an IPsec entity has a large number of SAs with various other
   endpoints, establishing all the SAs again upon a failure recovery
   condition takes a long time.  Examples of entities that manage a



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


   large number of IPsec SAs include IPsec remote access gateways, and
   application servers that use IPsec for protection of signaling
   traffic.  For efficient recovery from gateway or server failure, it
   might make sense to allow those entities to maintain copies of IPsec
   and IKEv2 state (SAD, SPD, and associated state) on other gateways
   (for stateful operation) or on the client itself (for stateless
   operation).  Either the recovered IPsec entity or other entities in
   the gateway pool may retrieve the stored IPsec and IKEv2 state for
   faster recovery.

   There are a number of proprietary solutions for some part of this
   problem in the industry, however, those solutions do not
   interoperate.  Applications that need IPsec failover capability, such
   as Mobile IPv6 have solutions under development for interoperable
   Home Agent (HA) failover.  Without interoperable (client to server
   and server to server) IPsec failover capability, Home Agent failover
   solutions are incomplete.  Thus, there is a need for an interoperable
   means of performing SA uploads and retrieval so that such IPsec
   redundancy can be implemented in an interoperable fashion.


3.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

   This document uses terminology defined in [2], [3], and [4].  In
   addition, this document uses the following terms:




4.  Motivation and Background

   This work is motivated by the use of IPsec in 3G networks, where the
   protocols used are often optimized for efficient, low overhead, low
   latency operation.  As will be noted from the rest of this document,
   this does not mean that a solution developed will only be applicable
   for use in such 3G networks.  The intent is to develop a solution
   that will be applicable for any entities using IKEv2/IPsec.  This
   section provides details on the motivation and background that will
   help understand the problem statement and goals that follow.

4.1.  Use of IPsec in 3G Networks

   A high level view of a 3G network with the various IPsec components
   is shown in Figure 1.



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


         ------------     ---------------
        | Home Agent |   | Other servers |
        |(MIP6,IPsec)|   |(May use IPsec)|
         ------------     ---------------
                |              |
                |              |
              --------------------
             (                    )
             (     IP Network     )
             (                    )
              --------------------
                 |       |
                /         \
               /           \
     ----------------    -------------
    / Trusted access \  | VPN Gateway |
    \                /  |   (IPsec)   |
     ----------------    -------------
                               |
                               |
                     ------------------
                    / Untrusted access \
                    \                  /
               \     ------------------
                \        /
                 \      /
            ----------------
           | Mobile Station |
           | (IPsec Client) |
            ----------------


          Figure 1: High Level Network View with IPsec Components

   There are multiple uses of IPsec being considered in next generation
   3G networks.  One is the use of IPsec in untrusted access networks -
   this is much like a remote access VPN, with a VPN gateway placed in
   the network to provide secure connectivity to mobile devices over an
   untrusted network.  The second is the use of IPsec for Mobile IPv6
   (MIP6) - here, the MIP6 signaling is protected using IPsec, as
   required by MIP6, between the mobile node and the Home Agent (HA).
   Additionally, data tunneled through the Home Agent may also be
   protected using IPsec.  In both these cases, IKEv2 is the mode of
   establishing the IPsec SA and EAP is often used in IKEv2 for client
   authentication.

   A third use of IPsec is in the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) -
   however, IKEv2 is not used to set up the IPsec SA for use in IMS and



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


   hence, that use is not considered in this document.  It should be
   noted that these may only be a subset of the IPsec use cases; this
   document applies to any use of IPsec that uses IKEv2 for SA
   establishment.

   In all these cases, the execution of IKEv2 (especially with EAP for
   client authentication) takes up a number of message exchanges and
   reasonable computational expense.  When executed once upon power up,
   it may not be a significant concern.  However, if IKEv2/EAP needs to
   be executed during handoffs, it often adds an unacceptable handoff
   latency.  Further, upon failure of the network or the IPsec gateway,
   there is significant time needed to bring all the clients back in
   service.

   Distributed network elements to which the clients can connect using
   IPsec allow distributed failovers without the need for a fully
   reduandant IPsec gateway.  Even when a fully redundant IPsec gateway
   is used, the ability to failover to distributed gateways provides
   better site-level redundancy.

4.1.1.  Mobile IPv6 in 3G Networks and IPsec State Related Concerns


         ------------     ---------------
        | Home Agent |   | Other servers |
         ------------     ---------------
                |              |
                |              |
              --------------------
             (                    )
             (     IP Network     )
             (                    )
              --------------------
                 |              |
                 |              |_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
                 |                                |
           -------------                   ----------------
          / Home Access \                 / Roaming access \
          \             /                 \                /
           -------------                   ----------------
               |                                |
               |                                |
            ----------------            ----------------
           | Mobile Station |          | Mobile Station |
           |(No MIP6; IPsec |  ----->  | (MIP6, IPsec   |
           |   unused)      |          |    in use)     |
            ----------------            ----------------




Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


           Figure 2: Mobile IPv6 with Home and Roaming Networks

   One potential use of MIP6 in 3G networks involves using the protocol
   only when the mobile node roams outside of the its home network.
   This is shown in Figure 2.  There is a need to keep the handoff upon
   roaming seamless and hence, this makes the setting up of IPsec SAs
   upon roaming undesirable.  It is also not always feasible to predict
   roaming well ahead of time, sufficiently enough to proactively set up
   an IPsec SA.  For this reason, it is better to set up the SAs while
   the mobile node is still on the home network (for e.g., upon first
   attachment to the network).

   However, it is also the case that device roaming is unpredictable -
   so, if the Home Agent is required to maintain all the IPsec SAs for
   all the mobile nodes, that is a significant waste of resources on the
   Home Agent, given that it is maintaining state for several devices
   that may never roam.  Hence, establishing the IPsec SA, losing the
   state on the Home Agent, and allowing resumption of state when needed
   is a more scalable approach to handling the scenario.

   This case, while does not constitute a true failure of any kind, can
   be viewed as an instance where the network lost the state meant for
   the client.  In such circumstances, any stateless failover mechanisms
   defined can be used to quickly resume the IPsec SA when the mobile
   device roams and actually needs to use it.

4.2.  Mobile IPv6 Home Agent Reliability and IPsec Failover

   There are ongoing efforts to standardize Mobile IP Home Agent
   reliability [5] mechanisms for interoperable MIP6 failovers.  The
   scope of that work addresses having distributed home agents that
   share MIP6 state.  IPsec state sharing is not assumed by the work,
   although some IPsec state may be shared across the gateways.  For
   this work, it is assumed that the home agents will have different IP
   addresses, although, the client IP addresses will be preserved after
   failover.  If the IPsec state is perfectly synchronized among the
   different home agents, it may be feasible to have a failover that is
   transparent to the clients from an IPsec perspective.  Note that the
   failover is not exactly transparent from a Mobile IP perspective, due
   to the change in Home Agent IP address.  However, per packet
   synchronization of IPsec state is very hard to achieve, especially
   across distributed entities and hence, a need for client involved
   IPsec failover also becomes essential in that case.

   In all the cases described above, the resumption of IKEv2/IPsec state
   needs to happen with minimal latency to avoid longer resumption times
   for applications in progress on the clients.




Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


5.  Applicability and Problem Statement

   There are at least two cases where fast recovery from failure of an
   IPsec entity is applicable.

      IPsec Gateways -- The first case is that of an IPsec remote access
      gateway managing tunnel mode SAs with clients.  The gateway may be
      enforcing access control to an enterprise network; this is the
      typical remote access use case.  The gateway could also be
      enforcing service provider network access control.  In that case,
      clients typically use EAP over IKEv2 to establish an IPsec session
      with a network access gateway.  In either IPsec Gateway use case,
      the IPsec traffic itself flows from the VPN clients or Initiators
      to the VPN gateway; the gateway decapsulates the IPsec packets and
      forwards the cleartext packets based on inner IP headers.  In the
      reverse direction, the VPN gateway uses the security policy
      database (SPD) or associated caches as per RFC4301, to lookup the
      relevant IPsec SA, encapsulates the packets and sends to the
      appropriate VPN client.

      Servers -- The second use is that of an IPsec entity acting as a
      server for an application such as Mobile IP.  In these cases,
      Mobile IP messages are protected using IPsec.  Each Mobile IP Home
      Agent (HA) maintains a large number of transport or tunnel mode
      IPsec sessions with their respective clients.  In this case, IPsec
      protected signaling messages are sent end-to-end, between Mobile
      IP client and HA, respectively.

   In the security gateway mode, while there may be multiple security
   gateways serving a number of remote endpoints, a given remote
   endpoint is served by one security gateway.  For instance, an IPsec
   VPN client typically maintains one or more SAs for remote access with
   one VPN gateway.  However, when the serving gateway fails, it is
   desirable for one of the other gateways to seamlessly take over and
   serve the clients affected by the failure.  In some deployments,
   there may be a backup gateway that can take over for the primary in
   case of a failure.  Such gateways may be running a VRRP-like protocol
   to actually share the gateway IP address as known to the clients.  In
   other deployments, a cluster of gateways may load balance to serve a
   number of clients.  In such a case, one or more of the gateways in
   the cluster may take over clients associated with another gateway in
   the cluster in the event of a failure.

   When IPsec is used for protection of signaling between an application
   client and server, server redundancy is often an important
   consideration.  As in the gateway model, it is necessary for another
   server to be able to seamlessly take over clients being served by a
   failed server.



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


   In cases of gateway or server failures, it may also be that the
   clients re-attach to the same gateway or server after recovery of the
   entity.  The failover procedures must be able to support that type of
   recovery.

   In addition to server failures, massive network failures of a short
   duration (minutes), followed by network recovery are also a concern.
   The network failure results in all clients being disconnected first
   (e.g. because of dead-peer detection), and then simultaneously
   attempting to reconnect.  This can be classified as a subset of the
   gateway failure case for the purpose of this effort.

   In all these cases outlined above, it is feasible to perform secure
   IPsec and IKEv2 state transfer across endpoints to provide smoother
   failure recovery.  Today, such redundancy operations are performed in
   a vendor specific manner and are not interoperable.  Also, lack of
   client involvement implies a failover mode that is transparent to the
   client.  However, in the above cases, the failover may not always be
   transparent to the client and hence, an interoperable mechanism
   becomes very important.

5.1.  Failover Cases


              --------------------------
             (                          )
             (         Internet         )
             (                          )
              --------------------------
                  |                   |
                 /                     \
                /                       \
        ----------        ----       ----------
       |Operator X|      (    )     |Operator X|
       |  Site A  |      ( IP )     |  Site B  |
       |          |      (    )     |          |
       |  ------  |      ( N  )     |  ------  |
       | |IPsec | |      ( e  )     | |IPsec | |
       | |GW A1 | |------( t  )-----| |GW B1 | |
       |  ------  |      ( w  )     |  ------  |
       |  ------  |      ( o  )     |  ------  |
       | |IPsec | |      ( r  )     | |IPsec | |
       | |GW A2 | |      ( k  )     | |GW B2 | |
       |  ------  |      (    )     |  ------  |
       |          |       ----      |          |
        ----------                   ----------





Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


              Figure 3: Various IPsec Entities in the Network

   Figure 3 shows the various possible IPsec gateways that may be
   present in an operator's network.  This figure shows a two-site
   operator network, each of which may have multiple IPsec gateways.
   Even though the term "IPsec gateway" has been used in the figure, it
   is also representative of any application server serving as an IPsec
   endpoint.  The following are applicable failover cases under
   consideration.

   1.  Intra-site gateways with no direct gateway-to-gateway state
       synchronization mechanisms: In this case, the IPsec state is
       either partially available (e.g., no per packet state
       synchronization, but, the IKE SA is available, etc.) or not
       available at all.  However, this does not restrict any state
       synchronization of other applications (e.g., the Mobile IP state
       may still be fully sychronized).  This would be a case where
       IPsec Gateway A2 or B2 is acting as the backup gateway for IPsec
       Gateway A1 or B1 respectively in Figure 3.

   2.  Inter-site gateways that are geographically distributed: It is
       assumed that complete IPsec state synchronization across inter-
       site gateways is either complicated or impractical.  This again
       does not rule of synchronization of other state such as Mobile IP
       state.  This would be a case where IPsec Gateway B1 or B2 is
       acting as the backup gateway for IPsec Gateway A1 or A2 or vice-
       versa in Figure 3.

   3.  Gateway reboots: This is the case of clients attaching to the
       same gateway after it has recovered from a failure.  Often, the
       gateway has lost the relevant IPsec state in such cases.  This
       would be a case where any single IPsec Gateway in Figure 3
       recovers from a failure and has clients connecting to it again.


6.  IPsec Failover Redundancy Solution Goals

   The following are goals for the IPsec Failover Redundancy solution.
   Note that the motivation for this effort is to develop mechanisms and
   perhaps protocols to facilitate failover capabilities.  It is
   plausible that the design facilitates features such as load
   balancing, but additional signaling or protocol design to facilitate
   load balancing exclusively is outside the scope of this effort.

   1.  Distributed Failover Mechanism: Gateways may be located at
       different sites and may not share the same IP address or have the
       same view of the network.  For instance, the various distributed
       gateways may be connected to different backend elements such as



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


       EAP servers, DHCP servers, etc.  A failover mechanism must be
       able to allow such distributed gateways to take over the clients
       associated with a failed gateway.  The idea here is that there is
       no need for a fully redundant gateway that only starts
       functioning in the event of a failure.  It is more cost-effective
       to allow such failover to distributed gateways that may be
       functional on their own, serving other clients.  The temporary
       increase in load on some gateways in the system may be acceptable
       to many deployments in the event of a failure.  Such a mechanism
       across distributed gateways may also be used for client handoff
       to other gateways due to other reasons, e.g., load balancing.
       Gateways located on the same link with the same view of the
       network may be viewed as a subset.

   2.  Client Involvement: Given that the gateways may be distributed,
       the failover is not intended to be transparent to the client.
       There may be times when the client, from its perspective, sees
       the gateway as unavailable and therefore needs to take some
       action to use a new gateway.  The goal is to allow the option for
       the client to initiate the switch to a different gateway.  In
       some cases, such as the Mobile IPv6 Home Agent reliability
       process, the Home Agent, acting as the IPsec gateway, may
       initiate the switch.  This is due to the fact that the MIP6 Home
       Agent reliability procedures would allow a new Home Agent to
       detect the failure of an old Home Agent and trigger communication
       with its clients.

   3.  Low Latency failover: One of the major goals is to allow a low
       latency failover, without having to re-establish all the IKEv2
       and IPsec state all over again.  The bottleneck here is the new
       IPsec gateway trying to handle a flood of IKEv2 exchanges upon a
       failover.  Further, for applications such as Mobile IPv6 that use
       IKEv2/IPsec for securing the signaling, re-establishment of IKEv2
       often adds unacceptable latencies.  Ideally, a mechanism that
       does not need any new messages to exclusively support failover is
       desired.  In general, the goal is to have significantly lower
       latency and to incur a lower computational overhead than a
       regular IKEv2 exchange.  In cases where EAP is used for client
       authentication in IKEv2, the failover should not require EAP
       authentication, to avoid AAA overloading and possible user
       interaction.  This may mean that any attributes returned from the
       AAA server as a result of EAP must also be stored as part of the
       state, if those are required for IPsec operation.

   4.  Application Usage of IPsec: When IPsec is used to protect other
       protocols, the extent of failover interoperability that can be
       expected by such protocols greatly hinge on the interoperability
       of IPsec failover mechanisms.  For e.g., Mobile IP Home Agent



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


       reliability [5] mechanisms are intended to be standardized for
       interoperability.  However, it is incomplete without IPsec
       failover.  So, it is important to allow applications that use
       IPsec to take advantage of the IPsec failover mechanism.  It is
       not expected that the IPsec failover solution will address this,
       but a guidance needs to be provided to allow application
       specifications to specify the appropriate interface/interaction
       needed (e.g., if synchronization between application state and
       IPsec state is needed).

   5.  Interoperability: Client-gateway and gateway-gateway
       interoperability is required.  Note that the gateway-gateway
       interoperability does not refer to any full SA state
       synchronization mechanisms across gateways.  Interoperability
       across gateways is, however, needed from the perspective of
       having a standard state format that multi-vendor gateways would
       be able to use for failover, for example.

   6.  Stateless Gateway Operation: The IPsec failover mechanism should
       specify a mode of operation that will allow the backup gateways
       to not have to maintain state for clients it is not serving.  A
       gateway must need to acquire and store state for a client that is
       otherwise served by a different gateway, only when a failover
       occurs or during a temporary service interruption with the
       client's old gateway.  This will allow for better scalability of
       the solution, since a given gateway only needs to store state for
       clients that are being served by it.  This requires for an
       equally secure means of storing state in the clients and allowing
       the client to present it to the gateway for recovery.

   7.  Support for IPsec transport and tunnel modes: As noted in the
       applicability section of this document, the IPsec infrastructure
       endpoint may either be an IPsec VPN gateway employing tunnel mode
       SAs with the client or an application server that uses IPsec
       transport or tunnel mode to protect signaling exchanges with the
       client.  Hence, a solution developed for failover must support
       failover of both transport and tunnel mode SAs.


7.  Security Considerations

   This document provides the problem description and goals for an IPsec
   failover solution.  The solution must ensure secure operation and
   there are several important points to consider for that.  We
   highlight a few of the important ones below :

   o  First, any SA storage and retrieval mechanisms specified between
      the backend entities must be protected with a secure channel that



Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


      has the following properties: confidentiality, integrity
      protection, and replay protection.

   o  In a client-server model, where the client always initiates the
      secure communication, the client is always the IKEv2 initiator.
      Solutions for failover in such cases, may allow the client to find
      the new gateway IP address through external means.  Subsequently,
      the client must be able to verify that the new gateway possesses
      the IKEv2 key material.  A client should be able to initiate a new
      IKEv2 SA with one or more auxiliary gateways without interrupting
      a connection to the currently used primary gateway.  The client
      must consider the new gateway as a provisional one until it has
      verified a new gateway is the appropriate replacement for the
      primary gateway.

   o  Any solution must adequately describe the consequences to replay
      protection as a result of IPsec failover.  For replay protection,
      it may be best for the replacement gateway to assume that the
      IPsec SA state is outdated and reestablish the IPsec SA using an
      IKEv2 CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange.

   o  IPsec failover facilitates the replacement of an IPsec GW serving
      a client with another GW.  The design must take into account the
      possibility of an adversary creating a ping-ponging scenario where
      a client may be forced to move between two or more GWs
      persistently.

   o  It may be plausible for an attacker to force failover of a client
      to a gateway that is more advantageous to the attacker.  The
      design must provide a means of verifying that a particular gateway
      belongs to the secure domain that the client may attach to using
      the same IKE SA.


8.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA action is required for this document.


9.  Acknowledgments

   We thank Russ Housley, Jun Wang, Marcello Lioy, and Raymond Hsu for
   technical discussions and/or help with standardization aspects
   related to this work.  We thank Steve Kent for his review of the
   draft.  We also thank Kuntal Chowdhury, Vijay Devarapalli and Kent
   Leung for their discussions on the applicability to Mobile IPv6 and
   3G networks in general.




Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet
        Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [3]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4306,
        December 2005.

   [4]  Eronen, P., "IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol (MOBIKE)",
        RFC 4555, June 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [5]  Wakikawa, R., "Home Agent Reliability Protocol",
        draft-ietf-mip6-hareliability-01 (work in progress), March 2007.


Author's Address

   Vidya Narayanan (editor)
   Qualcomm, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-2483
   Email: vidyan@qualcomm.com



















Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        IPsec Failover/Redundancy PS              May 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Narayanan               Expires November 19, 2007              [Page 15]


