   Network Working Group                           
   INTERNET-DRAFT                                  
   Expires in: May 2008   
   Intended Status: Informational                                  
                    	   
                                                   Scott Poretsky
                                                   Reef Point Systems

                                                   November 2007

                   Considerations for Benchmarking 
             Link-State IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

            <draft-ietf-bmwg-igp-dataplane-conv-app-14.txt>

Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) statement:
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

Status of this Memo

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

ABSTRACT
   This document discusses considerations for benchmarking Interior 
   Gateway Protocol (IGP) Route Convergence for any link-state IGP, such 
   as Intermediate System-Intermediate System (ISIS) and Open-Shorted 
   Path first (OSPF).   A companion methodology document is to 
   be used for benchmarking IGP convergence time through externally 
   observable (black box) data plane measurements.  A companion 
   terminology document is to be referenced to support the benchmarking. 

Poretsky                                                     [Page 1]
   
INTERNET-DRAFT        Considerations for Benchmarking  November 2007
                      IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

   Table of Contents
     1. Introduction ...............................................2 
     2. Existing definitions .......................................2
     3. Factors for IGP Route Convergence Time......................2 
     4. Network Events that Cause Route Convergence.................3
     5. Use of Data Plane for IGP Route Convergence Benchmarking....4
     6. IANA Considerations.........................................4
     7. Security Considerations.....................................4 
     8. Acknowledgements............................................5
     9. Normative References........................................5
     10. Author's Address...........................................6

1. Introduction
   Convergence Time is a critical performance parameter.  Customers 
   of Service Providers use convergence packet loss [Po07t] due to 
   Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP) convergence as a key metric of 
   their network service quality.  Service Providers use IGP 
   Convergence time as a key metric of router design and architecture 
   for any IGP such as Intermediate System - Intermediate System 
   (ISIS) [Ca90] and Open-Shorted Path first (OSPF) [Mo98].  Fast 
   network convergence can be optimally achieved through deployment 
   of fast converging routers.  The fundamental basis by which network 
   users and operators benchmark convergence is packet loss, which is 
   an externally observable event having direct impact on their 
   application performance.  

   IGP Route Convergence is a Direct Measure of Quality (DMOQ) when 
   benchmarking the data plane.  For this reason it is important to 
   develop a standard router benchmarking methodology and terminology 
   for measuring IGP convergence that uses the data plane as described 
   in [Po07m] and [Po07t].  This document describes all of the factors 
   that influence a convergence measurement and how a purely black box 
   test can be designed to account for all of these factors.  This 
   enables accurate benchmarking and evaluation for route convergence 
   time.  

2.  Existing definitions
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 
   2119 [Br97].  RFC 2119 defines the use of these key words to help 
   make the intent of standards track documents as clear as possible.  
   While this document uses these keywords, this document is not a 
   standards track document.

3. Factors for IGP Route Convergence Time   
   There are four major categories of factors contributing to the 
   measured Router IGP Convergence Time.   As discussed in [Vi02], 
   [Ka02], [Fi02], [Al02] and [Al00], these categories are Event 
   Detection, Shortest Path First (SPF) Processing, IGP Advertisement, 
   and Forwarding Information Base (FIB) Update.  These have numerous 
   components that influence the convergence time, as listed below:

Poretsky                                                     [Page 2]
   
INTERNET-DRAFT        Considerations for Benchmarking  November 2007
                      IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

      -Event Detection-
        Physical Layer failure/recovery indication time
        Layer 2 failure/recovery indication time
        IGP Hello Dead Interval

      -SPF Processing-
        SPF Delay Time
        SPF Hold time
        SPF Execution time

      -IGP Advertisement-
        LSA/LSP Flood Packet Pacing
        LSA/LSP Retransmission Packet Pacing
        LSA/LSP Generation time
    
      -FIB Update-
        Tree Build time
        Hardware Update time

      -Increased Forwarding Delay due to Queueing

   The contribution of each of these factors listed above will vary
   with each router vendors' architecture and IGP implementation.  
   Routers may have a centralized forwarding architecture, in which 
   one route table is calculated and referenced for all arriving 
   packets, or a distributed forwarding architecture, in which the
   central route table is calculated and distributed to the 
   interfaces for local look-up as packets arrive.  The distributed
   route tables are typically maintained in hardware.

   It is therefore necessary to design a convergence test that 
   considers all of these components contributing to convergence time
   and is independent of the Device Under Test (DUT) architecture, 
   The benefit of designing a test for these considerations is that 
   it enables black-box testing in which knowledge of the routers' 
   internal implementations is not required.  It is then possible 
   to make valid use of the convergence benchmarking metrics when 
   comparing routers from different vendors.
   
4. Network Events that Cause Convergence
   There are different types of network events that can cause IGP 
   convergence.  These network events are as follow:
       * administrative link removal
       * unplanned link failure
       * line card failure
       * route changes such as withdrawal, flap, next-hop change, 
         and cost change.  
       * session loss due to loss of peer or adjancency 
       * link recovery
       * link insertion

Poretsky                                                     [Page 3]
   
INTERNET-DRAFT        Considerations for Benchmarking  November 2007
                      IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

   When benchmarking a router it is important to measure convergence 
   time for local and remote occurrence of these network events.  
   The convergence time measured will vary whether the network event 
   occurred locally or remotely due to varying combinations of 
   factors listed in the previous sections.  This behavior makes it 
   possible to design purely black-box tests that isolate 
   measurements for each of the components of convergence time.

5. Use of Data Plane for IGP Route Convergence Benchmarking
   Customers of service providers use packet loss as the metric to
   calculate convergence time.  Packet loss is an externally 
   observable event having direct impact on customers' application 
   performance.  For this reason it is important to develop a 
   standard router benchmarking methodology and terminology that is 
   a Direct Measure of Quality (DMOQ) for measuring IGP convergence.  
   Such a methodology uses the data plane as described in [Po07m] 
   using the terminology provided in [Po07t].  

   An additional benefit of using packet loss for calculation of 
   IGP Route Convergence time is that it enables black-box tests to 
   be designed.  Data traffic can be offered to the 
   device under test (DUT), an emulated network event can be forced 
   to occur, and packet loss can be externally measured to calculate 
   the convergence time.  Knowledge of the DUT architecture and IGP    
   implementation is not required. There is no need to rely on the 
   DUT to produce the test results.  There is no need to build 
   intrusive test harnesses for the DUT.   

   Use of data traffic and measurement of packet loss on the data 
   plane also enables Route Convergence methodology test cases that 
   consider the time for the Route Controller to update the FIB on 
   the forwarding engine of the hardware.  A router is not fully 
   converged until all components are updated and traffic is 
   rerouted to the correct egress interface.  As long as there is 
   packet loss, routes have not converged.  It is possible to send 
   diverse traffic flows to destinations matching every route in 
   the FIB so that the time it takes for the router to converge an 
   entire route table can be benchmarked.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA considerations.

7. Security Considerations

        Documents of this type do not directly effect the security 
        of the Internet or of corporate networks as long as 
        benchmarking is not performed on devices or systems 
        connected to production networks.

Poretsky                                                     [Page 4]
   
INTERNET-DRAFT        Considerations for Benchmarking  November 2007
                      IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

8. Acknowledgements
   Thanks to Curtis Villamizar for sharing so much of his knowledge 
   and experience through the years. Thanks to Ron Bonica, Al Morton, 
   David Ward, and the BMWG for their reviews and comments.

9. References
9.1 Normative References

      [Br97] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
          Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997 

      [Ca90] Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for Routing in TCP/IP 
          and Dual Environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

      [Mo98] Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, IETF, April 1998.

      [Po07m] Poretsky, S., "Benchmarking Methodology for 
          Link-State IGP Data Plane Route Convergence", 
          draft-ietf-bmwg-igp-dataplane-conv-meth-14, work in 
          progress, November 2007.

      [Po07t] Poretsky, S., "Benchmarking Terminology for 
          Link-State IGP Data Plane Route Convergence", 
          draft-ietf-bmwg-igp-dataplane-conv-term-14, work in 
          progress, November 2007.

9.2 Informative References

      [Al00] Alaettinoglu, C., Jacobson, V., and Yu, H., "Towards 
          Millisecond IGP Convergence", NANOG 20, March 2000. 

      [Al02] Alaettinoglu, C. and Casner, S., "ISIS Routing on the 
          Qwest Backbone: a Recipe for Subsecond ISIS Convergence", 
          NANOG 24, March 2002. 

      [Fi02] Filsfils, C., "Deploying Tight-SLA Services on an 
          Internet   Backbone: ISIS Fast Convergence and 
          Differentiated Services Design (tutorial)", NANOG 25, 
          March 2002.

      [Ka02] Katz, D., "Why are we Scared of SPF?  IGP Scaling and 
          Stability", NANOG 25, March 2002. 

      [Vi02] Villamizar, C., "Convergence and Restoration Techniques 
          for ISP Interior Routing", NANOG 25, March 2002. 

Poretsky                                                     [Page 5]
   
INTERNET-DRAFT        Considerations for Benchmarking  November 2007
                      IGP Data Plane Route Convergence

10. Author's Address
      Scott Poretsky
      Reef Point Systems
      3 Federal Street
      Billerica, MA 01821 USA
      Phone: + 1 508 439 9008
      EMail: sporetsky@reefpoint.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

Poretsky                                                     [Page 6]
