


Network Working Group                                         R. Johnson
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         November 16, 2007
Expires: May 19, 2008


                VoIP Configuration Server Address Option
                 draft-raj-dhc-tftp-addr-option-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 19, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


Abstract

   This memo documents existing usage for the "VoIP Configuration Server
   Address Option" (previously known as the "TFTP Server IP Address
   Option".  The option number currently in use is 150.  This memo
   documents the current usage of the option in agreement with [6],
   which declares that any pre-existing usages of option numbers in the
   range 128 - 223 should be documented and the working group will try
   to officially assign those numbers to those options.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option Definition  . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10






























Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


1.  Introduction

   Voice over IP ("VoIP") devices, such as IP phones, have a need to
   download their configuration from a configuration server on the
   network.  There are commonly accepted methods to discover this server
   via DHCP; the "sname" field in the DHCP header [2], the "TFTP Server
   name" option (#66) [3].  Both of these sources of information,
   however, contain the TFTP server's hostname.  That hostname must then
   be translated to an IP address.  The usual method to accomplish this
   would be DNS. [4] This means the firmware in a VoIP device (with
   possibly limited flash, memory, and/or processing resources) would
   need to implement the DNS protocol in order to perform this
   translation.  This would also introduce an additional unnecessary
   point of failure whereby the device is dependent on the DNS server
   infrastructure in order to boot up and communicate with its call
   agent.

   In order to eliminate DNS as a point of failure keep the firmware in
   such a VoIP device to a minimum the "VoIP Configuration Server
   Address" option (150) was introduced.  This option allows the DHCP
   server to pass one or more IP addresses of the VoIP Configuration
   Server(s) instead of the hostname, thus making the information
   directly usable by the VoIP device.

   Other reasons for this option are that, (1) the "siaddr" field is not
   configurable on some DHCP servers, (2) the "siaddr" field only allows
   for one IPv4 address and it is desirable to have the ability to
   configure multiple IP addresses for redundancy, (3) some DHCP servers
   have been found to fill in their own IPv4 address as siaddr, and (4)
   some customers were already using the "siaddr" field for other
   purposes. (5) The configuration server may use a protocol other than
   TFTP to serve configuration files, making the use of the "TFTP Server
   name" opion (#66) in inappropriate.

   In cases where other download server address information also appears
   in the response packet, such as "sname" and "TFTP Server name", it is
   left to the device to decide which piece of information to use.














Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY" and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].














































Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


3.  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option Definition

   The VoIP Configuration Server Address option is a DHCP option [3].
   The option contains one or more IPv4 addresses of the VoIP
   Configuration Server which the client should use, if needed.

   The format of the option is:

    Code   Len   IPv4 Configuration Server Address(es)
   +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
   | 150 |  n  |     IPv4 address      | ...
   +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+


                                 Figure 1

   The option minimum length (n) is 4.

   The "Len" field must specify a length which is an integral multiple
   of 4 octets (4, 8, 12, etc.).  If an option is received where this is
   not the case, the option information SHOULD be ignored.  Dividing
   this "Len" value by 4 will give number of IPv4 VoIP Configuration
   Server addresses which are specified in the option.

   The option SHOULD NOT be specified by the DHCP Client as it is
   intended only to be returned from the DHCP Server.  If the DHCP
   Client wants to receive this information from the server, it SHOULD
   include the number 150 in the DHCP "Parameter List" option (55)."

   Server addresses SHOULD be listed in order of preference.

   The client may use as many or as few of the addresses provided.  For
   example, if client is only capable of accepting 2 configuration
   server addresses, it may ignore any other addresses provided after
   the second address.  A client SHOULD accept an offer that contains
   more addresses than it is capable of utilizing and ignore those that
   it is not capable of using.














Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


4.  Security Considerations

   A rogue DHCP Server could use this option in order to coerce a Client
   into downloading configuration from an alternate Configuration Server
   and thus gain control of the device's configuration.  This is easier
   done with the VoIP Configuration Server Address option than it was
   with the "TFTP Server Name" option, because in the later case the
   attack would need to control DNS responses as well as inserting the
   rogue DHCP option information.  If this is a concern, then either
   DHCP Authentication may be used, or the "TFTP Server Name" option may
   be used instead.

   Message authentication in DHCP for intradomain use where the out-of-
   band exchange of a shared secret is feasible is defined in [5].
   Potential exposures to attack are discussed in section 7 of the DHCP
   protocol specification in [2].

   Other out-of-band methods of verifying the validity of the VoIP
   Configuration Server Address, such as certificates of trust, could be
   used to mitigate some security concerns.































Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


5.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to assign DHCP option number 150 for this option,
   in accordance with [6].















































Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


6.  References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
        March 1997.

   [3]  Alexander, S. and R. Droms, "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor
        Extensions", RFC 2132, March 1997.

   [4]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
        STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [5]  Droms, R. and W. Arbaugh, "Authentication for DHCP Messages",
        RFC 3118, June 2001.

   [6]  Volz, B., "Reclassifying Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
        version 4 (DHCPv4) Options", RFC 3942, November 2004.
































Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


Author's Address

   Richard A. Johnson
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Phone: +1 408 526 4000
   Email: raj@cisco.com









































Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  VoIP Configuration Server Address Option   November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Johnson                   Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 10]

