


 
 
 
Internet Engineering Task Force                                  Rajesh Kumar   
Internet Draft                                                  Cisco Systems   
Document: <draft-rajeshkumar-mmusic-gfmtp-02.txt>              June 1, 2002      
Category: Informational                                     
Expires: December 1, 2002                                        
   
   
                      Generic Format Parameter   
   
Status of this Document   
   
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with   
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026   
  
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other   
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts.   
     
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months   
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any   
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference   
material or to cite them other than as work in progress."   
     
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt   
     
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.   
   
1. Abstract   
 
There may be a need, in some applications, to describe a format (e.g. payload 
type) with parameters that are not part of its standard (e.g. MIME)  definition. 
An example is a boolean parameter, 'vbd', that associates a dynamic payload type 
with voiceband data treatment. This internet draft defines a new SDP attribute 
to convey such parameters. Values of this parameter will need to be registered 
with IANA.  The name of this attribute, 'gfmtp', is tentative. Suggestions for a 
better name are requested. This document may be folded into another document 
such as the new SDP specification.  
 
 
      
 
Kumar                        Informational                          1 
      Generic Format-Specific Parameter                 April 2002 
 
 
2. Conventions used in this document   
        
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",  
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be  
interpreted as described in RFC-2119.      
     
3. Introduction   
  
There is a need within SDP to qualify formats, such as those of a codec, with  
additional parameters not included in their definition. The 'fmtp' parameter [3]  
may be used for only those parameters included in the format definition or  
template e.g. MIME.  
  
For example, there is a need to distinguish between a payload type associated  
with voice and a payload type associated with voiceband data. The rationale is  
twofold:  
  
* At the receiver, voiceband data traffic is found to work best with fixed-size  
jitter buffers, while adaptive jitter buffers are optimal for voice.  
  
* Packet loss concealment algorithms are the receiver are suitable for voice,  
but not for voiceband data.  
     
This issue was discussed in a MMUSIC session of the 53rd IETF during the  
discussion of [1], which is obsoleted by this internet draft. This internet  
draft is an attempt to capture the consensus of MMUSIC in this area.  
  
4. Proposed representation in SDP  
  
The SDP attribute, gfmtp, is defined as:  
  
     a=gfmtp:<format><parameter list>  
       
<parameter list> is represented as a semicolon-separated list of  
"parameter=value" pairs. The format may be an RTP payload type. 
  
Like all other SDP attributes, this SDP attribute is optional. Parsers that do  
not recognize it should be able to ignore it. The only adverse effect is that  
the other end may not apply the special treatments associated with the codec.  
For a parameter like 'vbd', this might result in some degradation.  
 
This document defines the boolean (yes/no) parameter 'vbd' (voiceband data) that 
can be used with the 'gfmtp'  attribute. Other parameter definitions are 
possible. Standard values must be registered with IANA.  
   
 
Kumar                        Informational                          2  
      Generic Format-Specific Parameter                 June 2002 
 
 
An example media description in SDP might be:  
   
    m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 0 15 98 99   
    a=rtpmap:98 PCMU/8000  
    a=gfmtp:98 vbd=on  
    a=rtpmap:99 G726-32/8000  
    a=gfmtp:99 vbd=on  
   
This specifies dynamic RTP payload types 98 and 99 as being "vbd" codecs, with  
PCMU and G726-32 encodings.    
  
Note that the static payload type 2 (G726-32) does not appear in the media line  
in this case. The only permitted voice encodings are PCMU (payload type 0) and   
G728 (payload type 15).   
  
When both voice and voiceband data payload types are distinctly earmarked for a  
session at session establishment, a transmitter may switch from a voice payload  
type (0 or 15 in the example above) to a voiceband data payload type (98 or 99  
in the example above) when it detects an appropriate event such as an ANS or  
ANSAM as defined in ITU V.25 and ITU V.8 respectively. When the receiving  
gateway or endpoint sees a voiceband data payload type (e.g. 98 in the example  
above), it recognizes this as a  voiceband data codec (with PCMU encoding) and  
adjusts the jitter buffer accordingly.   
  
5. Acknowledgements  
  
Steven Casner, Henning Schulzrinne and Colin Perkins for the idea of this new, 
generic SDP attribute. Bill Foster and Flemming Andreasen for their energy put 
in pursuing the logical antecedents of this draft [1]. Flemming Andreasen for 
suggesting the genericization of this parameter beyond RTP payload type.   
  
6. References   
     
  [1]     Voiceband Data Media Format, draft-foster-mmusic-vbdformat-01.txt,   
          Bill Foster, Rajesh Kumar and Flemming Andreasen.   
     
  [2]     An RTP Payload Format for Generic Forward Error Correction, RFC 2733,  
          Rosenberg and Schulzrinne.  
     
  [3]     M. Handley, V. Jacobson, SDP: Session Description Protocol, RFC   
          2327.  
  
  [4]     H. Schulzrinne, RTP Profile for Audio and Video Conferences with   
          Minimal Control, RFC 1890.   
  
 
Kumar                        Informational                          3  
      Generic Format-Specific Parameter                 June 2002 
 
 
  [5]     http://www.iana.org/assignments/rtp-parameters.  
  
  [6]     C. Perkins et al, RTP payload for redundant audio data, RFC 2198.  
  
  [7]     MIME Type Registration of RTP Payload Formats,   
          draft-ietf-avt-rtp-mime-06.txt, Casner, S. and Hoschka, P.  
  
     
7. Author's Addresses   
      
  Rajesh Kumar   
  Cisco Systems   
  170 West Tasman Dr   
  San Jose, CA   
  Phone: +1 408 527 0811   
  Email: rkumar@cisco.com   
     
     
8. Full Copyright Statement   
     
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.   
     
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to   
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it   
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published   
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any   
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are   
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this   
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing   
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other   
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of   
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for   
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be   
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than   
  English.   
     
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be   
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.   
      
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an   
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING   
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING   
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION   
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF   
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.   
 
Kumar                        Informational                          4  
      Generic Format-Specific Parameter                 June 2002 
 
 
     
  Acknowledgement   
     
  Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the   
  Internet Society.   
 
 
Kumar                        Informational                          5