
 


Network Working Group                              J.L. Le Roux (Editor) 
Internet Draft                                            France Telecom 
Category: Informational                  
Expires: November 2006                   
                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                May 2006 
 
 
        Requirements for Path Computation Element (PCE) Discovery 
 
               draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document presents a set of requirements for a Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) discovery mechanism that would allow a Path Computation 
   Client (PCC) to discover dynamically and automatically a set of PCEs 
   along with certain information relevant for PCE selection. It is 
   intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocols or 
   extensions to existing protocols for such PCE discovery satisfy these 
   requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.       Requirements for PCE Discovery             [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Contributors................................................3 
   2.      Terminology.................................................3 
   3.      Introduction................................................4 
   4.      Problem Statement and Requirements Overview.................5 
   4.1.    Problem Statement...........................................5 
   4.2.    Requirements overview.......................................6 
   5.      Example of application scenario.............................6 
   6.      Detailed Requirements.......................................7 
   6.1.    PCE Information to be disclosed.............................7 
   6.1.1.  General PCE Information (Mandatory support).................8 
   6.1.1.1.  Discovery of PCE Location.................................8 
   6.1.1.2.  Discovery of PCE Domains and Inter-domain Functions.......8 
   6.1.2.  Detailed PCE Information (Optional support).................9 
   6.1.2.1.  Discovery of PCE Capabilities.............................9 
   6.1.2.2.  Discovery of Alternate PCEs...............................9 
   6.2.    Scope of PCE Discovery.....................................10 
   6.2.1.  Inter-AS specific requirements.............................10 
   6.3.    PCE Information Synchronization............................11 
   6.4.    Discovery of PCE deactivation..............................11 
   6.5.    Policy Support.............................................11 
   6.6.    Security Requirements......................................12 
   6.7.    Extensibility..............................................12 
   6.8.    Scalability................................................12 
   6.9.    Operational orders of magnitudes...........................13 
   6.10.   Manageability considerations...............................13 
   7.      Security Considerations....................................13 
   8.      Acknowledgments............................................13 
   9.      References.................................................14 
   9.1.    Normative references.......................................14 
   9.2.    Informative references.....................................14 
   10.     Authors' Addresses:........................................14 
   11.     Intellectual Property Statement............................15 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


1. Contributors 
    
   The following are the authors that contributed to the present 
   document: 
 
   Jean-Louis Le Roux (France Telecom)  
   Paul Mabey (Qwest Communications) 
   Eiji Oki (NTT) 
   Richard Rabbat (Fujitsu) 
   Ting Wo Chung (Bell Canada) 
   Raymond Zhang (BT Infonet) 
 
2. Terminology 
 
   Terminology used in this document  
    
   LSR: Label Switch Router 
    
   TE-LSP: Traffic Engineered Label Switched Path 
    
   PCE: Path Computation Element: an entity (component, application, or 
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route 
   based on a network graph, and applying computational constraints. 
    
   PCC: Path Computation Client: any client application requesting a 
   path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.  
        
   IGP Area: OSPF Area or ISIS level/area 
    
   ABR: IGP Area Border Router (OSPF ABR or ISIS L1L2 router)  
    
   AS: Autonomous System 
    
   ASBR: AS Border Router 
    
   Intra-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path does not cross IGP area 
   boundaries.  
       
   Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits through two or more 
   IGP areas. 
        
   Inter-AS MPLS TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits through two or 
   more ASs or sub-ASs (BGP confederations).  
    
   Domain: any collection of network elements within a common sphere of 
   address management or path computational responsibility. Examples of 
   domains include IGP areas and Autonomous Systems.  
    
    
    
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


3. Introduction 
 
   The PCE-based network Architecture [PCE-ARCH] defines a Path 
   Computation Element (PCE) as an entity capable of computing TE-LSP 
   paths based on a network graph, and applying computational 
   constraints. A PCE serves path computation requests sent by Path 
   Computation Clients (PCC).  
   A PCC is a client application requesting a path computation to be 
   performed by a PCE. This can be, for instance, an LSR requesting a 
   path for a TE-LSP for which it is the head-end, or a PCE requesting a 
   path computation of another PCE (inter-PCE communication). The 
   communication between a PCC and a PCE requires a client-server 
   protocol whose generic requirements are listed in [PCE-COM-REQ].  
 
   The PCE based architecture requires, that a PCC be aware of the 
   location of one or more PCEs in its domain, and also potentially of 
   some PCEs in other domains, e.g. in case of inter-domain path 
   computation.  
 
   In that context it would be highly desirable to define a mechanism 
   for automatic and dynamic PCE discovery, which would allow PCCs to 
   automatically discover a set of PCEs, to determine additional 
   information required for PCE selection, and to dynamically detect new 
   PCEs or any modification of the PCEs' information. This includes the 
   discovery by a PCC of a set of one or more PCEs in its domain, and 
   potentially in some other domains. The latter is a desirable function 
   in the case of inter-domain path computation, for example.  
 
   This document lists a set of functional requirements for such an 
   automatic and dynamic PCE discovery mechanism. Section 4 points out 
   the problem statement. Section 5 illustrates an application scenario. 
   Finally, section 6 addresses detailed requirements. 
    
   It is intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocols 
   or protocol extensions for PCE discovery satisfy these requirements. 
   There is no intent either to specify solution-specific requirements 
   or to make any assumption on the protocols that could be used for the 
   discovery. 
    
   Note that requirements listed in this document apply equally to PCEs 
   that are capable of computing paths in MPLS-TE-enabled networks and 
   PCEs that are capable of computing paths in GMPLS-enabled networks 
   (and PCEs capable of both). 
    
   It is also important to note that the notion of a PCC encompasses a 
   PCE acting as PCC when requesting a path computation of another PCE 
   (inter-PCE communication). Hence, this document does not make the 
   distinction between PCE discovery by PCCs and PCE discovery by PCEs. 
 
 
 

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


4. Problem Statement and Requirements Overview 
    
4.1. Problem Statement 
 
   A routing domain may, in practice, contain multiple PCEs: 
   - The path computation load may be balanced among a set of PCEs  
     to improve scalability;    
   - For the purpose of redundancy, primary and backup PCEs may be  
     used; 
   - PCEs may have distinct path computation capabilities (multi- 
     constrained path computation, backup path computation, etc.);  
   - In an inter-domain context there can be several PCEs with  
     distinct inter-domain functions (inter-area, inter-AS, inter- 
     layer), each PCE being responsible for path computation in one or  
     more domains. 
    
   In order to allow for effective PCE selection by PCCs, that is to 
   select the appropriate PCE based on its capabilities and perform 
   efficient load balancing of requests, a PCC needs to know the 
   location of PCEs in its domain, along with some information relevant 
   to PCE selection, and also potentially needs to know the location of 
   some PCEs in other domains, for inter-domain path computation 
   purpose. 
   Such PCE information could be learnt through manual configuration, on 
   each PCC, of the set of PCEs along with their capabilities. Such a 
   manual configuration approach may be sufficient, and even desired in 
   some particular situations, (e.g. inter-AS PCE discovery, where 
   manual configuration of neighbor PCEs may be preferred for security 
   reasons), but it obviously faces several limitations: 
   - This may imply a substantial configuration overhead; 
   - This would not allow a PCC to dynamically detect that a new PCE is  
     available, that an existing PCE is no longer available, or that  
     there is a change in the PCE's information. 
    
   Furthermore, as with any manual configuration approach, there is a  
   risk of configuration errors. 
 
   As an example, in a multi-area network made up of one backbone area 
   and N peripheral areas, and where inter-area MPLS-TE path computation 
   relies on multiple-PCE path computation with ABRs acting as PCEs, the 
   backbone area would comprise at least N PCEs, and the configuration 
   of PCC would be too cumbersome (e.g. in existing multi-area networks, 
   N can be beyond fifty). 
    
   Hence, an automated PCE discovery mechanism allowing a PCC to 
   dynamically discover a set of PCEs is highly desirable. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


4.2. Requirements overview 
     
   A PCE discovery mechanism that satisfies the requirements set forth 
   in this document MUST allow a PCC to automatically discover the 
   location of one or more of the PCEs in its domain.   
   Where inter-domain path computation is required, the PCE discovery 
   method MUST allow a PCC to automatically discover the location of 
   PCEs in other domains that can assist with inter-domain path 
   computation.  
 
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to discover the set of one 
   or more domains where a PCE has TE topology visibility and can 
   compute paths. It MUST also allow the discovery of the potential 
   inter-domain path computation functions of a PCE (inter-area, inter-
   AS, inter-layer, etc.).  
 
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow the control of the discovery 
   scope, that is the set of one or more domains (areas, ASs) where 
   information related to a given PCE has to be disclosed. 
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow PCCs in a given discovery scope 
   to dynamically discover that a new PCE has appeared or that there is 
   a change in PCE's information.  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow PCCs to dynamically discover 
   that a PCE is no longer available.  
    
   A PCE discovery MUST support security procedures. In particular, key 
   consideration MUST be given in terms of how to establish a trust 
   model for PCE discovery. 
 
   OPTIONALLY a PCE discovery mechanism MAY be used so as to disclose a    
   set of detailed PCE capabilities so that the PCC may make advanced 
   and informed choices about which PCE to use. 
 
5. Example of application scenario 
    
   <----------------AS1-------------------->           <----AS2---                    
    Area 1           Area 0        Area 2 
  R1---------R3-----R5-------R6-----------R9----------R11----R13      
  |          |               |             |           | 
  |          |               |             |           | 
  R2---------R4-----R7-------R8-----------R10---------R12----R14               
       | 
       |      
       -- 
      |S1| 
       --                                            
 
                          Figure 1 
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


    
   Figure 1 illustrates a multi-area/AS network with several PCEs: 
   - The ABR R3 is a PCE that can take part in inter area path   
     computation. It can compute paths in area 1 and area 0; 
   - The ABR R6 is a PCE that can take part in inter-area path  
     computation. It can compute paths in area 0 and area2; 
   - The ASBR R9 is a PCE that can take part in inter-AS path  
     computation. It is responsible for path computation in AS1 towards  
     AS2; 
   - The ASBR R12 is a PCE that can take part in inter-AS path  
     computation. It is responsible for path computation in AS2 towards  
     AS1; 
   - The server S1 is a PCE that can be used to compute diverse paths  
     and backup paths in area 1. 
    
   By meeting the requirements set out in this document, the PCE 
   discovery mechanism will allow: 
   - each PCC in areas 1 and 0 to dynamically discover R3, as a PCE for  
     inter-area path computation, and that R3 can compute paths in area0  
     and area1; 
   - each PCC in areas 0 and 2 to dynamically discover R6, as a PCE for  
     inter-area path computation, and that R6 can compute paths in area2  
     and area0; 
   - each PCC in AS1 and one or more PCCs in AS2 to dynamically discover  
     R9 as a PCE for inter-AS path computation in AS1 towards AS2; 
   - each PCC in AS2 and one or more PCCs in AS1 to dynamically discover  
     R12 as a PCE for inter-AS path computation in AS2 towards AS1; 
   - each PCC in area 1 to dynamically discover S1, as a PCE for intra-  
     area path computation in area1, and optionally to discover its path  
     computation capabilities (diverse path computation and backup path  
     computation). 
 
6. Detailed Requirements 
 
6.1. PCE Information to be disclosed 
    
   We distinguish two levels of PCE information to be disclosed by a PCE 
   discovery mechanism: 
   - General information. Disclosure MUST be supported by the  
     PCE discovery mechanism. 
   - Detailed information. Disclosure MAY be supported by the  
     PCE discovery mechanism. 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow disclosure of general PCE 
   information that will allow PCCs to select appropriate PCEs. This 
   comprises discovery of PCE location, PCE domains supported by the 
   PCEs, and PCE inter-domain functions. 
        
   The PCE discovery mechanism MAY also allow disclosure of detailed PCE 
   information. This comprises any or all information about PCE path 
   computation capabilities and alternate PCEs. This information is not 
   part of PCE discovery; this is additional information that can 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


   facilitate the selection of a PCE by a PCC. Support of the exchange 
   of this information is optional in the context of the PCE discovery 
   mechanism itself. This does not mean that the availability of this 
   information is optional in the PCE-based architecture, but such 
   information could also be obtained by other mechanisms, such as the 
   PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
6.1.1. General PCE Information (Mandatory support) 
 
6.1.1.1. Discovery of PCE Location 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow the discovery, for a given 
   PCE, of the IPv4 and/or IPv6 address to be used to reach the PCE. 
   This address will typically be a loop-back address that is always 
   reachable, if there is any connectivity to the PCE. 
    
   This address will be used by PCCs to communicate with a PCE, through 
   a PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
 
 
6.1.1.2. Discovery of PCE Domains and Inter-domain Functions 
    
   Inter-domain path computation is a key application of the PCE 
   architecture. This can rely on a multiple-PCE path computation, where 
   PCEs in each domain compute a part of the end-to-end path and 
   collaborate with each other to find the end-to-end-path. Inter-domain 
   path computation can also rely on a single-PCE path computation where 
   a PCE has visibility inside multiple domains and can compute an 
   entire end-to-end inter-domain path (that is a path from the inter-
   domain TE-LSP head-end to the inter-domain TE-LSP tail end). 
    
   Hence the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow the discovery of the set 
   of one or more domains where a PCE has visibility and can compute 
   paths. These domains could be identified using a domain identifier: 
   For instance, an IGP area can be identified by the Area ID (OSPF or 
   ISIS), and an AS can be identified by the AS number.  
 
   Also the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovery of the inter-
   domain functions of a PCE, i.e. whether a PCE can be used to compute 
   or to take part in the computation of end-to-end paths across domain 
   borders. The inter-domain functions include non exhaustively: inter-
   area, inter-AS and inter-layer path computation. Note that these 
   functions are not mutually exclusive.  
    
   Note that the inter-domain functions are not necessarily inferred 
   from the set of domains where a PCE has visibility. For instance a 
   PCE may have visibility limited to a single domain, but may be able 
   to take part into the computation of inter-domain paths, by 
   collaborating with PCEs in other domains. Conversely, a PCE may have 
   visibility in multiple domains but the operator may not want that the 
   PCE be used for inter-domain path computations. 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


   The PCE discovery mechanisms MUST also allow discovery of the set of 
   one or more domains toward which a PCE can compute paths. For 
   instance in an inter-AS path computation context, there may be 
   several PCEs in an AS, each one responsible for taking part in the 
   computation of inter-AS paths toward a set of one or more destination 
   ASs, and a PCC must discover the destination ASs each PCE is 
   responsible for. 
    
6.1.2. Detailed PCE Information (Optional support) 
 
6.1.2.1. Discovery of PCE Capabilities 
    
   In the case where there are several PCEs with distinct capabilities 
   available, a PCC has to select one or more appropriate PCEs.  
    
   For that purpose the PCE discovery mechanism MAY support the 
   disclosure of some detailed PCE capabilities.  
    
   For the sake of illustration this could include the following path 
   computation related PCE capabilities: 
   - The link constraints supported: e.g. bandwidth, affinities.  
   - The path constraints supported: maximum IGP/TE cost, maximum hop   
     count; 
   - The objective functions supported: e.g. shortest path, widest path; 
   - The capability to compute multiple correlated paths: e.g. diverse  
     paths, load balanced paths; 
   - The capability to compute bidirectional paths; 
   - The GMPLS technology specific constraints supported: e.g. the    
     supported interface switching capabilities, encoding types. 
 
 
   And this could also include some specific PCE capabilities: 
   - The capability to handle request prioritization; 
   - The maximum size of a request message; 
   - The maximum number of path requests in a request message; 
   - The PCE computation power (static parameters to be used for  
     weighted load balancing of requests). 
    
   Such information regarding PCE capabilities could then be used by a 
   PCC to select an appropriate PCE from a list of candidate PCEs. 
    
   Note that the exact definition and description of PCE capabilities is 
   out of the scope of this document. It is expected that this will be 
   described in one or more separate documents which may be application 
   specific. 
       
6.1.2.2. Discovery of Alternate PCEs 
    
   In the case of a PCE failure, a PCC has to select another PCE, if one 
   is available. It could be useful in various situations, for a PCE to 
   indicate a set of one or more alternate PCEs that can be selected in 
   case the given PCE fails.  
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


    
   Hence the PCE Discovery mechanism MAY allow the discovery, for a 
   given PCE, of the location of one or more assigned alternate PCEs. 
    
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MAY also allow the discovery, for a given 
   PCE, of the set of one or more PCEs for which it acts as alternate 
   PCE. 
 
6.2. Scope of PCE Discovery  
 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow control of the scope of the 
   PCE information disclosure on a per PCE basis. In other words it MUST 
   allow control of to which PCC or group of PCCs the information 
   related to a PCE may be disclosed. 
    
   The choice for the discovery scope of a given PCE MUST include at 
   least the followings settings: 
 
   - All PCCs in a single IGP area 
    
   - All PCCs in a set of adjacent IGP areas 
    
   - All PCCs in a single AS 
    
   - All PCCs in a set of ASs 
 
   - A set of one or more PCCs in a set of one or more ASs 
 
   In particular, this also implies that the PCE Discovery mechanism 
   MUST allow for the discovery of PCE information across IGP areas and 
   across AS boundaries. 
    
   The discovery scope MUST be configurable on a per PCE basis.  
    
   It MUST be possible to deactivate PCE discovery on a per PCE basis. 
    
6.2.1. Inter-AS specific requirements 
    
   When using a PCE-based approach for inter-AS path computation, a PCC 
   in one AS may need to learn information related to inter-AS capable 
   PCEs located in other ASs. For that purpose, and as pointed out in 
   the previous section, the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow 
   disclosure of information related to inter-AS capable PCEs across AS 
   boundaries. 
    
   Such inter-AS PCE discovery must be carefully controlled. For 
   security and confidentiality reasons, particularly in an inter-
   provider context, the discovery mechanism MUST allow the discovery 
   scope to be limited to a set of ASs and MUST also provide control of 
   the PCE information to be disclosed across ASs. This is achieved by 
   applying policies (See also section 6.4). This implies the capability 
   to contain a PCE advertisement to a restricted set of one or more 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 10] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


   ASs, and to filter and translate any PCE parameter (PCE domains, PCE 
   inter-domain functions, PCE capabilities, etc.) in disclosures that 
   cross AS borders. For the sake of illustration, it may be useful to 
   disclose detailed PCE information (such as detailed capabilities) 
   locally in the PCE's AS but only general information (such as 
   location and supported domains) in other ASs.  
 
6.3. PCE Information Synchronization 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to discover any change 
   in the information related to a PCE that it has previously 
   discovered. This includes changes to both general information (e.g.  
   a change in the PCE domains supported), and detailed information if 
   supported (e.g. a modification of the PCE's capabilities).  
    
   In addition, the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow to dynamically 
   discover new PCEs in a given discovery scope. 
 
   Note that there is no requirement for real-time detection of these 
   changes, the PCE Discovery Mechanism SHOULD rather allow discovery of 
   these changes in an order of magnitude of 60 seconds, and the 
   operator should have the ability to configure the Discovery delay. 
    
   Note that PCE information is relatively static, and is expected to be 
   fairly stable and to not change frequently.  
 
6.4. Discovery of PCE deactivation 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to discover when a PCE 
   that it has previously discovered is no longer alive or is 
   deactivated. This may help reducing or avoiding path computation 
   service disruption. 
    
   Note that there is no requirement for real-time detection of PCE 
   failure/deactivation, the PCE Discovery Mechanism SHOULD rather allow 
   such discovery in an order of magnitude of 60 seconds, and the 
   operator should have the ability to configure the Discovery delay. 
 
6.5. Policy Support 
 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow for policies to restrict the 
   discovery scope to a set of authorized domains, to control and 
   restrict the type and nature of the information to be disclosed, and 
   also to filter and translate some information at domains borders. It 
   MUST be possible to apply these policies on a per PCE basis. 
   The way these policies could be managed is out of the scope of this 
   document. 
    
   Note that the Discovery mechanisms MUST allow disclosing policy 
   information so as to control the disclosure policies at domain 
   boundaries. 
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 11] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


   Also, it MUST be possible to apply different policies when disclosing 
   PCE information to different domains. 
 
6.6. Security Requirements 
 
   The five major threats related to PCE discovery mechanisms are: 
   - Impersonation of PCE; 
   - Interception of PCE discovery information (sniffing); 
   - Falsification of PCE discovery information; 
   - Information disclosure to non-authorized PCCs (PCC spoofing). 
   - DoS Attacks  
 
   Note that security of the PCE Discovery procedures is of particular 
   importance in an inter-AS context, where PCE discovery may increase 
   the vulnerability to attacks and the consequences of these attacks. 
 
   Hence mechanisms MUST be defined to ensure authenticity, integrity,  
   privacy, and containment of PCE discovery information: 
   - There MUST be a mechanism to authenticate discovery information;    
   - There MUST be a mechanism to verify discovery information  
     integrity; 
   - There MUST be a mechanism to encrypt discovery information; 
   - There MUST be a mechanism to restrict the scope of discovery to a    
     set of authorized PCCs and to filter PCE information disclosed     
     at domain boundaries (as per defined in 6.5).  
 
   Mechanisms MUST be defined in order to limit the impact of a 
   DoS attack on the PCE discovery procedure (e.g. filter out excessive 
   PCE information change and flapping PCEs). Note also that DOS 
   attacks may be either accidental (caused by a mis-behaving 
   PCE system) or intentional. As discussed in [PCE-COM-REQ] such 
   mechanisms may include packet filtering, rate limiting, no 
   promiscuous listening, and where applicable use of private addresses 
   spaces. 
 
   Also, key consideration MUST be given in terms of how to establish a 
   trust model for PCE discovery. The PCE discovery mechanism MUST 
   explicitly support a specific set of one or more trust models. 
 
6.7. Extensibility 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be flexible and extensible so as to 
   easily allow for the inclusion of additional PCE information that 
   could be defined in the future. 
 
6.8. Scalability 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be designed to scale well with an 
   increase of any of the following parameters: 
   - Number of PCCs discovering a given PCE; 
   - Number of PCEs to be discovered by a given PCC; 
   - Number of domains in the discovery scope. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 12] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST NOT have an adverse effect in the 
   performance of other protocols (especially routing and signaling) 
   already operating in the network. 
    
   Note that there is no scalability requirement with regards to the 
   amount of information to be exchanged.  
   Information disclosed in the PCE discovery mechanism is relatively 
   static. Changes in PCE information may occur as result of PCE 
   configuration updates, PCE deployment/activation or PCE 
   deactivation/suppression, and should not occur as a result of the PCE 
   activity itself. Hence, this information is quite stable and will not 
   change frequently. 
 
6.9. Operational orders of magnitudes 
    
   This section gives minimum order of magnitude estimates of what the 
   PCE discovery mechanism should support. 
    
   - Number of PCCs discovering a given PCE: 1000  
   - Number of PCEs to be discovered by a given PCC: 100 
 
6.10. Manageability considerations 
    
   Manageability of PCE discovery MUST addresses the following 
   considerations: 
    
   - need for a MIB module for PCE discovery; 
   - configuration implications for the protocol. 
 
7. Security Considerations 
    
   This document is a requirement document and hence does not raise by 
   itself any particular security issue. 
    
   A set of security requirements that MUST be addressed when 
   considering the design and deployment of a PCE Discovery mechanism 
   have been identified in section 6.6. 
 
8. Acknowledgments 
 
   We would like to thank Benoit Fondeviole, Thomas Morin, Emile 
   Stephan, Jean-Philippe Vasseur, Dean Cheng, Adrian Farrel, Renhai 
   Zhang, Mohamed Boucadair, Eric Gray, Igor Bryskin, Dimitri 
   Papadimitriou, Arthi Ayyangar, Andrew Dolganow, Lou Berger, Nabil 
   Bitar, Kenji Kumaki and Ross Callon for their useful comments and 
   suggestions. 
    
    
    
    

 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 13] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


 
9. References 
    
9.1. Normative references 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture, work in 
   progress. 
    
9.2. Informative references 
 
   [PCE-COM-REQ] Ash, J., Le Roux, J.L., "PCE Communication Protocol 
   Generic Requirements", draft-ietf-pce-comm-protocol-gen-reqs, work in 
   progress.  
 
10. Authors' Addresses:  
     
   Jean-Louis Le Roux (Editor) 
   France Telecom  
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
   22307 Lannion Cedex  
   FRANCE 
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
     
   Paul Mabey 
   Qwest Communications 
   950 17th Street, 
   Denver, CO 80202,  
   USA 
   Email: pmabey@qwest.com 
    
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   Midori-cho 3-9-11 
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585,  
   JAPAN 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Richard Rabbat 
   Fujitsu Laboratories of America 
   1240 East Arques Ave, MS 345 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
   USA 
   Email: richard@us.fujitsu.com 
    
   Ting Wo Chung 
   Bell Canada 
   181 Bay Street, Suite 350 
   Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2T3 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 14] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-04.txt         May 2006 


   CANADA,  
   Email: ting_wo.chung@bell.ca 
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   BT Infonet 
   2160 E. Grand Ave. 
   El Segundo, CA 90025 
   USA 
   Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com 
 
11. Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 15] 
  
