


Network Working Group                                          J. Galvin
Internet-Draft                                         eList eXpress LLC
Expires: December 26, 2002                                 June 27, 2002


  IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall Process: Operation
                of the Nominating and Recall Committees
                  draft-ietf-nomcom-rfc2727bis-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 26, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The process by which the members of the IAB and IESG are selected,
   confirmed, and recalled is specified.  This document is a self-
   consistent, organized compilation of the process as it was known at
   the time of publication.

Discussion of this Draft

   Please direct all comments, suggestions, and questions regarding this
   draft to the following mailing list:

      ietf-nomcom@lists.elistx.com



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


   To subscribe to that mailing list you may send a message with the
   single word "subscribe" in the body to:

      ietf-nomcom-request@lists.elistx.com

   Or you may visit the web-based subscription manager at:

      <http://lists.elistx.com/subscribe>


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2. Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3. General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4. Nominating Committee Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5. Nominating Committee Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6. Member Recall  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   7. Changes From RFC2727 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   8. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   9. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   A. Oral Tradition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26


























Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


1. Introduction

   This document is a revision of and supercedes RFC2727.  [2] It is a
   complete specification of the process by which members of the IAB and
   IESG are selected, confirmed, and recalled as of the date of its
   approval.  However, these procedures are subject to change and such
   change takes effect immediately upon its approval, regardless of
   whether this document has yet been revised.

   The following two assumptions continue to be true of this
   specification.

   1.  The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) and Internet Research
       Steering Group (IRSG) are not a part of the process described
       here.

   2.  The organization (and re-organization) of the IESG is not a part
       of the process described here.

   The time frames specified here use IETF meetings as a frame of
   reference.  The time frames assume that the IETF meets three times
   per calendar year with approximately equal amounts of time between
   them.  The meetings are referred to as the First IETF, Second IETF,
   or Third IETF as needed.

   The next section lists the words and phrases commonly used throughout
   this document with their intended meaning.

   The majority of this document is divided into four major topics as
   follows.

   General: This a set of rules and constraints that apply to the
      selection and confirmation process as a whole.

   Nominating Committee Selection: This is the process by which
      volunteers from the IETF community are recognized to serve on the
      committee that nominates candidates to serve on the IESG and IAB.

   Nominating Committee Operation: This is the set of principles, rules,
      and constraints that guide the activities of the nominating
      committee, including the confirmation process.

   Member Recall: This is the process by which the behavior of a sitting
      member of the IESG or IAB may be questioned, perhaps resulting in
      the removal of the sitting member.

   A final section describes how this document differs from its
   predecessor: RFC2727. [2]



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


   An appendix of useful facts and practices collected from previous
   nominating committees is also included.

















































Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


2. Definitions

   The following words and phrases are commonly used throughout this
   document.  They are listed here with their intended meaning for the
   convenience of the reader.

   candidate: A nominee who has been selected to be considered for
      confirmation by a confirming body.

   confirmed candidate: A candidate that has been reviewed and approved
      by a confirming body.

   nominating committee term: The term begins when its members are
      officially announced, which is expected to be prior to the Third
      IETF to ensure it is fully operational at the Third IETF.  The
      term ends when the next nominating committee's term begins.

   nominee: A person who is being or has been considered for one or more
      open positions of the IESG or IAB.

   sitting member: A person who is currently serving a term of
      membership in the IESG, IAB or ISOC Board of Trustees.

   superior candidate: A nominee selected for either the IESG or IAB by
      the nominating committee because it believes the nominee's
      membership would contribute in such a way as to improve or
      otherwise be more desirable to that body as a whole.
























Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


3. General

   The following set of rules apply to the selection and confirmation
   process as a whole.  If necessary, a paragraph discussing the
   interpretation of each rule is included.

   1.  The principal functions of the nominating committee are to review
       the open IESG and IAB positions and to either nominate its
       incumbent or recruit a superior candidate.

       Although there is no term limit for serving in any IESG or IAB
       position, the nominating committee may use length of service as
       one of its criterion for evaluating an incumbent.

       The nominating committee does not select the open positions to be
       reviewed; it is instructed as to which positions to review.

       The nominating committee will be given the title of the position
       to be reviewed and a brief description of the desirable set of
       qualifications of the candidate that is nominated to fill each
       position.

       Incumbents must notify the nominating committee if they wish to
       be nominated.

       The nominating committee does not confirm its candidates; it
       presents its candidates to the appropriate confirming body as
       indicated below.

   2.  The annual selection and confirmation process is expected to be
       completed within 3 months.

       The annual selection and confirmation process is expected to be
       completed one month prior to the friday of the week before the
       First IETF.  It is expected to begin 4 months prior to the Friday
       of the week before the First IETF.

   3.  One-half of each of the then current IESG and IAB positions is
       selected to be reviewed each year.

       The intent of this rule to ensure the review of approximately
       one-half of each of the sitting IESG and IAB members each year.
       It is recognized that circumstances may exist that will require
       the nominating committee to review more or less than one-half of
       the current positions, e.g., if the IESG or IAB have re-organized
       prior to this process and created new positions, or if there are
       an odd number of current positions.




Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


   4.  Confirmed candidates are expected to serve at least a 2 year
       term.

       The intent of this rule is to ensure that members of the IESG and
       IAB serve the number of years that best facilitates the review of
       one-half of the members each year.

       It is consistent with this rule for the nominating committee to
       choose one or more of the currently open positions to which it
       may assign a term greater than 2 years in order to ensure the
       ideal application of this rule in the future.

       It is consistent with this rule for the nominating committee to
       choose one or more of the currently open positions that share
       responsibilities with other positions (both those being reviewed
       and those sitting) to which it may assign a term greater than 2
       years to ensure that all such members will not be reviewed at the
       same time.

       All sitting member terms end during the First IETF meeting
       corresponding to the end of the term for which they were
       confirmed.  All confirmed candidate terms begin during the First
       IETF meeting corresponding to the beginning of the term for which
       they were confirmed.  Normally, the confirmed candidate's term
       begins when the currently sitting member's term ends on the last
       day of the meeting.  A term may begin or end no sooner than the
       first day of the meeting and no later than the last day of the
       meeting as determined by the mutual agreement of the currently
       sitting member and the confirmed candidate.  The confirmed
       candidate's term may overlap the sitting member's term during the
       meeting as determined by their mutual agreement.

   5.  Mid-term vacancies are filled by the same rules as documented
       here with four qualifications.

       First, the body with the mid-term vacancy chooses whether to
       reconvene the current nominating committee to fill the mid-term
       vacancy or to wait until the next nominating committee is
       constituted so it can fill the mid-term vacancy.  If the body
       with the mid-term vacancy chooses to wait there is no further
       action required of the current nominating committee.

       Second, if the body with the mid-term vacancy chooses to
       reconvene the current nominating committee, the selection and
       confirmation process is expected to be completed within 1 month,
       with all other time periods otherwise unspecified prorated
       accordingly.  Third, the confirming body has two weeks from the
       day it is notified of a candidate to reject the candidate,



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


       otherwise the candidate is assumed to have been confirmed.
       Fourth, the term of the confirmed candidate will be either:

       1.  the remainder of the term of the open position if that
           remainder is not less than one year.

       2.  the remainder of the term of the open position plus the next
           2 year term if that remainder is less than one year.

   6.  All deliberations and supporting information that relates to
       specific nominees, candidates, and confirmed candidates are
       confidential.

       The nominating committee and confirming body members will be
       exposed to confidential information as a result of their
       deliberations, their interactions with those they consult, and
       from those who provide requested supporting information.  All
       members and all other participants are expected to handle this
       information in a manner consistent with its sensitivity.

       It is consistent with this rule for current nominating committee
       members who have served on prior nominating committees to advise
       the current committee on deliberations and results of the prior
       committee, as necessary and appropriate.

   7.  Unless otherwise specified, the advise and consent model is used
       throughout the process.  This model is characterized as follows.

       1.  The IETF Executive Director informs the nominating committee
           of the IESG and IAB positions to be reviewed.

       2.  The nominating committee selects candidates and advises each
           confirming body of its respective slate of candidates.

       3.  The confirming bodies review their respective slate of
           candidates and, in consultation with the nominating
           committee, consent to some, all, or none of the candidates.

           The sitting IAB members review the IESG candidates.

           The Internet Society Board of Trustees reviews the IAB
           candidates.

           If the entire slate of candidates submitted to a confirming
           body is confirmed, the job of the nominating committee with
           respect to those open positions is complete.

           If some or none of the candidates submitted to a confirming



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


           body are confirmed, the purpose of the consultation is to
           ensure the nominating committee interacts with the confirming
           body both to understand the reason why all the candidates
           were not confirmed and to explain their rationale for the
           slate.  During the course of the consultation the nominating
           committee may re-examine the slate of candidates and may
           change it in any way.

           The confirming body may reject individual candidates.  The
           nominating committee must select alternate candidates for the
           rejected candidates.

           Any additional time required by the nominating committee
           should not exceed its maximum time allotment.

       4.  The confirming bodies decide their consent according to a
           mechanism of their own choosing, which must ensure that at
           least one-half of the sitting members agree with the
           decision.

           At least one-half of the sitting members of the confirming
           bodies must agree to either confirm or reject each individual
           nominee.  The agreement must be decided within a reasonable
           timeframe.  The agreement may be decided by conducting a
           formal vote, by asserting consensus based on informal
           exchanges (email), or by whatever mechanism is used to
           conduct the normal business of the confirming body.

   8.  All announcements must be made using at least the mechanism used
       by the IETF secretariat for its announcements, including a notice
       on the IETF web site.

       As of the publication of this document the current mechanism is
       an email message to both the "ietf" and the "ietf-announce"
       mailing lists.
















Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


4. Nominating Committee Selection

   The following set of rules apply to the creation of the nominating
   committee and the selection of its members.

   1.   The process of selecting the members of the nominating committee
        is expected to be completed within 2 months.

        The selection process is expected to be completed one month
        prior to the Third IETF.  This ensures there is an opportunity
        for the nominating committee to meet and to organize itself
        prior to the Third IETF.

   2.   The term of a nominating committee is expected to be 1 year.

        It is the intent of this rule that there be exactly one
        nominating committee that is the current, official nominating
        committee.

        The term of a nominating committee begins when its members are
        officially announced.  The term ends when the next nominating
        committee's term begins.

        A term is expected to begin prior to the Third IETF to ensure
        the nominating committee has an opportunity to prepare to be
        fully operational at the Third IETF.

        A nominating committee is expected to complete any work-in-
        progress before it is dissolved at the end of its term.

   3.   The committee comprises at least a non-voting Chair, 10 voting
        volunteers, and 3 non-voting liaisons.

        Any committee member may propose the addition of a non-voting
        advisor to participate in some or all of the deliberations of
        the committee.  The addition must be approved by both the voting
        and non-voting members of the committee according to its
        established voting mechanism.  Advisors participate as
        individuals.

        Any committee member may propose the addition of a non-voting
        liaison from other unrepresented organizations to participate in
        some or all of the deliberations of the committee.  The addition
        must be approved by both the voting and non-voting members of
        the committee according to its established voting mechanism.
        Liaisons participate as representatives of their respective
        organizations.




Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


   4.   The Internet Society President appoints the non-voting Chair,
        who must meet the usual requirements for membership in the
        nominating committee.

        The nominating committee Chair must agree to invest the time
        necessary to ensure that the nominating committee completes its
        assigned duties and to perform in the best interests of the IETF
        community in that role.

        The appointment must be completed no later than the Second IETF
        meeting to ensure it can be announced during a plenary session
        at that meeting.  This ensures the Chair has approximately two
        months to conduct the selection process for the nominating
        committee members and approximately one month to organize one or
        more initial meetings of the nominating committee prior to the
        Third IETF meeting.

   5.   The Chair must establish and announce milestones for the
        selection of the nominating commitee members.

        There is a defined time period during which the selection
        process must be completed.  The Chair must establish a set of
        milestones which, if met in a timely fashion, will result in the
        completion of the process on time.

   6.   The Chair obtains the list of IESG and IAB positions to be
        reviewed and announces it along with a solicitation for names of
        volunteers from the IETF community willing to serve on the
        nominating committee.

        The solicitation must permit the community at least 30 days
        during which they may choose to volunteer to be selected for the
        nominating committee.

        The list of open positions is published with the solicitation to
        facilitate community members choosing between volunteering for
        an open position and volunteering for the nominating committee.

   7.   Members of the IETF community must have attended at least 2 of
        the last 3 IETF meetings in order to volunteer.

        The 3 meetings are the three most recent meetings that ended
        prior to the date on which the solicitation for nominating
        committee volunteers was submitted for distribution to the IETF
        community.

   8.   Members of the Internet Society Board of Trustees, sitting
        members of the IAB, and sitting members of the IESG may not



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


        volunteer.

   9.   The Chair announces both the list of the pool of volunteers from
        which the 10 voting volunteers will be randomly selected and the
        method with which the selection will be completed.

        The announcement should be made at least 1 week prior to the
        date on which the random selection will occur.

        The pool of volunteers must be enumerated or otherwise indicated
        according to the needs of the method to be used.

        The announcement must specify the data that will be used as
        input to the method.  The method must depend on random data
        whose value is not known or available until the date on which
        the random selection will occur.

        It must be possible to independently verify that the method used
        is both fair and unbiased.  A method is fair if each eligible
        volunteer is equally likely to be selected.  A method is
        unbiased if no one can influence its outcome in favor of a
        specific outcome.

        It must be possible to repeat the method, either through
        iteration or by restarting in such a way as to remain fair and
        unbiased.  This is necessary to replace selected volunteers
        should they become unavailable after selection.

        One possible method is described in RFC2777 [1].

   10.  The Chair randomly selects and announces the 10 voting
        volunteers from the pool of names of volunteers.

        There must be two announcements of the members of the voting
        members of the nominating committee.

        The first announcement should occur as soon after the selection
        as is reasonable for the Chair.  The community must have at
        least 1 week during which any member may challenge the results.
        The challenge is made and processed according to the usual IETF
        appeals process except that an initial challenge is submitted to
        the IETF Chair.

        During at least the 1 week challenge period the Chair should
        contact each of the selected volunteers and confirm their
        willingness and availability to serve.  The Chair should make
        every reasonable effort to contact each selected volunteer.  If
        necessary, the Chair may announce and then iterate the selection



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


        process in order to replace a volunteer that is unavailable.
        There should be at least 1 day between the announcement and the
        iteration of the selection process.

        After at least 1 week and confirming that 10 voting volunteers
        are ready to serve, the Chair makes the second announcement of
        the voting members of the nominating committee, which officially
        begins the term of the nominating committee.

   11.  The sitting IAB and IESG members each appoint a non-voting
        liaison to the nominating committee from their current
        membership who are not sitting in an open position.

   12.  The Chair of the prior year's nominating committee serves as a
        non-voting liaison.

        The prior year's Chair may select a designee from a pool
        composed of the voting members of the prior year's committee and
        all prior Chairs if the Chair is unavailable.  If the prior
        year's Chair is unavailable and is unable or unwilling to make
        such a designation in a timely fashion, the Chair of the current
        committee may do so.

        Selecting a prior year's committee member as the designee
        permits the experience of the prior year's deliberations to be
        readily available to the current committee.  Selecting an
        earlier prior year Chair as the designee permits the experience
        of being a Chair as well as that Chair's committee deliberations
        to be readily available to the current committee.

   13.  The Internet Society Board of Trustees may appoint a non-voting
        liaison to the nominating committee.



















Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


5. Nominating Committee Operation

   The following rules apply to the operation of the nominating
   committee.  If necessary, a paragraph discussing the interpretation
   of each rule is included.

   The rules are organized approximately in the order in which they
   would be invoked.

   1.   All rules and special circumstances not otherwise specified are
        at the discretion of the committee.

        Exceptional circumstances will occasionally arise during the
        normal operation of the nominating committee.  This rule is
        intended to foster the continued forward progress of the
        committee.

        Any member of the committee may propose a rule for adoption by
        the committee.  The rule must be approved by both the voting and
        non- voting members of the committee according to its
        established voting mechanism.

        All members of the committee should consider whether the
        exception is worthy of mention in the next revision of this
        document and followup accordingly.

   2.   The Chair must establish and announce milestones, which must
        include at least a call for nominations.

        There is a defined time period during which the selection and
        confirmation process must be completed.  The Chair must
        establish a set of milestones which, if met in a timely fashion,
        will result in the completion of the process on time.  The Chair
        should allow time for iterating the activities of the committee
        if one or more candidates is not confirmed.

   3.   The Chair must establish a voting mechanism.

        The committee must be able to objectively determine when a
        decision has been made during its deliberations.  The criteria
        for determining closure must be established and known to all
        members of the nominating committee.

   4.   At least a quorum of committee members must participate in a
        vote.

        A quorum comprises at least 7 voting members.




Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


   5.   The Chair may establish a process by which a member of the
        nominating committee may be recalled.

        The process, if established, must be agreed to by a 3/4 majority
        of the members of the nominating committee, including the non-
        voting members since they would be subject to the same process.

   6.   All members of the nominating committee may participate in all
        deliberations.

        The emphasis of this rule is that no member, whether voting or
        non-voting, can be explicitly excluded from any deliberation.
        However, a member may individually choose not to participate in
        a deliberation.

   7.   The Chair announces the open positions to be reviewed and the
        call for nominees.

        The call for nominees must include a request for comments
        regarding the past performance of incumbents, which will be
        considered during the deliberations of the nominating committee.

        The call must request that a nomination include a valid, working
        email address, a telephone number, or both for the nominee.  The
        nomination must include the set of skills or expertise the
        nominator believes the nominee has that would be desirable.

   8.   Any member of the IETF community may nominate any member of the
        IETF community for any open position.

        A self-nomination is permitted.

   9.   Nominating committee members must not be nominees.

        To be a nominee is to enter the process of being selected as a
        candidate and confirmed.  Nominating committee members are not
        eligible to be considered for filling any open position.  They
        become ineligible as soon as term of the nominating committee on
        which they serve officially begins.  They remain ineligible for
        the duration of this nominating committee's term.

   10.  Members of the IETF community who were recalled from any IESG or
        IAB position during the previous two years must not be nominees.

   11.  The nominating committee selects candidates based on its
        understanding of the IETF community's consensus of the
        qualifications required to fill the open positions.




Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


        The intent of this rule is to ensure that the nominating
        committee consults with a broad base of the IETF community for
        input to its deliberations.  In particular, the nominating
        committee must determine if the desired qualifications for the
        open positions matches its understanding of the qualifications
        desired by the IETF community.

        The consultations are permitted to include names of nominees, if
        all parties to the consultation agree to observe the same
        confidentiality rules as the nominating committee itself.

        A broad base of the community should include the existing
        members of the IAB and IESG, especially sitting members who
        share responsibilities with open positions, e.g., co-Area
        Directors.

   12.  Nominees should be advised that they are being considered and
        must consent to their nomination prior to being chosen as a
        candidate.

        Although the nominating committee will make every reasonable
        effort to contact and to remain in contact with nominees, any
        nominee whose contact information changes during the process and
        who wishes to still be considered should inform the nominating
        committee of the changes.

        A nominee's consent must be written (email is acceptable) and
        must include a commitment to provide the resources necessary to
        fill the open position and an assurance that the nominee will
        perform the duties of the position for which they are being
        considered in the best interests of the IETF community.

        Consenting to a nomination must occur prior to a nominee being a
        candidate and may occur as soon after the nomination as needed
        by the nominating committee.

        Consenting to a nomination must not imply the nominee will be a
        candidate.

        The nominating committee should help nominees provide
        justification to their employers.

   13.  The nominating committee advises the confirming bodies of their
        candidates, specifying a single candidate for each open position
        and a testament as to how each candidate meets the
        qualifications of an open position.

        For each candidate, the testament must include a brief statement



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


        of the qualifications for the position that is being filled,
        which may be exactly the qualifications that were requested.  If
        the qualifications differ from the desired qualifications
        originally requested a brief statement explaining the difference
        must be included.

        The testament may include either or both a brief resume of the
        candidate or a brief summary of the deliberations of the
        nominating committee.

   14.  Confirmed candidates must consent to their confirmation and
        rejected candidates and nominees must be notified before
        confirmed candidates are announced.

        It is not necessary to notify and get consent from all confirmed
        candidates together.  Waiting to notify them all together
        permits the nominating committee to reconsider its selection if
        necessary.

        A nominee may not know they were a candidate and a candidate may
        not know they were included in a slate of candidates.  This
        permits a candidate to be rejected by a confirming body without
        knowing about the rejection.  Prior to announcing a confirmed
        candidate the nominating committee must ensure the candidate is
        prepared to serve.

        Rejected nominees who consented to their nomination must be
        notified prior to announcing the confirmed candidates.  Rejected
        candidates must be notified prior to announcing the confirmed
        candidates.  Waiting to notify them until after the slate of
        candidates has been confirmed permits the nominating committee
        to reconsider its selection if necessary.

        It is not necessary to announce all confirmed candidates
        together.  Waiting to announce them all together permits the
        nominating committee to reconsider its selection if necessary.

   15.  The nominating committee should archive the information it has
        collected or produced for a period of time not to exceed the its
        term.

        The purpose of the archive is to assist the nominating committee
        should it be necessary for it to fill a mid-term vacancy.

        The existence of an archive, how it is implemented, and what
        information to archive is at the discretion of the committee.
        The decisions must be approved by the voting members of the
        committee.



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 17]


        The implementation of the archive should make every reasonable
        effort to ensure the confidentiality of the information it
        contains is maintained.


















































Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


6. Member Recall

   The following rules apply to the recall process.  If necessary, a
   paragraph discussing the interpretation of each rule is included.

   1.  Anyone may request the recall of any sitting IAB or IESG member,
       at any time, upon written (email is acceptable) request with
       justification to the Internet Society President.

   2.  Internet Society President shall appoint a Recall Committee
       Chair.

       The Internet Society President must not evaluate the recall
       request.  It is explicitly the responsibility of the IETF
       community to evaluate the behavior of its leaders.

   3.  The recall committee is created according to the same rules as is
       the nominating committee with the qualifications that the person
       being investigated and the person requesting the recall must not
       be a member of the recall committee in any capacity.

   4.  The recall committee operates according to the same rules as the
       nominating committee with the qualification that there is no
       confirmation process.

   5.  The recall committee investigates the circumstances of the
       justification for the recall and votes on its findings.

       The investigation must include at least both an opportunity for
       the member being recalled to present a written statement and
       consultation with third parties.

   6.  A 3/4 majority of the members who vote on the question is
       required for a recall.

   7.  If a sitting member is recalled the open position is to be filled
       according to the mid-term vacancy rules.














Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


7. Changes From RFC2727

   This section describes the changes from RFC2727 that are currently
   incorporated in this draft.  The changes represent a proposal to the
   working group for it to review and approve, with any additional
   changes the consensus of the working group determines are necessary.
   Comments, suggestions, or questions should be directed to the mailing
   list for this working group.

   This proposal does not respond to all of the open issues before this
   working group.  There are additional issues yet to be resolved that
   are not covered in this proposal.

   Editorial changes are not described here, only substantive changes.
   They are listed here in the order in which they appear in the
   document.

   1.   A section with definitions for words and phrases used throughout
        the document was inserted.  Suggestions for additional entries
        are welcome.

   2.   A comment about term limits was added to Section 3 Rule 1.

   3.   In Section 3 Rule 1 the NOMCOM must now be provided with a brief
        description of the desirable set of qualifications for the
        candidate to be nominated for each position.

   4.   In Section 3 Rule 5 the body with the mid-term vacancy may now
        choose either to reconvene the current NOMCOM to fill it or to
        wait for the next NOMCOM to fill it.

   5.   The characterization of the advise and consent model (Section 3
        Rule 7) was revised to require the nominating committee and the
        confirming body to consult during the approval process.

   6.   In Section 3 Rule 8 was added to define that all announcements
        are made with the usual IETF secretariat mechanism.

   7.   Section 4, Nominating Committee Selection, was re-organized so
        that explicit timeframes could be specified for the various
        steps in the selection process.  The following suggestions are
        included in the re-organization.

        1.  The selection process must be completed within 2 months.

        2.  A term was defined for a nominating committee.

        3.  Liaisons and advisors are no longer required to meet the



Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


            usual requirements for nominating committee membership.

        4.  The Chair must be appointed by and announced during the
            Second IETF.

        5.  The IETF community can challenge the results of the
            selection process that determined the members of the
            nominating committee.

        6.  The Internet Society Board of Trustees may appoint a non-
            voting liaison.

   8.   In Section 5 Rule 7 nominations for open positions should
        include both contact information and a description of the skills
        or expertise the nominator believes the nominee possesses.

   9.   In Section 5 Rule 12 nominees are requested to keep the
        nominating committee informed of changes in their contact
        information.  Editorially, the distinction between a nominee and
        candidate was emphasized.

   10.  In Section 5 Rule 13 a description of a testament to be provided
        with a slate to a confirming body by the nominating committee is
        specified.

   11.  Section 5 Rule 14 regarding the announcement of confirmed
        candidates was substantially rewritten to make it easier to
        understand.

   12.  In Section 5 Rule 15 was added stating that the nominating
        committee is permitted to keep an archive for the duration of
        its term of the information it collects and produces for its use
        during its term.

   13.  Section 9, Security Considerations, was expanded.

   14.  Appendix A, Oral Tradition, has been added.  Suggestions for
        additional information to include are welcome.













Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


8. Acknowledgements

   There have been a number of people involved with the development of
   this document over the years.  A great deal of credit goes to the
   first three Nominating Committee Chairs:

      1993 - Jeff Case

      1994 - Fred Baker

      1995 - John Curran

   who had the pleasure of operating without the benefit of a documented
   process.  It was their fine work and oral tradition that became the
   first version of this document.  Of course we can not overlook the
   bug discovery burden that each of the Chairs since the first
   publication have had to endure:

      1996 - Guy Almes

      1997 - Geoff Houston

      1998 - Mike St. Johns

      1999 - Donald Eastlake

      2000 - Avri Doria

      2001 - Bernard Adoba

      2002 - Ted T'so

   Of course the bulk of the credit goes to the members of the POISSON
   Working Group, previously the POISED Working Group.  The prose here
   would not be what it is were it not for the attentive and insightful
   review of its members.  Specific acknowledgement must be extended to
   Scott Bradner and John Klensin, who have consistently contributed to
   the improvement of this document throughout its evolution.













Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


9. Security Considerations

   Any selection, confirmation, or recall process necessarily involves
   investigation into the qualifications and activities of prospective
   candidates.  The investigation may reveal confidential or otherwise
   private information about candidates to those participating in the
   process.  Each person who participates in any aspect of the process
   must maintain the confidentiality of any and all information not
   explicitly identified as suitable for public dissemination.

   When the nominating committee decides it is necessary to share
   confidential or otherwise private information with others, the
   dissemination must be minimal and must include a prior committment
   from all persons consulted to observe the same confidentiality rules
   as the nominating committee itself.




































Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


References

   [1]  Eastlake, D., "Publicly Verifiable Nomcom Random Selection", RFC
        2777, February 2000.

   [2]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
        Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP
        10, RFC 2727, February 2000.

   [3]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
        Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP
        10, RFC 2282, February 1998.


Author's Address

   James M. Galvin
   eList eXpress LLC
   607 Trixsam Road
   Sykesville, MD  21784
   US

   Phone: +1 410-549-4619
   Fax:   +1 410-795-7978
   EMail: galvin+ietf@elistx.com
   URI:   http://www.elistx.com/

























Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


Appendix A. Oral Tradition

   Over the years various nominating committees have learned through
   oral tradition passed on by liaisons that there are certain
   consistencies in the process and information considered during
   deliberations.  Some items from that oral tradition are collected
   here to facilitate its consideration by future nominating committees.

   1.  It has been found that experience as an IETF Working Group Chair
       or an IRTF Research Group Chair is helpful in giving a nominee
       experience of what the job of an Area Director involves.  It is
       also helps a nominating committee judge the technical, people,
       and process management skills of the nominee.

   2.  No person should ever be nominated to serve on both the IESG and
       the IAB concurrently; this does not apply to the IETF Chair who
       serves on both bodies by definition.

   3.  The strength of the IAB is found in part in the balance of the
       demographics of its members (e.g., national distribution, years
       of experience, gender, etc.), the combined skill set of its
       members, and the combined sectors (e.g., industry, academia,
       etc.) represented by its members.

   4.  There are no term limits explicitly because the issue of
       continuity versus turnover should be evaluated each year
       according to the expectations of the IETF community, as it is
       understood by each nominating committee.























Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection                June 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Galvin                  Expires December 26, 2002              [Page 26]


