


Internet Draft                                             Joseph J. Kim
Expiration Date: Feb 1998                                          Ipcom
                                                             August 1997
 
 
       DNS Top Level Domain Name Classification and Structure

                     draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt
 
 
Status of this Memo
 
     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
     areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
 
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     ``work in progress.''
 
     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
     the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
     Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
     nic.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
     ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).
 

Abstract
 
     This document specifies a structural organization of Internet top
     level domain names based on the International Schedule of Classes
     of Goods and Services. This structure intends to provide a 
     framework for classification such that web content providers can
     differentiate their goods and services and minimize the probability
     of name confusion and collision. Under each class, as specified by
     the International Schedule of Classes of Goods and Services, single
     or multiple top level domain names should be specified each 
     appropriately partitioning the class of goods or service into an
     appropriate sub-categorization. A method will further be described
     to incorporate additions/modifications as becomes necessary by as
     of yet unforseen future developments.
 
     This document does not address the delegation or the administration
     of top level domain names which the author feels should be 
     considered separately. However, the author does acknowledge that
     some form of centralized authority should be in place to properly
     control the structure to be described.


 

Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 1]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


1. Introduction
 
     Many new TLDs will soon be created, however, a framework for 
     classification which appropriately limits the scope of TLD names is
     not yet formally specified. Instances of name space collision in ".com" 
     illustrate the potential of future conflict by TLD names which are
     not appropriately limited in their scope of application. In other
     words, TLDs with names which are too general in nature will be a
     cause of conflict since multiple entities may have an interest in 
     registering similar names under a particular TLD.

     A TLD naming system based on the trademark system is in no way
     novel. In fact, many have independently realized and suggested
     variations of this approach before. However, a flexible system
     which 1. maintains a fairly flat structure allowing for short and
     easily remembered names (the whole purpose behind DNS in the first
     place), 2. allows for flexibility in the definition of 
     sub-categories and names under goods and service classes as needed,
     and 3. considers future revisions and modifications, has not been
     specified to date. The definition of sub-categories is especially
     important in light of the fact that most Internet related 
     businesses would likely fall under one of the 8 service classes 
     especially class 42: "...services that cannot be placed in other 
     classes [Int-sched]".

2. The Current System
 
     In the current system, the majority of domain names fall under the
     TLDs administered by Network Solutions, Inc. of: 

     .com
     .net
     .org

     These TLDs have been in use for some time. However, conflict from
     name collision and trademark issues continue as companies desire 
     the same names under a particular TLD. Current TLDs simply do not 
     provide enough granularity in terms of partitioning specific names
     with categories of goods and services.












Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996
 
 
     A recent proposal by the "IAHC" [Final-report 97] suggests 
     implementation of 7 new top level domain names including:
 
     .arts
     .rec
     .nom
     .store
     .info
     .firm
     .web

     However, the generic nature of some of these domain names and the 
     lack of guidelines for names to appropriately limit scope 
     [suffers 
     from the same problems encountered by the generality of ".com". 
     Future conflict is thus inevitable and a more robust and scalable
     solution preferred.
 
3. Proposed Structure
 
     The International Schedule of Classes of Goods and Services is the 
     international standard for trademark. The proposal in this document
     assumes the right of the trademark holder as a priority in 
     determining the rights to a particular domain name under a 
     particular TLD name space. 

     Top level domain names should be specified and categorized based on
     the International Schedule. Each class as defined by the 
     International Schedule should have associated with it a single or
     multiple top level domain names. Thus multiple TLDs may exist under
     a single class, unlike in the trademark system. This allows for 
     finer levels of granularity where needed and easily remembered TLD
     names associated with particular products or services.

     Again, each top level domain name would specify a particular subset
     of goods or service for it's associated class. Thus, for example,
     class 25 according to the International Schedule covers "Clothing,
     footwear, headgear". Possible top level domain names under this 
     class could include:
 
     .cloth - for clothing in general
     .shoe - for footwear
     .caps - for athletic caps
 
     Actually, a more elaborate and formal description of the scope of
     each top level domain name should be given. However, for the 
     purposes of illustration, the above should be sufficient.
 



Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     In a like manner all 34 classes of goods and 8 classes of services
     should be appropriately partitioned and given appropriately
     associated TLDs. Further each TLD should have a specific and 
     clearly defined scope of coverage. In other words, ambiguity and
     overlapping of what goods and services are covered by a TLD should
     be minimized as much as possible.
 
     In the above example, if it is not clear whether socks fit into
     ".cloth" or ".shoe" then this should be made concrete by the 
     governing body controlling the definition of these TLDs (more on 
     this governing body in the next section).
 
     A single and complete description of all TLD names under their 
     appropriate class of goods or service should be provided. The 
     author currently keeps a proposed description at 
     "http://www.idns.net" (will be updated regularly). The initial 
     suggestion of TLDs in each class is also included in Appendix A.
     Again what is provided is a suggestion and even after a formal
     categorization is constructed future modifications as needed should
     always be possible.
 
4. Coordination and Management of TLD Names and Name Scope

     The question now arises how to determine names for each class and
     how to incorporate new names as the need arises in the future? 
     Ideally some international, governing body consisting of various
     members of Internet and trademark bodies could be created and this
     body could reach a consensus on the categorization and scope of 
     each TLD. This governing body could also deal with disputes.

     However, the reality in creating such an organization may be 
     difficult. Also, the current power struggle between various 
     factions vying for control of the TLD name space makes this an 
     issue which will ultimately be decided by the victors of this power
     struggle.
     
5. Future Modifications in TLD Name Space

     When modifications need to be made in the classification of a TLD
     or it's scope, it may become necessary for some domain name holders
     to move from one particular TLD to another.










Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996

 
     TLD name changes will probably take the following form:
     1. the addition of an entirely new TLD which does not conflict with
     pre-existing TLD names and does not conflict with the scope of 
     coverage of other TLD names within the same class, 2. the change of
     a particular TLD name to that of another, 3. the creation of a new
     TLD with some scope "stolen" from other TLDs, 4. the aggregation of
     2 or more old TLD names into 1 TLD name, and 5. the splitting of a 
     single TLD name into 2 or more TLDs.
 
     Case 1 should not not produce any difficulties.
 
     Case 2 and 3 would require that old TLD name holders will need to
     change to use the new TLD name. For this case, some kind of a
     standard grace period should be provided (preferably for at least a
     year) in which the old TLD remains active. No new registrations 
     would be allowed in the old TLD but eventually after the grace 
     period expires old users would be forced out of the old TLD name 
     space and into the new TLD name space.
 
     Case 3 presents an interesting issue in that if a new TLD name 
     space is created, whether domain name holders under the old TLD be
     given priority for "generic" names under the new TLD name space. In
     other words, if someone has a generic name (which implies no 
     trademark protection) such as "cat" or "house" or "sex" does that
     person have rights to that same name in the new TLD name space?
     The author's tentative suggestion is to allow old domain name 
     holders rights in the new name space as well.
 
     In Case 4, which seems fairly pathological, there is a contentious
     point of issue for domain name holders with "generic" domain names.
     Assuming, this event were to occur (which most likely would never 
     happen) some form of prioritization needs to be established (i.e. 
     whoever registered first, etc.).
 
     Finally case 5, should be similar to case 2 and have the same kind
     of associated action.
 
6. Incorporating the IAHC Proposal and NSI TLDs
 
     There are obvious problems with the current IAHC assigned TLD names
     as well as the current NSI governed TLD names. For example
     ".store" and ".firm" are too similar and their scope becomes 
     ambiguous in relation to each other and ".web" and ".info" are too
     general. This is not to mention NSI's ".com" which conveniently 
     covers the entire realm of commercial enterprise. However, if the
     "IAHC Proposal" is successful with their 7 new TLD names then it
     would be useful to consider how to incorporate that possible 
     outcome with the suggestions outlined in this document.



Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996

 
     The first step would be to place the 7 new tlds in a particular
     class as specified by the International Schedule and the second 
     step would be to appropriately limit the scope of the current 
     names. Priority should be given to those who have priority for a 
     certain name given the associated scope of a given TLD as 
     specified.
 
     A tentative suggestion is as follows and is by no means definitive:
 
     class 41. "Education; providing of training; entertainment; sporting
     and cultural activities [Int-sched]."
 
     .arts -  libraries; museums; clubs centering around an artistic 
              focus; 
     .rec -   recreational centers; health clubs; sporting centers;
              sporting events; other recreational events;
     .nom -   "for those wishing individual or personal nomenclature 
              [Final-report 97]"
 
     class 42. "Providing of food and drink; temporary accomodation; 
     medical, hygienic and beauty care; veterinary and agricultural 
     services; legal services; scientific and industrial research; 
     computer programming; services that cannot be placed in other 
     classes [Int-sched]."
 
     .info -  directory services; Internet searching; white and yellow
              pages; whois;
 
     .web -   web related advertising firms; 
 
     .store-  see below
     .firm-   see below
 
     Eventually, .store and .firm should be obsoleted and registrants
     should be moved (as specified by this document) into appropriate 
     TLDs to be created in the future. 
 














Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 6]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Similar to incorporating IAHC TLDs, the TLDs currently administered
     by NSI of .com, .org, and .net could also be handled.
 
     class 42

     .org-    non-profit organizations; 
     .net-    network consultants; isps; web design firms; 

     .com-    should be obsoleted as .store and .firm

     As future TLDs are created some of the above listed TLD names can
     be changed or moved or deleted as per the specification of this
     document.


7. Acknowledgements
 
     Many people have expressed various ideas about incorporating 
     trademark into the DNS, however, the first real codification of
     those ideas, and similar to those ideas expressed in this document,
     came from a now expired IETF draft document by Simon Higgs of Higgs
     America.

     The problems associated with the "IAHC proposal" (as well as a 
     stimulus for writing this document) and their 7 new top level 
     domain names was best described by Donna Hoffman in her article
     "IAHC'S Seven New Top Level Domains Will Confuse Customers" 
     [Hoffman 97].
     




















Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 7]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


8. References
 
     [Int-sched] International Schedule of Classes of Goods and 
     Services
      
     [Final-report 97] Final Report of the International Ad Hoc 
     Committee: Recommendations for Administration and Management of
     gTLDs

     [Hoffman 97] Hoffman, D., "IAHC's Seven New Top Level Domain Names
     Will Confuse Customers", The COOK Report on Internet, Vol. 6, No.
     4/5, 1997.


9. Author Information


     Joseph Kim
     ipcom
     811 Haverhill Dr.
     Sunnyvale, CA 94087
     Phone: (408) 527-2579
     email: jokim@ipcom.com
 

Appendix A.  Initial Recommendation of TLD Names and Scope

     All TLDs should be 3-7 characters in length.

     Goods:
     =====

     Sub-categorizations for classes is listed with examples listed to 
     the right. Manufacturers of the associated goods described should
     apply for domain names under the appropriately designated TLD.

     Class 1-
     
     .CHEM	chemicals used in industry, science, and photography, as
		well as in agriculture, horticulture and forestry;
     .PLAS	unprocessed plastics
     .MANURE	manures
     .PRSRV	chemical substances for preserving foodstuffs
     .ADHSV	adhesives used in industry




Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 8]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 2-

     .PAINT	paints, varnishes, lacquers; colorants;

     Class 3-

     .LNDRY	bleaching preparations and other substances for laundry
		use.
     .SOAP	soaps, perfumery, essential oils, cosmetics, hair 
		lotions.
     .CLEAN	cleaning, polishing, scouring and abrasive preparations

     Class 4-

     .OILS	industrial oils and greases; lubricants; dust absorbing, 
		wetting and binding compositions; candles, wicks.
     .FUEL	fuels.

     Class 5-

     .PHARM	pharmaceutical, veterinary and sanitary preparations.

     Class 6-

     .METAL	common metals and their alloys, pipes and tubes of 
		metal; ironmongery, small items of metal hardware; safes;
		goods of common metal not included in other classes.

     .ORE	ores.
     .WIRE	non-electric wires of common metal.
     .CABLE	non-electric cables of common metal.

     Class 7-

     .MCHN	machines and machine tools; motors and engines
     
     Class 8-

     .RAZOR     razors
     .CUTLRY    cutlery; knives
     .TOOLS     hand tools and implements (hand operated)











Joseph Kim                                                      [Page 9]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 9-

     .INSTR	scientific, nautical, surveying, electric, photographic,
		cinematographic, optical, weighing, measuring, 
		signalling, checking (supervision), life-saving and 
		teaching apparatus and instruments; 
     .RECORD	apparatus for recording, transmission or reproduction
		of sound or images; magnetic data carriers, recording 
		discs. 
     .VEND	automatic vending machines and mechanisms for coin 
		operated apparatus;
     .CASHREG	cash registers.
     .CALC	calculating machines. 
     .COMP	data processing equipment and computers.
     .FIREX	fire-extinguishing apparatus.
     .NTWK	routers, switches and hubs; modems and other network 
		related machinery. 

     Class 10-

     .SURGI	surgical, medical, dental and veterinary apparatus and instruments
		artificial limbs, eyes and teeth; orthopedic articles; suture 
		materials

     Class 11-

     .LTNG	apparatus for lighting.
     .HEATER	apparatus for heating.
     .STEAMG	apparatus for steam generating.
     .KITCHEN	apparatus for cooking, refrigerating, water supply and
		sanitary purposes.
     .WTRSPLY	apparatus for water supply.
     .VENT	apparatus for ventilating.
     .DRYER	apparatus for drying.

     Class 12-

     .VEHI	apparatus for locomotion by land, air, or water

     Class 13-

     .ARMS	firearms; ammunition and projectiles; explosives; fireworks









Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 10]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 14-

     .JEWEL	jewellry, precious stones; 
     .WATCH     horological and chronometric instruments (wrist based)
     .CLOCK     horological and chronometric instruments (non wrist based)

     Class 15-

     .MUSICI	musical instruments

     Class 16-

     .PRINT	printed matter; bookbinding materials; printers' type;
		printing blocks.
     .BRUSH	painters brushes.
     .PAPER	paper, cardboard and goods made from these materials.
     .CARD	greeting cards; playing cards.
     .STNRY	stationery. 
     .TAPE	adhesives for stationery or household purposes.
     .PHOTO	photographs.

     Class 17-

     .RUBBER    rubber, gutta-percha, gum asbestos, mica and goods made 
                from these materials.
     .PIPE      flexible pipes, not of metal.
     .PACK	packing, stopping and insulating materials.
     .PLSTC	plastics in extruded form for use in manufacture.

     Class 18-

     .LTHR	leather and imitations of leather, and goods made of these
		materials and not included in other classes; animal skins ...
     .HIDE	animal skins, hides.
     .SADDLE    harness and saddlery		
     .UMBRLA	umbrellas, parasols and walking sticks.
     .WHIPS	whips.

     Class 19-

     .BUILD	building materials (non-metallic); rigid pipes for 
                building; asphalt, pitch and bitumen; non-metallic 
		transportable buildings; monumetns, not of metal.








Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 11]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 20-

     .FURN	furniture, mirrors, picture frames; goods (not included
                in other classes) of wood, cork, reed, cane, wicker,
		horn, bone, ivory, whalebone, shell, amber, 
		mother-of-pearl, meeschaum and substitutes for all these
		materials, or of plastics.


     Class 21-

     .HSHLD	household or kitchen utensils and containers (not of
		precious metal or coated therewith); combs and sponges;
		brushes (except paint brushes); brush-making materials;
		articles for cleaning purposes; steelwool; unworked or
		semiworked glass (except glass used in building); 
		glassware, porcelain and earthenware not included in
		other classes.

     Class 22-

     .ROPE	Ropes, string, nets, tents, awnings, tarpaulins, sails,
		sacks and bags (not included in other classes); padding
		and stuffing materials (except of rubber or plastics);
		raw fibrous textile materials.


     Class 23-

     .YARN	yarns and threads, for textile use.

     Class 24-

     .TEXTILE	textiles and textile goods, not included in other 
		classes; bed and table covers.

     Class 25-

     .CLOTH	clothing in general; socks; caps.
     .SHOE	shoes; boots; thongs; other types of footwear.











Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 12]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 26-	

     .LACE	Lace and embroidery, ribbons and braid;

     Class 27-

     .CARPET	Carpets, rugs, mats and matting, linoleum and other 
		materials for covering existing floors; 
     .POSTER	wall hangings (non-textile)


     Class 28-	

     .GAMES	Games and playthings; gymnastic and sporting articles 
		not included in other classes. 
     .XTREE	decorations for Christmas trees.

     Class 29-

     .MEAT	Meat, fish, poultry and game; meat extracts; edible oils
		and fats.
     .?????	preserved, dried and cooked fruits and vegetables.
     .JELLY	jellies, jams, and fruit sauces.
     .DAIRY	milk and milk products.

     Class 30-	

     .COFFEE	Coffee and artificial coffee.
     .TEA	Tea.
     .SUGAR	sugar.
     .SALT	salt.
     .RICE	rice.
     .FLOUR	flour.
     .BREAD	bread.
     .PASTRY	pastries.
     .HONEY	honey.
     .SPICE	spices.
     .CONDMNT	condiments, sauces, mustard, and ketchup.
     .ICE	ice










Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 13]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 31-

     .AGRI	agricultural products not included in other classes
     .HORTI	horticultural products not included in other classes; 
		plants and flowers.
     .FRSTRY	forestry products not included in other classes
     .ANIMAL	live animals
     .FRUIT	fresh fruits 
     .VEGE	vegetables.
     .FEED	foodstuffs for animals
     .MALT	malt

     Class 32

     .BEER	beers
     .BEV	mineral and aerated waters and other non-alcoholic 
		drinks; fruit drinks and fruit juices; syrups and other
		preparations for making beverages.

     Class 33

     .ALCO	Alcoholic beverages (except beers).

     Class 34

     .TBCO	Tobacco; smokers articles; matches.


     Services:
     ========

     Class 35

     .ADS	Advertising;
     .BUSI	Business management; business administration; office
		functions.

     Class 36

     .INSU	Insurance.
     .FINA	Financial affairs; monetary affairs.
     .REAL	Real estate affairs.

     Class 37

     .CONST	Building construction.
     .REPAIR	Repair services
     .INSTALL	installation services.





Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 14]

Internet Draft          draft-kim-tld-class-00.txt           August 1996


     Class 38

     .TELCO	Telecommunications.

     Class 39

     .TRANS	Transport
     .SHIP	Shipping of goods.
     .TRAVEL	travel arrangements
     .STRAGE	Packaging and storage of goods.

     Class 40

     .MTRLS	Treatment of materials.

     Class 41

     .EDU	Education.
     .TRAIN	providing of training.
     .SPORTS	Sporting activities.
     .CLTRE	Cultural activities.

     Class 42

     .ADLT      web sites containing adult/mature material.
     .BAR	bars.
     .MOVIE     movie information.
     .RESTNT	restaurants
     .HOTEL	hotels.
     .MOTEL	motels.
     .ITV       television broadcasting stations, internet related television broadcasting.
     .VIDEO     video rental stores.
     .MED	medical care.
     .COSM	hygienic and beauty care.
     .VET	veterinary services.   	
     .AGRIS	agricultural services.
     .LEGAL	legal services.
     .RSRCH	scientific and industrial research.
     .PROG	comoputer programming.
     .NET	network consultants; isps; web design firms.
     .ORG	non-profit organizations
     .NEWS	newspapers; news related web sites
     .INFO	directory services; Internet searching; white and yellow
		pages; whois/rwhois.









Joseph Kim                                                     [Page 15]





