





Network Working Group                                         Alan DeKok
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                FreeRADIUS
Category: Informational
<draft-dekok-radius-status-server-02.txt>
Expires: September 20, 2008
20 March 2008


                  Use of Status-Server Packets in the
      Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) Protocol

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 20, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   RFC 2865 defines a Status-Server code for use in RADIUS, but labels
   it as "Experimental" without further discussion.  This document
   describes a practical use for the Status-Server packet code, which is
   to let clients query the status of a RADIUS server.  These queries,
   and responses (if any) enable the client to make more informed
   decisions.  The result is a more stable, and more robust RADIUS
   architecture.




DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


Table of Contents

1.  Introduction .............................................    3
   1.1.  Terminology .........................................    3
   1.2.  Requirements Language ...............................    4
2.  Problem Statement ........................................    5
   2.1.  Overloading Access-Request ..........................    5
      2.1.1.  Recommendation against Access-Request ..........    6
   2.2.  Overloading Accounting-Request ......................    6
      2.2.1.  Recommendation against Accounting-Request ......    7
   2.3.  Status-Server as a Solution .........................    7
      2.3.1.  Status-Server to the RADIUS Authentication port    7
      2.3.2.  Status-Server to the RADIUS Accounting port ....    8
3.  Packet Format ............................................    8
   3.1.  Consistent definition for Status-Server .............   10
4.  Implementation notes .....................................   10
   4.1.  Client Requirements .................................   11
   4.2.  Server Requirements .................................   13
   4.3.  More Robust Fail-over with Status-Server ............   14
   4.4.  Proxy Server handling of Status-Server ..............   15
   4.5.  Realm Routing .......................................   15
   4.6.  Management Information Base (MIB) Considerations ....   17
      4.6.1.  Interaction with RADIUS Server MIBs ............   17
      4.6.2.  Interaction with RADIUS Client MIBs ............   18
5.  Additional considerations ................................   18
   5.1.  Local site testing ..................................   18
   5.2.  RADIUS over reliable transports .....................   19
   5.3.  Other uses for Status-Server ........................   20
   5.4.  Potential Uses for Status-Client ....................   20
6.  Table of Attributes ......................................   20
7.  Examples .................................................   21
   7.1.  Minimal Query to Authentication Port ................   21
   7.2.  Minimal Query to Accounting Port ....................   22
   7.3.  Verbose Query and Response ..........................   23
8.  IANA Considerations ......................................   23
9.  Security Considerations ..................................   24
10.  References ..............................................   24
   10.1.  Normative references ...............................   24
   10.2.  Informative references .............................   24
Intellectual Property Statement ..............................   25
Disclaimer of Validity .......................................   27
Full Copyright Statement .....................................   27









DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


1.  Introduction

   The RADIUS Working Group was formed in 1995 to document the protocol
   of the same name, and created a number of standards surrounding the
   protocol.  It also defined experimental commands within the protocol,
   without elaborating further on the potential uses of those commands.
   One of the commands so defined was Status-Server ([RFC2865] Section
   3.).

   This document describes how some current implementations are using
   Status-Server packets as a method for querying the status of a RADIUS
   server.  These queries do not otherwise affect the normal operation
   of a server, and do not result in any side effects other than perhaps
   incrementing an internal packet counter.

   These queries are not intended to implement the application-layer
   watchdog messages described in [RFC3539] Section 3.4.  That document
   describes Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)
   protocols that run over reliable transports which handle
   retransmissions internally.  Since RADIUS runs over the User Datagram
   Protocol (UDP) rather than Transport Control Protocol (TCP), the full
   watchdog mechanism is not applicable here.

   The rest of this document is laid out as follows.  Section 2 contains
   the problem statement, and explanations as to why some possible
   solutions can have unwanted side effects.  Section 3 defines the
   Status-Server packet format.  Section 4 contains client and server
   requirements, along with some implementation notes.  Section 5 lists
   additional considerations not covered in the other sections.  The
   remaining text contains a RADIUS table of attributes, and discussed
   security considerations not covered elsewhere in the document.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document uses the following terms:

Network Access Server (NAS)
     The device providing access to the network.  Also known as the
     Authenticator (in IEEE 802.1x terminology) or RADIUS client.

Home Server
     A RADIUS server that is authoritative for user authorization and
     authentication.

Proxy Server
     A RADIUS server that acts as a Home Server to the NAS, but in turn
     proxies the request to another Proxy Server, or to a Home Server.




DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


silently discard
     This means the implementation discards the packet without further
     processing.  The implementation MAY provide the capability of
     logging the error, including the contents of the silently discarded
     packet, and SHOULD record the event in a statistics counter.

1.2.  Requirements Language

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].






































DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


2.  Problem Statement

   It is often useful to know if a RADIUS server is alive and responding
   to requests.  The most accurate way to obtain this information is to
   query the server via application protocol traffic, as other methods
   are either less accurate, or cannot be performed remotely.

   The reasons for wanting to know the status of a server are many.  The
   administrator may simply be curious if the server is responding, and
   may not have access to NAS or traffic data that would give him that
   information.  The queries may also be performed automatically by a
   NAS or proxy server, which is configured to send packets to a RADIUS
   server, and where that server may not be responding.  That is, while
   [RFC2865] Section 2.6 indicates that sending Keep-Alives is harmful,
   it may be useful to send "Are you Alive" queries to a server once it
   has been marked "dead" due to prior unresponsiveness.

   The occasional query to a "dead" server offers little additional load
   on the network or server, and permits clients to more quickly
   discover when the server returns to a responsive state.  Overall,
   status queries can be a useful part of the deployment of a RADIUS
   server.

2.1.  Overloading Access-Request

   One possible solution to the problem of querying server status is for
   a NAS to send specially formed Access-Request packets to a RADIUS
   server's authentication port.  The NAS can then look for a response,
   and use this information to determine if the server is active or
   unresponsive.

   However, the server may see the request as a normal login request for
   a user, and conclude that a real user has logged onto that NAS.  The
   server may then perform actions that are undesirable for a simple
   status query.  The server may alternatively respond with an Access-
   Challenge, indicating that it believes an extended authentication
   conversation is necessary.

   Another possibility is that the server responds with an Access-
   Reject, indicating that the user is not authorized to gain access to
   the network.  As above, the server may also perform local site
   actions, such as warning an administrator of failed login attempts.
   The server may also delay the Access-Reject response, in the
   traditional manner of rate-limiting failed authentication attempts.
   This delay in response means that the querying administrator is
   unsure as to whether or not the server is down, is slow to respond,
   or is intentionally delaying it's response to the query.




DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   In addition, using Access-Request queries may mean that the server
   may have local users configured whose sole reason for existence is to
   enable these query requests.  Unless the server's policy is designed
   carefully, it may be possible for an attacker to use those
   credentials to gain unauthorized network access.

   We note that some NAS implementations currently use Access-Request
   packets as described above, with a fixed (and non configurable) user
   name and password.  Implementation issues with that equipment means
   that if a RADIUS server does not respond to those qeuries, it may be
   marked as unresponsive by the NAS.  This marking may happen even if
   the server is actively responding to other Access-Requests from that
   same NAS.  This behavior is confusing to administrators who then need
   to determine why an active server has been marked as "unresponsive".

2.1.1.  Recommendation against Access-Request

   For the reasons outlined above, NAS implementors SHOULD NOT generate
   Access-Request packets solely to see if a server is alive.
   Similarly, site administrators SHOULD NOT configure test users whose
   sole reason for existence is to enable such queries via Access-
   Request packets.

   Note that it still may be useful to configure test users for the
   purpose of performing end-to-end or in-depth testing of a servers
   policy.  While this practice is wide-spread, we caution
   administrators to use it with care.

2.2.  Overloading Accounting-Request

   A similar solution for the problem of querying server status may be
   for a NAS to send specially formed Accounting-Request packets to a
   RADIUS servers authentication port.  The NAS can then look for a
   response, and use this information to determine if the server is
   active or unresponsive.

   As seen above with Access-Request, the server may then conclude that
   a real user has logged onto a NAS, and perform local site actions
   that are undesirable for a simple status query.

   Another consideration is that some attributes are mandatory to
   include in an Accounting-Request.  This requirement forces the
   administrator to query an accounting server with fake values for
   those attributes in a test packet.  These fake values increase the
   work required to perform a simple query, and may pollute the server's
   accounting database with incorrect data.





DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


2.2.1.  Recommendation against Accounting-Request

   For the reasons outlined above, NAS implementors SHOULD NOT generate
   Accounting-Request packets solely to see if a server is alive.
   Similarly, site administrators SHOULD NOT configure accounting
   policies whose sole reason for existence is to enable such queries
   via Accounting-Request packets.

   Note that it still may be useful to configure test users for the
   purpose of performing end-to-end or in-depth testing of a servers
   policy.  While this practice is wide-spread, we caution
   administrators to use it with care.

2.3.  Status-Server as a Solution

   A better solution to the above problems is to use the Status-Server
   packet code.  The name of the code leads us to conclude that it was
   intended for packets that query the status of a server.  Since the
   packet is otherwise undefined, it does not cause interoperability
   issues to create implementation-specific definitions for it.  The
   difficulty until now has been defining an inter-operable method of
   performing these queries.

   This document addresses that need.

2.3.1.  Status-Server to the RADIUS Authentication port

   Status-Server SHOULD be used instead of Access-Request to query the
   responsiveness of a server.  In this use-case, the protocol exchange
   between client and server is similar to the usual exchange of Access-
   Request and Access-Accept, as shown below.

           NAS                          RADIUS server
           ---                          -------------
           Status-Server/
            Message-Authenticator ->
                                     <- Access-Accept/
                                         Reply-Message

   The Status-Server packet MUST contain a Message-Authenticator
   attribute for security.  The Access-Accept packet can optionally
   contain an informational Reply-Message attribute.  A list of
   attributes permitted in each type of packet is given in the Table of
   attributes in Section 6, below.







DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


2.3.2.  Status-Server to the RADIUS Accounting port

   Status-Server may be used instead of Accounting-Request to query the
   responsiveness of a server.  In this use-case, the protocol exchange
   between client and server is similar to the usual exchange of
   Accounting-Request and Accounting-Response, as shown below.

           NAS                          RADIUS server
           ---                          -------------
           Status-Server/
            Message-Authenticator ->
                                     <- Accounting-Response

   The Status-Server packet MUST contain a Message-Authenticator
   attribute for security.  The Accounting-Response packet is empty.  A
   list of attributes permitted in each type of packet is given in the
   Table of attributes in Section 6, below.

3.  Packet Format

   Status-Server packets re-use the RADIUS packet format, with the
   fields and values for those fields as defined [RFC2865] Section 3.
   We do not include all of the text or diagrams of that section here,
   but instead explain the differences required to implement Status-
   Server.

   The Authenticator field of Status-Server packets MUST be generated
   using the same method as that used for the Request Authenticator
   field of Access-Request packets, as given below.

   The role of the Identifier field is the same for Status-Server as for
   other packets.  However, as Status-Server is taking the role of
   Access-Request or Accounting-Request packets, there is the potential
   for Status-Server requests to be in conflict with Access-Request or
   Accounting-Request packets with the same Identifier.  In Section 4.2,
   below, we describe a method for avoiding these problems.  This method
   MUST be used to avoid conflicts between Status-Server and other
   packet types.

      Request Authenticator

         In Status-Server Packets, the Authenticator value is a 16 octet
         random number, called the Request Authenticator.  The value
         SHOULD be unpredictable and unique over the lifetime of a
         secret (the password shared between the client and the RADIUS
         server), since repetition of a request value in conjunction
         with the same secret would permit an attacker to reply with a
         previously intercepted response.  Since it is expected that the



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


         same secret MAY be used to authenticate with servers in
         disparate geographic regions, the Request Authenticator field
         SHOULD exhibit global and temporal uniqueness.

         The Request Authenticator value in a Status-Server packet
         SHOULD also be unpredictable, lest an attacker trick a server
         into responding to a predicted future request, and then use the
         response to masquerade as that server to a future Status-Server
         request from a client.

   Similarly, the Response Authenticator field of an Access-Accept
   packet sent in response to Status-Server queries MUST be generated
   using the same method as used for for calculating the Response
   Authenticator of the Access-Accept, with the Status-Server Request
   Authenticator taking the place of the Access-Request Request
   Authenticator.

   The Response Authenticator field of an Accounting-Response packet
   sent in response to Status-Server queries MUST be generated using the
   same method as used for for calculating the Response Authenticator of
   the Accounting-Response, with the Status-Server Request Authenticator
   taking the place of the Accounting-Request Request Authenticator.

   Note that when a server responds to a Status-Server request, it MUST
   NOTE send more than one response packet.

      Response Authenticator

         The value of the Authenticator field in Access-Accept, or
         Accounting-Response packets is called the Response
         Authenticator, and contains a one-way MD5 hash calculated over
         a stream of octets consisting of: the RADIUS packet, beginning
         with the Code field, including the Identifier, the Length, the
         Request Authenticator field from the Status-Server packet, and
         the response Attributes (if any), followed by the shared
         secret.  That is, ResponseAuth =
         MD5(Code+ID+Length+RequestAuth+Attributes+Secret) where +
         denotes concatenation.

   In addition to the above requirements, all Status-Server packets MUST
   include a Message-Authenticator attribute.  Failure to do so would
   mean that the packets could be trivially spoofed.

   Status-Server packets MAY include NAS-Identifier, one of NAS-IP-
   Address or NAS-IPv6-Address, and Reply-Message.  These attributes are
   not necessary for the operation of Status-Server, but may be useful
   information to a server that receives those packets.




DeKok, Alan                   Informational                     [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   Other attributes SHOULD NOT be included in a Status-Server packet.
   User authentication credentials such as User-Password, CHAP-Password,
   EAP-Message, etc. MUST NOT appear in a Status-Server packet sent to a
   RADIUS authentication port.  User or NAS accounting attributes such
   as Acct-Session-Id, Acct-Status-Type, Acct-Input-Octets, etc.  MUST
   NOT appear in a Status-Server packet sent to a RADIUS accounting
   port.

   The Access-Accept MAY contain a Reply-Message or Message-
   Authenticator attribute.  It SHOULD NOT contain other attributes.
   The Accounting-Response packets sent in response to a Status-Server
   query SHOULD NOT contain any attributes.  As the intent is to
   implement a simple query instead of user authentication or
   accounting, there is little reason to include other attributes in
   either the query or the corresponding response.

   Examples of Status-Server packet flows are given below in Section 7.

3.1.  Consistent definition for Status-Server

   When sent to a RADIUS accounting port, contents of the Status-Server
   packets are calculated as described above.  That is, even though the
   packets are being sent to an accounting port, they are not created
   using the same method as Accounting-Request packets.  This difference
   from the handling of Accounting-Request packets has a number of
   benefits.

   Having one definition for Status-Server packets is simpler than
   having different definitions for different destination ports.  In
   addition, if we were to define Status-Server as being similar to
   Accounting-Request, but containing no attributes, then the packets
   could be trivially forged.

   We therefore define Status-Server consistently, and vary the response
   packets depending on the port to which the request is sent.  When
   sent to an authentication port, the response to a Status-Server query
   is an Access-Accept packet.  When sent to an accounting port, the
   response to a Status-Server query is an Accounting-Response packet.

4.  Implementation notes

   There are a number of considerations to take into account when
   implementing support for Status-Server.  This section describes
   implementation details and requirements for RADIUS clients and
   servers that support Status-Server.

   The following text applies to both authentication and accounting
   ports.  We use the generic terms below to simplify the discussion:



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


      * Request packet

        An Access-Request packet sent to an authentication port, or
        an Accounting-Request packet sent to an accounting port.

      * Response packet

        An Access-Accept, Access-Challenge, or Access-Reject packet sent
        from an authentication port, or an Accounting-Response packet
        sent from an accounting port.

   Using generic terms to describe the Status-Server conversations is
   simpler than duplicating the text for both authentication and
   accounting ports.

4.1.  Client Requirements

   Clients SHOULD permit administrators to globally enable or disable
   the generation of Status-Server packets.  The default SHOULD be that
   it is disabled.  As it is undesirable to send queries to servers that
   do not support Status-Server, clients SHOULD also have a per-server
   configuration indicating whether or not to enable Status-Server for a
   particular destination.  The default SHOULD be that it is disabled.

   The client SHOULD also have a configurable global timer (Tw) that is
   used when sending periodic Status-Server queries during server fail-
   over.  The default value SHOULD be 30 seconds, and the value MUST NOT
   be permitted to be set below 6 seconds.  If a response has not been
   received within the timeout period, the Status-Server packet is
   deemed to have received no corresponding Response packet, and MUST be
   discarded.

   When Status-Server packets are sent from a client, they MUST NOT be
   retransmitted.  Instead, the Identity field MUST be changed every
   time a packet is transmitted.  The old packet should be discarded,
   and a new Status-Server packet should be generated and sent, with new
   Identity and Authenticator fields.

   Clients MUST include the Message-Authenticator attribute in all
   Status-Server packets.  Failure to do so would mean that the packets
   could be trivially spoofed, leading to potential denial of service
   (DoS) attacks.  Other attributes SHOULD NOT appear in a Status-Server
   packet, except as outlined below in Section 6.  As the intent of the
   packet is a simple status query, there is little reason for any
   additional attributes to appear in Status-Server packets.

   The client MAY increment packet counters as a result of sending a
   Status-Server request, or receiving a Response packet.  The client



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   MUST NOT perform any other action that is normally performed when it
   receives a Response packet, such as permitting a user to have login
   access to a port.

   When a client sends Status-Server packets, those requests SHOULD NOT
   be sent from a source port that is used to send Access-Request or
   Accounting-Request packets.  Clients MAY send Status-Server requests
   to both authentication and accounting destination ports from the same
   source port.

   The above suggestion for a unique source port for Status-Server
   packets aids in matching responses to requests.  Since the response
   to a Status-Server packet is an Access-Accept or Accounting-Response
   packet, those responses are indistinguishable from other packets sent
   in response to an Access-Request or Accounting-Request.  Therefore,
   the best way to distinguish them from other traffic is to have a
   unique port.

   A client MAY send a Status-Server packet from a source port also used
   to send Access-Request or Accounting-Request packets.  In that case,
   the Identifer field MUST be unique across all outstanding requests
   for that source port, independent of the value of the RADIUS Code
   field for those outstanding requests.  Once the client has either
   received a response to the Status-Server packet, or has determined
   that the Status-Server packet has timed out, it may re-use that
   Identifier in another packet.

   When the client receives a response to a Status-Server query, the
   response may be either an Access-Accept packet or an Accounting-
   Response packet, depending both on the behavior of the server, and
   the port to which the query was sent.  It may be difficult for the
   client to know which Response packet to expect.  Therefore, a client
   SHOULD accept either packet code as an acceptable response to a
   Status-Server query, subject to the validation requirements defined
   above for the Response Authenticator.

   That is, prior to accepting the response as valid, the client should
   check that the Response packet Code field is either Access-Accept (2)
   or Accounting-Response (5).  If the code does not match one of those
   two values, the packet MUST be silently discarded.  The client MUST
   then validate the Response Authenticator via the algorithm given
   above in Section 3.  If the Response Authenticator is not valid, the
   packet MUST be silently discarded.  If the Response Authenticator is
   valid, then the packet MUST be deemed to be a valid response from the
   server.

   If the client instead discarded the response because the packet code
   did not match what it expected, then it could erroneously discard



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   valid responses from a server, and mark that server as unresponsive.
   This behavior would affect the stability of a RADIUS network, as
   responsive servers would erroneously be marked as unresponsive.  We
   therefore recommend that clients should be liberal in what they
   accept as responses to Status-Server queries.

4.2.  Server Requirements

   Servers SHOULD permit administrators to globally enable or disable
   the acceptance of Status-Server packets.  The default SHOULD be that
   it is enabled.  Servers SHOULD also permit adminstrators to enable or
   disable acceptance of Status-Server packets on a per-client basis.
   The default SHOULD be that it is enabled.

   Status-Server packets originating from clients that are not permitted
   to send the server Request packets MUST be silently discarded.  If a
   server does not support Status-Server packets, or is configured to
   not respond to them, then it MUST silently discard the packet.

   We note that [RFC2865] Section 3 defines a number of RADIUS Codes,
   but does not make statements about which Codes are valid for port
   1812.  In contrast, [RFC2866] Section 3 specifies that only RADIUS
   Accounting packets are to be sent to port 1813.  This specification
   is compatible with [RFC2865], as it uses a known Code for packets to
   port 1812.  This specification is not compatible with [RFC2866], as
   it adds a new code (Status-Server) that is valid for port 1812.
   However, as the category of [RFC2866] is Informational, this conflict
   is acceptable.

   Servers SHOULD silently discard Status-Server packets if they
   determine that a client is sending too many Status-Server requests in
   a particular time period.  The method used by a server to make this
   determination is implementation-specific, and out of scope for this
   specification.

   If a server supports Status-Server packets, and is configured to
   respond to them, and receives a packet from a known client, it MUST
   validate the Message-Authenticator attribute as defined in [RFC3579]
   Section 3.2.  Packets failing that validation MUST be silently
   discarded.

   Servers SHOULD NOT otherwise discard Status-Server packets if they
   have recently sent the client a Response packet.  The query may have
   originated from an administrator who does not have access to the
   Response packet stream, or who is interested in obtaining additional
   information about the server.

   The server MAY prioritize the handling Status-Server queries over the



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   handling of other requests, subject to the rate limiting described
   above.

   The server MAY decide to not respond to a Status-Server, depending on
   local site policy.  For example, a server that is running but is
   unable to perform it's normal activities MAY silently discard Status-
   Server packets.  This situation can happen, for example, when a
   server requires access to a database for normal operation, but the
   connection to that database is down.  Or, it may happen when the
   accept load on the server is lower than the offered load.

   Some server implementations require that Access-Request packets are
   accepted only on "authentication" ports, (e.g. 1812/udp), and that
   Accounting-Request packets are accepted only on "accounting" ports
   (e.g. 1813/udp).  Those implementations SHOULD reply to Status-Server
   packets sent to an "authentication" port with an Access-Accept
   packet.  Those implementations SHOULD reply to Status-Server packets
   sent to an "accounting" port with an Accounting-Response packet.

   Some server implementations accept both Access-Request and
   Accounting-Request packets on the same port, and do not distinguish
   between "authentication only" ports, and "accounting only" ports.
   Those implementations SHOULD reply to Status-Server packets with an
   Access-Accept packet.

   The server MAY increment packet counters as a result of receiving a
   Status-Server, or sending a Response packet.  The server SHOULD NOT
   perform any other action that is normally performed when it receives
   a Request packet, other than sending a Response packet.

4.3.  More Robust Fail-over with Status-Server

   A common problem in RADIUS client implementations is the
   implementation of a robust fail-over mechanism between servers.  A
   client may have multiple servers configured, with one server marked
   as primary and another marked as secondary.  If the client determines
   that the primary is unresponsive, it can "fail over" to the
   secondary, and send requests to the secondary instead of to the
   primary.

   However, it is difficult in standard RADIUS for a client to know when
   it should start sending requests to the primary again.  Sending test
   Access-Requests or Accounting-Requests to see if the server is alive
   has the issues outlined above in Section 2.  Clients could
   alternately send real traffic to the primary, on the hope that it is
   responsive.  If the server is still unresponsive, however, the result
   may be user login failures.  The Status-Server solution is an ideal
   one to solve this problem.



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   When a client fails over from one server to another because of a lack
   of responsiveness, it SHOULD send periodic Status-Server packets to
   the unresponsive server, using the timer (Tw) defined above.

   Once three time periods have passed where Status-Server messages have
   been sent and responded to, the server should be deemed responsive
   and RADIUS requests may sent to it again.  This determination should
   be made separately for each server that the client has a relationship
   with.  The same algorithm should be used for both authentication and
   accounting ports.  The client MUST treat each destination (ip, port)
   combination as a unique server for the purposes of this
   determination.

   The above behavior is modelled after [RFC3539] Section 3.4.1.  We
   note that if a reliable transport is used for RADIUS, then the
   algorithms specified in [RFC3539] MUST be used in preference to the
   ones given here.

4.4.  Proxy Server handling of Status-Server

   Many RADIUS servers can act as proxy servers, and can forward
   requests to home servers.  Such servers MUST NOT proxy Status-Server
   packets.  The purpose of Status-Server as specified here is to permit
   the client to query the responsiveness of a server that it has a
   direct relationship with.  Proxying Status-Server queries would
   negate any usefulness that may be gained by implementing support for
   them.

   Proxy servers MAY be configured to respond to Status-Server queries
   from clients, and MAY act as clients sending Status-Server queries to
   other servers.  However, those activities MUST be independent of one
   another.

4.5.  Realm Routing

   RADIUS servers are commonly used in an environment where Network
   Access Identifiers (NAIs) are used as routing identifiers [RFC4282].
   In this practice, the User-Name attribute is decorated with realm
   routing information, commonly in the format of "user@realm".  Since a
   particular RADIUS server may act as a proxy for more than one realm,
   the mechanism outlined above may be inadequate.

   The schematic below demonstrates this scenario.

                /-> Proxy Server P -----> Home Server for Realm A
               /                    \ /
            NAS                      X
               \                    / \



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


                \-> Proxy Server S -----> Home Server for Realm B

   That is, the NAS has relationships with two Proxy Servers, P and S.
   Each Proxy Server has relationships with Home Servers for both Realm
   A and Realm B.

   In this scenario, the Proxy Servers can determine if one or both of
   the Home Servers are dead or unreachable.  The NAS can determine if
   one or both of the Proxy Servers are dead or unreachable.  There is
   an additional case to consider, however.

   If Proxy Server P cannot reach the Home Server for Realm A, but the
   Proxy Server S can reach that Home Server, then the NAS cannot
   discover this information using the Status-Server queries as outlined
   above.  It would therefore be useful for the NAS to know that Realm A
   is reachable from Proxy Server S, as it can then route all requests
   for Realm A to that Proxy Server.  Without this knowledge, the client
   may route requests to Proxy Server P, where they may be discarded or
   rejected.

   To complicate matters, the behavior of Proxy Servers P and S in this
   situation is not well defined.  Some implementations simply fail to
   respond to the request, and other implementations respond with an
   Access-Reject.  If the implementation fails to respond, then the NAS
   cannot distinguish between the Proxy Server being down, or the next
   server along along the proxy chain is unreachable.

   In the worst case, failures in routing for Realm A may affect users
   Realm B.  For example, if Proxy Server P can reach Realm B but not
   Realm A, and Proxy Server S can reach Realm A but not Realm B, then
   active paths exist to handle all RADIUS requests.  However, depending
   on the NAS and Proxy Server implementation choices, the NAS may not
   be able to determine which server requests may be sent to in order to
   maintain network stability.

   This problem cannot, unfortunately be solved by using Status-Server
   requests.  A robust solution would involve either a RADIUS routing
   table for the NAI realms, or a RADIUS "destination unreachable"
   response to authentication requests.  Either solution would not fit
   into the traditional RADIUS model, and both are therefore outside of
   the scope of this specification.

   The problem is discussed here in order to define how best to use
   Status-Server in this situation, rather than to define a new
   solution.

   When a server has responded recently to a request from a client, that
   client MUST mark the server as "responsive".  In the above case, a



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   Proxy Server may be responding to requests destined for Realm A, but
   not responding to requests destined for Realm B.  The client
   therefore considers the server to be responsive, as it is receiving
   responses from the server.

   The client will then continue to send requests to the Proxy Server
   for destination Realm B, even though the Proxy Server cannot route
   the requests to that destination.  This failure is a known limitation
   of RADIUS, and can be partially addressed through the use of failover
   in the Proxy Servers.

   A more realistic situation than the one outlined above is where each
   Proxy Server also has multiple choices of Home Servers for a realm,
   as outlined below.

                /-> Proxy Server P -----> Home Server P
               /                    \ /
            NAS                      X
               \                    / \
                \-> Proxy Server S -----> Home Server S

   In this situation, if all participants impement Status-Server as
   defined herein, any one link may be broken, and all requests from the
   NAS will still reach a home server.  If two links are broken at
   different places, (i.e. not both links from the NAS), then all
   requests from the NAS will still reach a home server.  In many
   situations where three or more links are broken, then requests from
   the NAS may still reach a home server.

   It is RECOMMENDED, therefore, that implementations desiring the most
   benefit from Status-Server also implement server failover.  The
   combination of these two practices will maximize network reliability
   and stability.

4.6.  Management Information Base (MIB) Considerations


4.6.1.  Interaction with RADIUS Server MIBs

   Since Status-Server packets are sent to the defined RADIUS ports,
   they can affect the [RFC4669] and [RFC4671] RADIUS server MIBs.
   [RFC4669] defines a counter named radiusAuthServTotalUnknownTypes,
   that counts "The number of RADIUS packets of unknown type that were
   received".  [RFC4671] defines a similar counter named
   radiusAcctServTotalUnknownTypes.  Implementations not supporting
   Status-Server, or implementations that are configured to not respond
   to Status-Server packets MUST use these counters to track received
   Status-Server packets.



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   If, however, Status-Server is supported and the server is configured
   to respond as described above, then the counters defined in [RFC4669]
   and [RFC4671] MUST NOT be used to track Status-Server requests or
   responses to those requests.  That is, when a server fully implements
   Status-Server, the counters defined in [RFC4669] and [RFC4671] MUST
   be unaffected by the transmission or reception of packets relating to
   Status-Server.

   If a server supports Status-Server and the [RFC4669] or [RFC4671]
   MIBs, then it SHOULD also support vendor-specific MIBs containing
   similar information as the standard MIBs, but which are instead
   dedicated solely to tracking Status-Server requests and responses.
   Any definition of the server MIBs for Status-Server is outside of the
   scope of this document.

4.6.2.  Interaction with RADIUS Client MIBs

   Clients implementing Status-Server MUST NOT increment [RFC4668] or
   [RFC4670] counters upon reception of Response packets to Status-
   Server queries.  That is, when a server fully implements Status-
   Server, the counters defined in [RFC4668] and [RFC4670] MUST be
   unaffected by the transmission or reception of packets relating to
   Status-Server.

   If an implementation supports Status-Server and the [RFC4668] or
   [RFC4670] MIBs, then it SHOULD also support vendor-specific MIBs
   containing similar information as those MIBs, but which are instead
   dedicated solely to tracking Status-Server requests and responses.
   Any definition of the client MIBs for Status-Server is outside of the
   scope of this document.

5.  Additional considerations

   There are additional topics related to the use of Status-Server that
   may be covered.  As those topics do not fit well into the preceding
   sections, they are covered herein.

5.1.  Local site testing

   There is at least one situation where using Access-Request or
   Accounting-Request packets may be useful, despite the recommendations
   above in Section 2.1.1 and Section 2.2.1.  That situation is local
   site testing, where the RADIUS client, server, and user store are
   under the control of a single administrator or administrative entity.
   In that situation, administrators MAY configure a well-known "test"
   user to enable local site testing.

   The advantage to creating such a local user is that it is now



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   possible for the administrator to send a RADIUS request that performs
   end-to-end testing of the RADIUS server.  As above with Status-
   Server, this testing includes RADIUS server responsiveness.  It may
   also include querying databases of user authentication credentials,
   or storing accounting data to a billing database.  The information
   obtained from performing those queries is that the entire RADIUS
   server infrastructure, including all of it's dependencies, is
   functioning as expected.  These queries are most useful in
   deployments where an administrator has internal RADIUS server that
   proxy to other internal RADIUS servers, such as for load balancing or
   fail over.

   If used, the names used for these test users SHOULD be difficult to
   guess by an attacker.  An Access-Request packet for a test user
   otherwise should be treated as follows, depending on its origin:

      o Packets from localhost (127.0.0.1 or ::1):  RADIUS servers
      SHOULD treat the request according to local site policy.

      o Packets from NASes that normally originate Access-Request
      packets (i.e. not proxy servers):  RADIUS servers SHOULD respond
      with an Access-Reject packet, as the use of Status-Server is
      preferred.

      o Packets from other machines controlled by the administrator:
      RADIUS servers SHOULD treat the request according to local site
      policy.

      o Packets originating from machines not controlled by the
      administrator:  RADIUS servers MUST respond with an Access-Reject
      packet.

   If a RADIUS server is configured to support test users for
   Accounting-Request packets, it MAY respond with an Accounting-
   Response packet, independent of the origin of the request.  However,
   any subsequent analysis of the accounting data such as billing or
   usage MUST NOT include the data for the test user.

   If these recommendations are implemented, then it may be possible in
   some situations to safely query a RADIUS server for responsiveness
   using Access-Request or Accounting-Request packets.  However, this
   behavior is still NOT RECOMMENDED.

5.2.  RADIUS over reliable transports

   Although RADIUS has been assigned two TCP ports (1812/tcp and
   1813/tcp) in addition to the commonly used UDP ports, there has been
   as yet no specification for using TCP as a reliable transport for



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   RADIUS.  If such a specification were to be created, then the
   transport issues discussed in [RFC3539] would apply.

   Further, when RADIUS is run over reliable transports, the watchdog
   algorithm described in [RFC3539] Section 3.4 MUST be used rather than
   the algorithm described above.  For the reasons outlined above in
   Section 2, Status-Server packets SHOULD be used as the watchdog
   request, in preference to Access-Request or Accounting-Request
   packets.

   Clients sending Status-Server over reliable transport MUST ensure
   that the Identifier field is unique for all requests on a particular
   connection, independent of the packet code.  That is, if a Status-
   Server with a particular value in the Identifier field is sent to a
   server, the client MUST NOT simultaneously send an Access-Request or
   Accounting-Request packet with that same Identifier value, on that
   connection.  Once the client has either received a response to the
   Status-Server packet, or has determined that the Status-Server packet
   has timed out, it may re-use that Identifier in another packet.

5.3.  Other uses for Status-Server

   While other uses of Status-Server are possible, uses beyond those
   specified here are beyond the scope of this document.  It may be
   tempting to increase the utility of Status-Server by having the
   responses carry additional information, implementors are warned that
   such uses have not been analyzed for potential security issues or
   network problems.

5.4.  Potential Uses for Status-Client

   RADIUS currently defines an experimental Status-Client packet type,
   in addition to Status-Server.  It could be possible to define Status-
   Client similar to Status-Server, except that it would be applicable
   to Change of Authorization, and Disconnect-Request packets, currently
   sent to a NAS on port 3799 [RFC5176].

   We do no more than mention the possibility here.  Any definition of
   Status-Client is outside of the scope of this document.

6.  Table of Attributes

   The following table provide a guide to which attributes may be found
   in Status-Server packets, and in what quantity.  No attributes other
   than the ones listed below should be found in a Status-Server packet.

   Status-  Access-  Accounting-
   Server   Accept   Response      #    Attribute



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   0-1      0        0             4   NAS-IP-Address
   0        0+       0            18   Reply-Message
   0+       0+       0+           26   Vendor-Specific
   0+       0+       0            31   Calling-Station-Id
   0-1      0        0            32   NAS-Identifier
   1        0-1      0-1          80   Message-Authenticator
   0-1      0        0            95   NAS-IPv6-Address

   The following table defines the meaning of the above table entries.

0     This attribute MUST NOT be present in packet.
0+    Zero or more instances of this attribute MAY be present in packet.
0-1   Zero or one instance of this attribute MAY be present in packet.
1     Exactly one instance of this attribute MUST be present in packet.


7.  Examples

   A few examples are presented to illustrate the flow of packets to
   both the authentication and accounting ports.  These examples are not
   intended to be exhaustive, many others are possible.  Hexadecimal
   dumps of the example packets are given in network byte order, using
   the shared secret "xyzzy5461".

7.1.  Minimal Query to Authentication Port

   The NAS sends a Status-Server UDP packet with minimal content to a
   RADIUS server on port 1812.

   The Request Authenticator is a 16 octet random number generated by
   the NAS.  Message-Authenticator is included in order to authenticate
   that the request came from a known client.

      0c da 00 26 8a 54 f4 68 6f b3 94 c5 28 66 e3 02
      18 5d 06 23 50 12 5a 66 5e 2e 1e 84 11 f3 e2 43
      82 20 97 c8 4f a3

       1 Code = Status-Server (12)
       1 ID = 218
       2 Length = 38
      16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
      18 Message-Authenticator (80) = 5a665e2e1e8411f3e243822097c84fa3

   The Response Authenticator is a 16-octet MD5 checksum of the code
   (2), id (218), Length (20), the Request Authenticator from above, and
   the shared secret.



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


      02 da 00 14 ef 0d 55 2a 4b f2 d6 93 ec 2b 6f e8
      b5 41 1d 66

       1 Code = Access-Accept (2)
       1 ID = 218
       2 Length = 20
      16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
         None.


7.2.  Minimal Query to Accounting Port

   The NAS sends a Status-Server UDP packet with minimal content to a
   RADIUS server on port 1813.

   The Request Authenticator is a 16 octet random number generated by
   the NAS.  Message-Authenticator is included in order to authenticate
   that the request came from a known client.

      0c b3 00 26 92 5f 6b 66 dd 5f ed 57 1f cb 1d b7
      ad 38 82 60 80 12 e8 d6 ea bd a9 10 87 5c d9 1f
      da de 26 36 78 58

       1 Code = Status-Server (12)
       1 ID = 179
       2 Length = 38
      16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
      18 Message-Authenticator (80) = e8d6eabda910875cd91fdade26367858

   The Response Authenticator is a 16-octet MD5 checksum of the code
   (5), id (179), Length (20), the Request Authenticator from above, and
   the shared secret.

      02 b3 00 1a 0f 6f 92 14 5f 10 7e 2f 50 4e 86 0a
      48 60 66 9c

       1 Code = Accounting-Response (5)
       1 ID = 179
       2 Length = 20 16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
         None.





DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


7.3.  Verbose Query and Response

   The NAS at 192.0.2.16 sends a Status-Server UDP packet to the RADIUS
   server on port 1812.

   The Request Authenticator is a 16 octet random number generated by
   the NAS.

      0c 47 00 2c bf 58 de 56 ae 40 8a d3 b7 0c 85 13
      f9 b0 3f be 04 06 c0 00 02 10 50 12 85 2d 6f ec
      61 e7 ed 74 b8 e3 2d ac 2f 2a 5f b2

       1 Code = Status-Server (12)
       1 ID = 71
       2 Length = 44
      16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
       6  NAS-IP-Address (4) = 192.0.2.16
      18 Message-Authenticator (80) = 852d6fec61e7ed74b8e32dac2f2a5fb2

   The Response Authenticator is a 16-octet MD5 checksum of the code
   (2), id (71), Length (52), the Request Authenticator from above, the
   attributes in this reply, and the shared secret.

   The Reply-Message is "RADIUS Server up 2 days, 18:40"

      02 47 00 34 46 f4 3e 62 fd 03 54 42 4c bb eb fd
      6d 21 4e 06 12 20 52 41 44 49 55 53 20 53 65 72
      76 65 72 20 75 70 20 32 20 64 61 79 73 2c 20 31
      38 3a 34 30

       1 Code = Access-Accept (2)
       1 ID = 71
       2 Length = 52
      16 Request Authenticator

      Attributes:
      32 Reply-Message (18)


8.  IANA Considerations

   This specification does not create any new registries, nor does it
   require assignment of any protocol parameters.






DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


9.  Security Considerations

   This document defines the Status-Server packet as being similar in
   treatment to the Access-Request packet, and is therefore subject to
   the same security considerations as described in [RFC2865], Section
   8.  Status-Server packets also use the Message-Authenticator
   attribute, and are therefore subject to the same security
   considerations as [RFC3579], Section 4.

   We reiterate that Status-Server packets MUST contain a Message-
   Authenticator attribute.  Early implementations supporting Status-
   Server did not enforce this requirement, and may have been vulnerable
   to DoS attacks as a result.

   Where this document differs from [RFC2865] is that it defines a new
   request/response method in RADIUS; the Status-Server request.  As
   this use is based on previously described and implemented standards,
   we know of no additional security considerations that arise from the
   use of Status-Server as defined herein.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative references

[RFC2865]
     Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A. and W. Simpson, "Remote
     Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2865, June 2000.

[RFC2866]
     Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

[RFC3579]
     Aboba, B., Calhoun, P., "RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial In User
     Service) Support For Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC
     3579, September 2003.

[RFC4282]
     Aboba, B., and Beadles, M. at al, "The Network Access Identifier",
     RFC 4282, December 2005.

10.2.  Informative references

[RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
          Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March, 1997.

[RFC3539] Aboba, B., Wood, J., "Authentication, Authorization, and
          Accounting (AAA) Transport Profile", RFC 3539, June 2003.




DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


[RFC4668] Nelson, D., "RADIUS Authentication Client MIB for IPv6", RFC
          4668, August 2006.

[RFC4669] Nelson, D., "RADIUS Authentication Server MIB for IPv6", RFC
          4669, August 2006.

[RFC4670] Nelson, D., "RADIUS Accounting Client MIB for IPv6", RFC 4670,
          August 2006.

[RFC4671] Nelson, D., "RADIUS Accounting Server MIB for IPv6", RFC 4671,
          August 2006.

[RFC5176] Chiba, M., Eklund, M., et al, "Dynamic Authorization
          Extensions to Remote Authentication Dial In User Service
          (RADIUS)", RFC 5176, January 2008.

Acknowledgments

   Parts of the text in Section 3 defining the Request and Response
   Authenticators were taken with minor edits from [RFC2865] Section 3.

   The author would like to thank Mike McCauley of Open Systems
   Consultants for making a Radiator server available for inter-
   operability testing.

Authors' Addresses

   Alan DeKok
   The FreeRADIUS Server Project
   http://freeradius.org

   Email: aland@freeradius.org


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of



DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.










































DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Status-Server Practices           20 March 2008


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





























DeKok, Alan                   Informational                    [Page 27]

