


Network Working Group                                         M. Liebsch
Internet-Draft                                                       NEC
Intended status: Informational                          February 5, 2009
Expires: August 9, 2009


               PMIPv6 Localized Routing Problem Statement
                draft-liebsch-netext-pmip6-ro-ps-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.








Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


Abstract

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 is the IETF standard for network-based localized
   mobility management.  In Proxy Mobile IPv6, mobile nodes are
   topologically anchored at a Local Mobility Anchor, which forwards all
   data for registered mobile nodes.  The set up and support for
   localized routing, which allows forwarding of data packets between
   mobile nodes and correspondent nodes directly without traversing an
   LMA, is not considered.  This document describes the problem space of
   localized routing in Proxy Mobile IPv6.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions and Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Problem Statement for Localized Routing in PMIPv6  . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12




























Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


1.  Introduction

   The IETF has specified Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) [RFC5213] as the
   protocol for network-based localized mobility management (NetLMM),
   which takes basic operation for registration, de-registration and
   handover into account.  In scope of the base protocol specification
   is the set up and maintenance of a forwarding tunnel between an MN's
   Mobility Access Gateway (MAG) and its selected Local Mobility Anchor
   (LMA).  Data packets will always traverse the MN's MAG and its LMA,
   irrespective of the location of the MN's remote communication
   endpoint.  Even though two communicating MNs might be attached to the
   same MAG or to different MAGs of the same local mobility domain,
   packets will traverse the MNs' LMA(s).

   Objectives of designing a solution for localized routing in PMIPv6
   are to specify protocol messages and enable associated protocol
   operation between PMIPv6 components to support the set up of a direct
   routing path for data packets between the MNs' MAGs without
   forwarding these packets through the MNs' LMA(s) and to maintain
   localized routing in case one or both MNs handover to a different
   MAG.  Relevant protocol interfaces may include the interface between
   associated MAGs, between a MAG and an LMA as well as between LMAs.

   This document analyzes and discusses the problem space of using
   always the default route through two communicating mobile nodes'
   mobility anchors.  Furthermore, the problem space of enabling
   localized routing in PMIPv6 is analyzed and described, while
   different communication and mobility scenarios are taken into
   account.






















Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses the terminology of [RFC5213].  The following terms
   are used in the context of this problem statement:

   o  Mobile Node (MN): Mobile Node without IP mobility support, which
      is attached to a Mobility Access Gateway (MAG) and registered with
      a Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) according to the PMIPv6
      specification [RFC5213].

   o  Correspondent Node (CN): Correspondent Node with or without IP
      mobility support.  The CN represents the communication peer of an
      MN, which is attached to a MAG and registered with an LMA
      according to the PMIPv6 specification.

   o  Localized Routing: Result of signaling to set up routing states on
      relevant network entities to allow forwarding of data packets
      between an MN and a CN within a single PMIPv6 domain without
      traversing the MN's LMA and without traversing the CN's mobility
      anchor.

   o  Localized Routing States: Information for localized routing on
      relevant forwarding entities on the optimized data path between an
      MN and a CN.  Such information includes route entries and may
      include further information about the MN and the CN, such as IDs.






















Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


3.  Problem Statement for Localized Routing in PMIPv6

   The Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) protocol [RFC3775] has built-in mechanisms
   for direct communication between a MN and a CN.  Mechanisms for route
   optimization in MIPv6 cannot be directly applied in PMIPv6, as MNs do
   not take part in mobility management and associated signaling.
   Following the architecture of PMIPv6, rather entities of the network
   infrastructure are dedicated to perform signaling to set up an
   optimized route between an MN and a CN.  In case of communication
   between two nodes, which are attached to the PMIPv6 network
   infrastructure and each node is registered with an LMA, data packets
   between these two nodes will always traverse the responsible LMA(s).
   At least some deployment would benefit from having such communication
   localized, rather than traverse the core network to the LMA(s).

   Localized routing is crucial at least for the following two reasons:
   First, by limiting the communication to the access nodes, the data
   traffic traversing the MAG - LMA path (network) can be reduced.  This
   is significant considering that the transport network between the
   access and the core is often the bottleneck in terms of costs and
   performance.  And there are performance benefits in terms of delay
   and packet loss, especially when the MNs are attached to the same
   MAG.  Even when the MNs are attached to different MAGs, there could
   be benefits in limiting the communication to the access network only,
   rather than traversing the transport network to the LMA.  Hence,
   providing the necessary protocol specification to enable localized
   routing in PMIPv6 is necessary.

   Several tasks need to be performed by the network infrastructure
   components before relevant information for such direct communication
   is discovered and associated states for localized routing can be set
   up.  The following list summarizes some key functions, which need to
   be performed by the PMIPv6 enabled network infrastructure to
   substitute mobile nodes in setting up an optimized route.

   o  Detection of the possibility to perform localized routing.  This
      function includes looking at data packets' source and destination
      address.

   o  Initiation of a procedure, which sets up a localized routing path.

   o  Discovery of stateful entities (i.e. the LMA(s) and/or the
      MAG(s)), which maintain and can provide relevant information
      needed to set up a localized routing path.  Such information may
      include the routable address of an LMA or MAG, where one or both
      mobile nodes are connected to and registered with.





Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


   o  Control in setting up and maintaining (e.g. during handover) the
      localized routing path.

   This problem statement focuses on local communication between PMIPv6
   managed nodes within a single PMIPv6 domain.  The following list
   analyzes different use cases, which are limited to the communication
   within a single PMIPv6 domain, but they consider the existence of
   multiple LMAs.  Figure 1 depicts the network of a PMIPv6 domain with
   two mobility anchors.


                         Internet Backbone
                        :                  :
                        +------------------+
                        |                  | . . . . . .
                     +----+              +----+       ^
                     |LMA1|              |LMA2|       |
                     +----+              +----+       |
                        |                  |          |
                        |                  |          |PMIPv6
                   +----+------------------+-+        |domain
                   |                         |        |
                +----+                    +----+      |
                |MAG1|                    |MAG2|      v
                +----+                    +----+ . . . .
                :    :                      :
              +---+ +---+                 +---+
              |MN | |CN1|                 |CN2|
              +---+ +---+                 +---+


     Figure 1: Reference architecture for localized routing in PMIPv6

   All use cases A assume that both the MN and the CN are registered
   with an LMA according to the PMIPv6 protocol.  Whereas MAG1 is always
   considered as the MN's current pCoA, the CN can be either connected
   to the same or a different MAG or LMA as the MN.  Accordingly, these
   topological difference are denoted as follows:

   A[number of MAGs][number of LMAs]

   A11:  MN and CN (CN1) connect to the same MAG (MAG1) and are
      registered with the same LMA (LMA).  The common MAG may forward
      data packets between the MN and the CN directly without forwarding
      any packet to the LMA.  According to [RFC5213], such operation
      should be enforced by the LMA and signaled in the PBU by means of
      the EnableMAGLocalRouting flag.




Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


   A12:  MN and CN (CN1) connect to the same MAG (MAG1) and are
      registered with different LMAs (LMA1 and LMA2) of the same PMIPv6
      domain.  The common MAG may forward data packets between the MN
      and the CN directly without forwarding any packet to the LMAs.
      Even though [RFC5213] indicates that localized routing should be
      based on the MAG's policy, potential problems exist in case LMA1
      and LMA2 differ in settings of the EnableMAGLocalRouting flag.

   A21:  The CN (CN2) connects to a different MAG (MAG2) as the MN
      (MAG1), but MN and CN are registered with the same LMA (LMA1).
      The result of localized routing should be the existence of routing
      information at MAG1 and MAG2, which allows direct forwarding of
      packets between the MN's MAG1 and the CN's MAG2.  As LMA1 is the
      common anchor for MN and CN and maintains location information for
      both nodes, no major race condition and instability in updating
      the states for localized routing is expected.

   A22:  The CN (CN2) connects to a different MAG (MAG2) and a different
      LMA (LMA2) as the MN (MAG1, LMA1) in the same PMIPv6 domain.  The
      result of localized routing should be the existence of routing
      information at MAG1 and MAG2, which allows direct forwarding of
      packets between the MN's MAG1 and the CN's MAG2.  As the location
      information of the CN and the MN is maintained at different LMAs,
      both LMAs need to be involved in the procedure to set up localized
      routing.  In case of a handover of MNs to a different MAG, not
      synchronized control of updating the states for localized routing
      may result in race conditions, superfluous signaling and packet
      loss.

   The following list summarizes general problems with setting up and
   maintaining localized routing between an MN and a CN within a PMIPv6
   domain.  In the context of this problem statement, the MN and the CN
   are always assumed to be registered at an LMA according to the PMIPv6
   protocol [RFC5213].

   o  MNs do not participate in mobility management, hence cannot
      perform binding registration at a CN on their own.  Rather
      entities in the network infrastructure must take over the role of
      MNs to set up and maintain an optimized route.  Accordingly, a
      solution for localized routing in PMIPv6 must specify protocol
      operation between relevant network components, such as between a
      MAG and an LMA, to enable localized routing for data traffic
      without traversing the MNs' LMA(s)

   o  In case the MN and the CN are both registered with different LMAs
      according to the PMIPv6 protocol, relevant information for the set
      up of a localized routing path, such as the current MAGs of the MN
      and the CN, is distributed between these LMAs.  This may



Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


      complicate the set up and stable maintenance of states enabling
      localized routing.

   o  In case localized routing between an MN and a CN has been
      successfully set up and both nodes move and attach to a new access
      router simultaneously, signaling the new location and maintenance
      of states for localized routing at relevant routers may run into a
      race condition situation.  This can happen in case coordination of
      signaling for localized routing and provisioning of relevant state
      information is distributed between different network entities,
      e.g. different LMAs.








































Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


4.  Security Considerations

   Since network entities rather than MNs and CNs perform signaling to
   set up localized routing, the MIPv6 return routability test [RFC3775]
   is not suitable to authenticate associated signaling messages in
   PMIPv6.  Solutions for localized routing in PMIPv6 need to mitigate
   or to provide sufficient defense against possible security threats.
   When PMIPv6 participants are administered within the same domain,
   infrastructure-based authorization mechanisms, such as IPsec, may be
   usable to protect signaling for localized routing.

   Existing security associations according to [RFC5213] can be re-used
   to protect signaling for localized routing on the interface between a
   MAG and an LMA.  In case a protocol solution for localized routing in
   PMIPv6 relies on protocol operation between MAGs, means for
   protection of signaling between these MAGs must be provided.  The
   same applies for signaling on a possible protocol interface between
   two LMAs of the same domain.

































Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


5.  Acknowledgments

   Many aspects of the problem space for route optimization in PMIPv6
   have been discussed in the context of a PMIPv6 Route Optimization
   Design Goals document, which has been submitted to the NetLMM WG in
   November 2007.  This group of contributors includes Sangjin Jeong,
   Christian Vogt, Ryuji Wakikawa, Behcet Sarikaya, Shinta Sugimoto,
   Long Le, Alice Qinxia and Jaehwoon Lee. Many thanks also to Rajeev
   Koodli for his comments about the structure and scope of this problem
   statement.









































Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.





































Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         PMIPv6 Localized Routing PS         February 2009


Author's Address

   Marco Liebsch
   NEC Laboratories Europe
   NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   69115 Heidelberg,
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342146
   Email: liebsch@nw.neclab.eu








































Liebsch                  Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 12]

