Internet Engineering Task Force                Jozef Vandenameele
INTERNET DRAFT                                 Chair ETSI-TIPHON WG 2
draft-vandenameele-tiphon-arch-gway-decomp-00.txt 
November 1998 
Expires in six months                
 

          Requirements for the Reference Point ('N') between 
          Media Gateway Controller and Media Gateway


Status of this document

This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working 
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute 
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
"1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern 
Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific 
Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

This Internet-Draft contains those excerpts of ETSI-TIPHON's work
that focus on the reference point between Media Gateway Controller 
and Media Gateway (reference point "N" in TIPHON parlance).

ETSI-TIPHON is working on standards to connect VoIP (Voice over IP) 
networks and phone networks.

PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS INPUT FROM TIPHON IS WORK IN PROGRESS. IT HAS
BEEN APPROVED NEITHER ON THE TIPHON WORKING GROUP 2 LEVEL, NOR  ON
THE TIPHON PROJECT LEVEL. However, as input is always welcome, we
are herewith submitting the current status of the discussion within
TIPHON to the IETF.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Introduction
2. Definitions
3. Reference Configuration
    3.1 Reference Configuration Overview
    3.2 Reference Configuration Details
4. Functional Blocks
    4.1 Media Gateway
    4.2 Media Gateway Controller 
5. Requirements for Reference Point (N) between 
    Media Gateway Controller and Media Gateway
    5.1 Introduction
    5.2 Scope of Media Gateway Control
          5.2.1 Connection Control
          5.2.2 Media Stream Transformations
          5.2.3 Content Insertion
          5.2.4 Event Catching
    5.3 Other Requirements
          5.3.1 Modularity and Extensibility
          5.3.2 Resource Management
          5.3.3 Control Session Management
          5.3.4 Control Session Security
6. References
7. Acknowledgments
8. Contact Address


1	INTRODUCTION

ETSI-TIPHON [1a] is working on standards to connect VoIP (Voice over 
IP) networks and phone networks. Of its six working groups, working 
group 2 (WG2), is on architecture and reference configurations. One 
of WG2's documents is, in ETSI parlance, Technical Specification 
DTS/TIPHON-02002 [1b]. It defines the network architecture, system 
architecture, and the reference configurations which are necessary 
for the delivery of telephone calls which originate in 

- an IP network and are delivered to Switched Circuit Networks (SCN), 
such as Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), Integrated Services 
Digital Networks (ISDN) and Global System for Mobile communication 
(GSM) networks (so-called TIPHON Scenario 1),

- an SCN and are delivered in an IP network (TIPHON Scenario 2),

- an SCN and are delivered to an SCN via an IP transit network 
(TIPHON Scenario 3).

This Internet-Draft contains those excerpts of DTS/TIPHON-02002 
Version V0.3.1 (status 30 October 1998) that focus on the reference 
point between Media Gateway Controller and Media Gateway (reference 
point "N" in TIPHON parlance). 

PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS INPUT FROM TIPHON IS WORK IN PROGRESS. IT HAS
BEEN APPROVED NEITHER ON THE TIPHON WORKING GROUP 2 LEVEL, NOR  ON
THE TIPHON PROJECT LEVEL. However, as input is always welcome, we
are herewith submitting the current status of the discussion within
TIPHON to the IETF.

ETSI-TIPHON and ITU Study Group 16 are actively cooperating on the 
the gateway decomposition [1c], and ETSI-TIPHON whishes for active 
collaboration with the relevant IETF working group(s) as well.


2	DEFINITIONS

- Media gateway: provides the media mapping and / or transcoding 
functions

- Media gateway controller: controls the Media Gateways

- Signalling gateway: provides the signalling mediation function
between the IP domain and the SCN domain

- gatekeeper : An H.323 entity on the IP network which provides 
address translation and controls access to the network for terminals, 
gateways, and MCUs. The gatekeeper may also provide other services to 
terminals, gateways and MCUs, such as bandwidth management and 
gateway location.

- gateway: A gateway is an endpoint on a network which provides for
real-time, two-way communication between terminals on an IP based 
network and other terminals on switched circuit network.

- terminal: An H.323 terminal (see [2]), other than a gateway or a
multipoint control unit.


3	REFERENCE CONFIGURATION

This clause gives reference configurations that shall apply for the
interworking function (IWF) to ensure service interoperability for 
TIPHON phase 2 systems.

3.1	Reference configuration overview

The reference configuration shall consist of following entities:
- terminal connected to the IP network;
- IP access (e.g. Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), 
  Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN), x Digital Subscriber 
  Line (xDSL));
- IP network;
- gateway
  -   Media Gateway Controller
  -   Media Gateway
  -   Signalling Gateway;
- gatekeeper;
- an SCN;
- a terminal connected to an SCN network;
- back-end services;


     +--------+   D  +--------+   G  +--------+
     |   GK   |------|   GK   |------|Back End|
     +--------+      +--------+      +--------+
          |               |              /     
        A |             C |      ___F___/
          |        . . . . . . ./. . . . . . . .
     +--------+   .  +--------+   J  +--------+ . E.b
     |H323 Ter|------|  MGC   |------|   SG   |------
     +--------+   .  +--------+      +--------+ .
           \____B_.       |                     .
                  .\    N |                     .
                  . \     |                     .
                  .  +--------+                 . E.a
                  .  |   MG   |-----------------.----
                  .  +--------+                 .
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 


          Figure 1: Basic call reference configuration
          (MGC = Media Gateway Controller, MG = Media Gateway,
           SG = Signalling Gateway)

NOTE 1:	This diagram does not represent a network topology. For 
example, a gatekeeper that communicates with both a terminal and a 
gateway is using reference points A and C.

Whilst figure 1 contains two gatekeepers (in order to show the 
reference point between two gatekeepers), a particular TIPHON system 
may contain one or more gatekeepers. However, it appears to each 
terminal that it communicates with as a single gatekeeper, and 
similarly for the gateway. Different gatekeepers may be responsible 
for different administrative domains, or for different parts of a 
single administrative domain (i.e. one administrative domain may 
contain multiple gatekeepers). 
 
The architectural model of the gateway is split in three functional 
components: the Signalling Gateway (SG), the Media Gateway (MG) and 
the Media Gateway Controller (MGC).

3.2	Reference configuration details

The interoperability between SCN and IP networks for voice services
shall have minimal impact on those networks. 

The lines in the reference configuration diagram represent network 
connections between the elements. Dedicated or non-dedicated, long-
lived or on-demand connections may be used.

3.2.3	Gatekeeper

The gatekeeper is the element in the network that shall be
responsible for the Registration, Admission, and Status (RAS) of 
terminals and gateways. The gatekeeper shall participate in zone 
management, call processing and call signalling.

3.2.4	Gateway

A gateway shall be physically connected to one or more IP networks
and to one or more SCN networks. A gateway is composed of
  - Signalling Gateway
  - Media Gateway
  - Media Gateway Controller
These different functions can be co-located with either a gatekeeper, 
a gateway or both.

3.2.4.1. Signalling Gateway

The Signalling Gateway provides the signalling mediation function
between the IP domain and the SCN domain. It may support functional 
or signalling mediation between the IP domain (e.g. H.323) and call 
signalling in the SCN domain (e.g. channel associated signalling, 
non - channel associated signalling, ...). 

3.2.4.2. Media Gateway

The Media Gateway provides the media mapping and / or transcoding
functions. It maps (e.g. tandemfree operation) or transcodes the 
media in the IP domain (e.g. media transported over RTP/UDP/IP) and 
media in the SCN domain (e.g. PCM encoded voice, GSM, etc.).

3.2.4.3. Media Gateway Controller

The Media Gateway Controller sits between the Media Gateway, the
Signalling Gateway and the Gatekeeper. It provides the call 
processing (call handling) function for the Gateway. It controls the 
Media Gateways; it receives SCN signalling information from the 
Signalling Gateway and IP signalling from the Gatekeeper.

3.2.5	Back-end services

Back End Services may be used by gateways and gatekeepers to provide
functions (e.g. authentication function, billing and rating/ 
tariffing, or address resolution function, etc.). These back-end 
services may be provided by equipment within the SCN, within the 
IP Network, or elsewhere. 


4	FUNCTIONAL BLOCKS

Three main functional blocks are identified within the IP domain:
terminals, gateways, and gatekeepers. This section identifies 
functions within the media gateway and the media gateway controller 
only. 

The gateway Functional Block ensures the interworking between the IP 
domain and the SCN domain. It is composed of three separate 
Functional Blocks:
  - the Signalling Gateway (not discussed in this Internet-Draft)
  - the Media Gateway 
  - the Media Gateway Controller

4.1.  Media Gateway

- Media channel address resolution function - provides IP transport
addresses for media reception and transmission;

- Stream conditioning function - transfers the media streams between
the IP domain and the SCN domain, including (e.g.) transcoding and 
echo cancellation;

- Codec translation function - routes the media streams between the 
IP domain and the PSTN/ISDN/GSM domain

- Media channel privacy - ensures media privacy to and from the GW;

- Circuit Network Media Termination - This includes all lower-layer
circuit network hardware and protocols, including the method by which 
speech is placed on the wire, e.g. PCM A-law, PCM Mu-law, etc.

- Packet Media Termination - This includes all protocols involved in
putting media over the packet network, including the codecs used.  
For H.323 this includes RTP/RTCP as described in H.225.0, and also 
the coders such as G.711, G.723.1. etc.  

- SCN Circuit Interface: terminates the bearer channel (e.g. DS0) 
from the SCN and makes it available to the Media Processing 
functions.

- Packet / Circuit Media Processing Function - converts between 
audio, fax or data bearer channels on the SCN side and data packets 
(e.g. RTP/UDP/IP, or ATM) on the packet network side. This also 
performs associated signal processing functions such as voice 
compression, network echo-cancellation, silence suppression, comfort 
noise generation, encryption, fax conversion, and analog modem 
conversion (for passing analog modem signals "transparently" through 
the packet network).  In addition, this function performs the 
conversion between DTMF tones on the SCN side and the appropriate 
signals on the packet network side when the speech codec is not 
transparent to DTMF.  The SCN/Packet Media Processing function may 
also collect the packet traffic and quality data experienced by each 
call for use in call detail reporting and call control.

- NAS Media Processing and Control Function: provides the 
functionality of an IP Remote Access Server and terminates PPP, 
RADIUS, etc. stacks used for transport and management of the dial-up 
data channel.  This function, if present, always resides in the Media 
Gateway.

- Service Circuit Function: provides services such as playing
announcements and tones towards either the SCN or packet network. 
This function may also provide capabilities to collect and generate 
DTMF digits, perform voice recognition, etc.  The Service Circuit 
function resources again are managed from within the Media Gateway 
and may be requested by more than one Call Control function or other 
external system  (e.g., SCP). Some or all of these functions may be 
provided by an external entity in which case this function may be 
optional.

- Usage recording function - determines and/or records signalling
and/or media reception and transmission. 

- Usage reporting function - reports to an external entity the
determined and/or recorded usage.

- OAM&P: Operations, administration, maintenance, and provisioning
information that is not directly needed for call control can be 
passed through a logically separate interface to an element 
management system.  This operations interface is beyond the scope of 
this paper.

- Management function - interfaces to the network management system

- Packet Network Interface: terminates packet network.


4.2.  Media Gateway Controller

- GW H.225 function - receives and emits H.225 messages (see [4]);

- GW H.245 function - receives and emits H.245 messages (see [3]);

- Authentication function - establishes the identity of the user,
device, or network entity (see [5]);

- GW media stream admission control function - allows or disallows
media streaming;

- Non-repudiation evidence gathering - collects information to be 
used to prove that a certain signalling or media was transmitted or 
received;

- Packet Signaling - This includes all "call like" signaling that 
might exist on the packet network and is carried out by an endpoint 
on such a network.  For H.323, this includes H.225.0 Q.931-like call 
signaling, H.225.0 RAS, and H.245.  For an H.323 receive-only 
endpoint, this includesH.225.0 RAS, but not H.245. 

- Packet Network Signaling Interface:  terminates the packet network
signaling protocol (e.g., H.323, UNI, PNNI, etc.) It maintains only 
enough call state information to manage the protocol interface.  
Strictly speaking, the Packet Network Signaling Interface that exists 
in the Gateway Controller has no direct interface to the Media 
Gateway as all information passes from it to the Media Gateway via 
the Call Control Function.  In general this function will reside in 
the Gateway controller.

- Gateway Control - This includes all connection control logic,
resource management, and protocol translation (e.g. SS7 to H.225.0) 
that might take place.

- Remote Resource Monitoring: maintains the Gateway Controller's view
of network-level resources available for calls or NAS termination.  
These include such things as Media Gateway trunk utilization and 
availability, IP network bandwidth and utilisation, etc. useful for 
making call routing decisions.

- Call Control Function: maintains the Gateway call state. The Call
Control function contains all connection control logic of the 
Gateway. The Call Control function may interface with backend 
services, which may include IN services (SCP or SSP).

Note: This function may perform call routing, authorisation, 
authentication, quality of service selection, billing data and per-
call information recording and resource identification functions. 
It communicates bearer trunk circuit termination (DS0 channel) and 
data network addressing, security and configuration information 
(voice coder, echo cancellation parameters, encryption tokens, etc.) 
to the Media Gateway. 

- Media Gateway Resource Management - allocates internal resources
within the media gateway.  

- Signalling mediation function maps between signalling in the IP
domain (e.g. H.323) and signalling in the SCN domain, in co-operation 
with the SG.

- Usage recording function - determines and/or records signalling
and/or media reception and transmission 

- Usage reporting function - reports to an external entity the
determined and/or recorded usage.

- OAM&P: Operations, administration, maintenance, and provisioning
information that is not directly needed for call control can be 
passed through a logically separate interface to an element 
management system.  This operations interface is beyond the scope of 
this paper.

- Management function - interfaces to the network management system

- Packet Network Interface: terminates packet network.


5	REQUIREMENTS FOR REFERENCE POINT ("N")  BETWEEN MEDIA GATEWAY 
CONTROLLER AND MEDIA GATEWAY

5.1.	Introduction

Reference Point N designates the information flows required for
control of a Media Gateway in a decomposed H.323 Gateway.
NOTE:	There is a strong causal relationship between H.245 
signalling and information flow over reference point N. The 
detailed content required in Media Gateway control messages in a 
decomposed H.323 Gateway derives in large part from the potential 
content of  the associated H.245 signalling.

5.2.	Scope of Media Gateway Control

Media Gateway control consists of four functions:

1. Creation, modification, and deletion of media stream connections
across the Media Gateway.

2. Specification of the transformations to be applied to media
streams as they pass through  the Media Gateway, both initially as 
connections are created and subsequently during the life of the 
connection.

3. Requests to the Media Gateway to insert content (tones and
announcements) into media streams, either on direct orders from 
the controller or beginning and ending with the detection of 
specified events within the Media Gateway itself.

4. Requests to the Media Gateway to report and possibly to take
specified actions upon detection of specified events within the 
media streams.

5.2.1	Connection Control

In keeping with the capabilities of H.245, connection control shall
be able to provide at least the following types of connection:
  - circuit to packet (IP)
  - circuit to packet (ATM - H.323 Annex C operation)
  - circuit to circuit (circuit side fallback)

The connection mode may be unicast or multicast, or a connection may
be inactive. Typically connections are specified unidirectionally, 
but may be specified in both directions at once. On internet 
connections, both IPv4 and IPv6 are supported. 

H.245 contains parameters which must be passed on to the transport 
network to select transport QoS. H.245 sets up both an RTP and an 
optional RTCP connection in each direction.

On the circuit side, SS7 requires the ability to perform a loopback 
for continuity testing. This requirement applies especially to 
loopback through a circuit at the edge of the Media Gateway (path 1 
in Figure 2), but as Figure 2 shows, four different types of loopback 
are possible.
 
            SCN                                Packet
                   +========================+
                   |                        |
            ---------------------------------------\
                   |                                |
    path 2  <--------------------------------------/
                   |                        |
               . . | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
              .    |                        |
               . . | . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . >   path 4
                   |                        |
    path 1  -------------\           . . . . . . . . . .
                          |         .       |
            <------------/           . . . . . . . . . >   path 3
                   |                        |
                   +========================+

                Figure 2 - Possible Types Of Loopback


Abstracting from this, the Media Gateway control interface shall 
support the following capabilities for connection control:

1) Ability to identify the IP, ATM, and/or circuit connection end-
points involved in a connection.   On the packet side, end-point 
descriptions shall reflect the content provided by networkAddress 
portion of the H.245 NetworkAccessParameters type.  On the circuit 
side, it shall be possible to designate circuits using a 
hierarchical naming construct. 

It must be possible to wildcard the low-order portion of the 
endpoint identifier (i.e. the port number for an IP transport 
address or the low-order term of a circuit identifier), with the 
intent that Media Gateway shall select an idle endpoint instance 
and return its full identity to the controller. Wildcarding shall 
also be provided to allow a simultaneous reference to multiple 
endpoints.

2) Ability to request the selection of ports for both RTP and RTCP
reception on the packet side.

3) Ability to specify unicast or multicast propagation of the media
stream on the network side.

4) Ability to specify the QOS parameters applicable on the packet
side of a media stream connection.

5) Ability to monitor QOS statistics for an established connection,
or at least the accumulated statistics for each connection as it 
is taken down.

6) Ability for the Media Gateway to autonomously report if the QOS on
a given connection has fallen below a specified value.

7) Ability to support circuit-to-circuit connections (the case of
circuit-side fallback when the packet side is congested).

8) Ability to support at least the circuit-side loopbacks needed for
SS7 continuity testing.

5.2.2	Media stream transformations

This section has to do with the "steady-state" characteristics of the
media streams.  Again beginning with the packet side, H.245 specifies 
the RTP payload type to be used for a given media stream.  The Media 
Gateway control protocol shall permit the payload type to be 
transmitted onward to the Media Gateway.  The Media Gateway control 
protocol shall also allow the controller to pass explicit designation 
of the codec, packetization interval, and jitter buffer size for each 
media stream.

In some cases, it will be necessary to specify the coding information 
on both sides of the connection.  This will be true for a packet-to-
packet connection, and could happen if the coding on the circuit side 
varies on a per-call basis (e.g. because bearer capacity varies 
between 56kbs and 64kbs depending on which facilities the call has 
passed through along the way).

In addition to RTP payload type, H.245 can specify whether silence 
suppression is to be used.  Moreover, the Media Gateway may be the 
point at which encryption is applied because the subscriber has 
requested confidentiality service across the packet network.  For GSM 
codecs, H.245 signals whether comfort noise is to be generated during 
silent periods.  On the packet side, echo cancellation may be applied 
on a per-call basis.  The Media Gateway control protocol shall be 
able to pass all of this information on to the Media Gateway.
Typically much of this information must be specified at the same time 
that the connection is created.  The Media Gateway control protocol 
shall allow for this possibility.  However, it shall also be possible 
to change media handling instructions for an already-existing 
connection, in response, for instance, to an H.245 
FlowControlCommand.

A final requirement relating to media processing is that the Media 
Gateway control protocol shall support requests to initiate or 
terminate lawful interception of the content of a specified media 
stream.

5.2.3	Content Insertion

The requirement to play out one or more tones in a specified
direction (usually toward the circuit side) occurs for almost all 
media stream connections.  Occasionally it may be necessary to play 
out a Media-Gateway-resident announcement.  These actions are 
triggered by call processing rather than H.245 signalling.  The Media 
Gateway control protocol shall support the ability to request the 
playing of a specific tone or announcement at any point during the 
life of a connection.

To reduce the messaging and other processing burden on the controller 
and improve response times, it is highly desirable that the Media 
Gateway control protocol go beyond requests to start and stop the 
playing of specified announcements or tones, to support at a minimum 
the specification of the conditions under which playout should stop.  
For example, a prompting tone or announcement should stop when 
incoming DTMF is detected, without the need to report that event to 
the controller and receive another instruction stopping the playout.  
This capability is a subset of the general requirement for the 
controller to be able to program the Media Gateway to detect and 
react to specific events associated with specific connections.

The Media Gateway control protocol shall also support the ability to 
request muting of a media stream in a specified direction.

Finally, the Media Gateway control protocol shall support the ability 
for the controller to request the Media Gateway to insert and detect 
tones as required for SS7 continuity testing and other forms of 
testing.

5.2.4	Event Catching

Even the narrowest definition of the scope of Media Gateway control
within the context of H.323 Gateway decomposition requires the 
ability to instruct the Media Gateway to detect and act upon 
specified events.  As a specific example, once the call has been 
established, the controller must tell the Media Gateway to begin 
listening for DTMF on the circuit side, report any digits detected, 
and remove the DTMF from the stream as it is passed to the packet 
side. This is an example where H.245 signalling (userInputIndication 
messages) will occur as a consequence of Media Gateway control 
messages rather than the reverse. The Media Gateway control protocol 
shall support this specific operation.

The complete Media Gateway control repertoire of events to be 
detected and actions to be taken as a result is for further study.  
The main difficulty is to distinguish between Media Gateway control 
and circuit-side signalling (Reference Point J) requirements.

5.3	Other Requirements

As a general requirement, the Media Gateway control protocol shall
allow the Media Gateway to indicate to the controller whenever some 
or all of a request cannot be executed.  It shall be possible for the 
Media Gateway to indicate the general nature of the problem and to 
provide further details, possibly including proprietary content.

5.3.1	Modularity and Extensibility

It is essential that the protocol for Media Gateway control be both
modular and extensible.  Many uses are envisioned for this protocol, 
going beyond its implementation of an interface across Reference 
Point N.  To begin with, the protocol may also be used to implement 
at least part of Reference Point J circuit-side signalling transport 
interface, particularly where MF or R2 is being used.  Beyond that, 
it will probably be extended to handle Network Access Server (NAS) 
operation, where circuits must be connected to modems either 
unconditionally or upon detection of a modem tone.  One further 
example is possible use to control a line-terminating Media Gateway. 
These are just three examples of potential extensions.

However, not all implementations may wish to support all of the 
possible extensions.  Thus the protocol shall be modular, permitting 
light-weight implementations for specialised tasks where processing 
resources are constrained. The protocol shall provide the means 
whereby a controller can determine the capabilities supported by a 
particular Media Gateway.

5.3.2	Resource Management

The Media Gateway control protocol shall provide the means for the
controller to determine resource availability within the Media 
Gateway upon startup. Optionally, this capability may allow for 
queries during regular operation.  The means by which remaining 
capacity is quantified is for further study.

It shall be possible for the Media Gateway to indicate to the 
controller that it lacks sufficient resources to carry out a given 
command.

It shall be possible for the controller to audit the commitment of 
resources to connections, to ensure that all commitments are valid.  

It shall further be possible for the controller to order that 
specific resource assignments be cleared if it finds that they are 
invalid.

It shall be possible for the Media Gateway to report changes in 
operational status of significant resources from in-service to out-
of-service and vice versa.  This is especially required for 
transmission facilities terminating on the Media Gateway.

5.3.3	Control Session Management

The Media Gateway control protocol shall provide the means to start
up and take down a control session between a specific controller and 
a specific Media Gateway.  The ability for two controllers to make 
requests to the same Media Gateway at the same time is NOT a 
requirement.  However, it shall be possible for a Media Gateway to 
establish a control session with an alternate controller if its 
primary controller becomes unavailable.  It shall also be possible 
for a Media Gateway to establish an inactive control session with a 
standby controller.  Control switchovers should occur without loss of 
connections already made within the Media Gateway.  Means should be 
provided for the new controller to request a reset of all connections 
if it is unable to recover the existing connection states.

DEFINITION: A Control session is an application level relationship 
between a Media Gateway Controller and a Media Gateway. The use of 
the term session does not carry any implications for the protocol 
stack below the application level.

It shall be possible for either the Media Gateway or the controller 
to detect loss of contact with the other party to the control session 
within a configurable time of the order of ten seconds or less.  The 
appropriate actions to take upon detection of loss of contact are for 
further study.

5.3.4	Control Session Security

The Media Gateway control protocol shall provide the means for mutual
authentication at the start of a control session, and for 
preservation of the integrity and confidentiality of control messages 
once the session has started.


6. REFERENCES

[1a] http://www.etsi.org/tiphon. 

All ETSI-TIPHON documents are publicly available for free through 
this website. 

TIPHON mailing lists are also open to everyone.

[1b] DTS/TIPHON-02002 V0.3.1: "TIPHON; Network architecture and 
reference configurations; Phase II: Scenario 1 + Scenario 2"; 
http://docbox.etsi.org/tech-org/tiphon/Document/tiphon/07-
drafts/wg2/DTS02002/V0.3.1/ 

[1c] http://docbox.etsi.org/tech-org/tiphon/Document/tiphon/05-9810-
Tel_Aviv/10td137r1.doc

[2] ITU-T Recommendation H.323 (1998) (version 2): "Packet based 
multimedia communication"

[3] ITU-T Recommandation H.245 (1998) (version 3): "Control protocol 
for multimedia communication".

[4] ITU-T Recommandation H.225.0 (1998) (version 2): "Call 
signalling protocols and media stream packetization for packet based 
multimedia communications systems". 

[5] TR 101 306: "Telecommunications and Internet Protocol 
Harmonization Over Network (TIPHON); Requirements for service 
interoperability; Scenario 1".


7.  Acknowledgments

This draft is the work of Working Group 2 of ETSI-TIPHON. Many thanks
to all contributors.


8. Contact Address

Jozef Vandenameele
Alcatel Bell NV
Francis Wellesplein 1
B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
Tel:  + 32-3-240 4361                 
Fax:  + 32-3-240 9999 or 9961                 
email :  Jozef.Vandenameele@btmaa.bel.alcatel.be


or send mail to the mailing list of ETSI-TIPHON WG 2: 

TIPHON_WG2@list.etsi.fr

(to subscribe, send "subscribe TIPHON_WG2" to listserv@list.etsi.fr)
