


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: October 11, 2009                                     Technology
                                                           April 9, 2009


                Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-cbhe-02

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 11, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) "convergence-layer" adapters



Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


   may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed manner within the
   primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint identifiers
   conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Compression convention  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.1.  Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     3.2.  Reception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





















Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] "convergence-layer
   adapters may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed manner
   within the primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint
   identifiers conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   Each DTN bundle's primary block contains at least the following four
   BP endpoint identifiers (EIDs), of which any two, any three, or even
   all four may be lexically identical: the endpoint identifiers of the
   source, the destination, the report-to endpoint, and the current
   custodian.  Each EID is a Uniform Record Identifier (URI) as defined
   by [RFC3986].

   A degree of block compression is provided by the design of the
   primary block: the scheme names and scheme-specific parts of the four
   endpoints' IDs - up to eight NULL-terminated strings - are
   concatenated at the end of the block in a variable-length character
   array called a "dictionary", enabling each EID to be represented by a
   pair of integers indicating the offsets (within the dictionary) of
   the EID's scheme name and scheme-specific part.  Duplicate strings
   may be omitted from the dictionary, so the actual number of
   concatenated NULL-terminated strings in the dictionary may be less
   than eight and two or more of the scheme name or scheme-specific part
   offsets in the block may have the same value.  Moreover, the eight
   offsets in the primary block are encoded as self-delimiting numeric
   values (SDNVs), which shrink to fit the encoded values; when the
   total length of the dictionary is less than 127 bytes, all eight
   offsets can be encoded into just eight bytes.

   However, these strategems do not prevent the scheme names and scheme-
   specific parts themselves from being lengthy strings of ASCII text.
   It is therefore still possible for the length of a bundle's primary
   header to be a very large fraction of the total length of the bundle
   when the bundle's payload is relatively small, as is anticipated for
   a number of DTN applications such as space flight operations.

   The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) convention was developed
   to improve DTN transmission efficiency for such applications by
   further reducing the number of bytes used by convergence-layer
   adapters to express EIDs in the primary blocks of bundles.


2.  Compression convention






Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


2.1.  Constraints

   Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) is possible only when all
   endpoint IDs in the primary block of a given bundle are "CBHE-
   conformant".  Two forms of endpoint ID are CBHE-conformant: (a) the
   null endpoint ID "dtn:none" and (b) any endpoint ID formed within the
   "dtn" scheme whose namespace-specific string (NSS) is of the form
   NODE_NUMBER.SERVICE_NUMBER.

   The EIDs formed within any number of different namespaces within the
   "dtn" scheme may be CBHE-conformant.  However, CBHE compression is
   possible between a pair of convergence-layer adapters only when each
   one is configured to figured to compress only EIDs formed within a
   single namespace *and* that designated namespace is the same for both
   adapters.

   The node number is a positive integer that notionally identifies a BP
   node.  In a spacecraft flight operations context, for example,
   spacecraft identifier might be used as node number.  However, methods
   for assigning node numbers to BP nodes are beyond the scope of this
   document; in particular, no requirement or guarantee of a one-to-one
   mapping between node numbers and BP nodes may be inferred.

   Node number must be an integer in the range 1 to (2^64 - 1).  Node
   number zero is reserved for representation of the null endpoint ID in
   the compressed form described later in this specification;
   decompressing a compressed null EID MUST always yield the standard
   null endpoint ID URI "dtn:none".  Negative integers and integers
   larger than (2^64 - 1) cannot be compressed into the SDNVs that are
   used for representation of endpoint ID references in the primary
   blocks of bundles and therefore could not be compressed as described
   later.

   The service number is a non-negative integer that notionally
   functions as a de-multiplexing token.  When the protocol encapsulated
   within BP has its own de-multiplexing identifiers, the service number
   may function in a manner similar to that of the protocol number in an
   IP packet, characterizing the bundle payload; alternatively, the
   service number may function in a manner similar to that of the port
   number in a UDP datagram.  Service numbers enable inbound bundles'
   application data units to be de-multiplexed to instances of
   application functionality that are designed to process them, so that
   effective communication relationships can be developed between bundle
   producers and consumers.

   Service number must not be negative or exceed (2^64 - 1) for the same
   reason that node number must not do so.




Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


   For example, "dtn::ipn:9.37" would be a CBHE-conformant endpoint ID.

   Conversion of a CBHE-conformant EID to and from a tuple of two
   integers is therefore straightforward.  This ease of conversion
   enables an array of integers to serve the same function as a
   dictionary of EID ASCII strings.

   Note, however, that CBHE decompression cannot faithfully recreate the
   dictionary of a compressed primary block from an array of integers
   unless the order of the endpoint ID reference strings in the
   dictionary of the original, uncompressed block is known.  (The bundle
   protocol specification does not require that the strings in the
   dictionary appear in any particular order and does not require that
   redundant strings be omitted from the dictionary.)  Therefore, a
   further precondition to CBHE compression is that the endpoint ID
   reference strings in the dictionary of the bundle to be compressed
   must be exactly as follows, in this order and without addition:

   1.  The scheme name of the destination endpoint ID.

   2.  The scheme-specific part of the destination endpoint ID.

   3.  The scheme name of the source endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   4.  The scheme-specific part of the source endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   5.  The scheme name of the report-to endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   6.  The scheme-specific part of the report-to endpoint ID, if and
       only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   7.  The scheme name of the current custodian endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   8.  The scheme-specific part of the current custodian endpoint ID, if
       and only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   Note: this constraint implies that a bundle which includes any
   extension blocks containing EID references to endpoint IDs other than
   the block's destination, source, report-to, and current custodian
   cannot be CBHE-compressed.







Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


2.2.  Method

   When the constraints summarized above are met, the CBHE block
   compression method can be applied by the convergence layer adapter at
   the time the bundle is transmitted via a convergence-layer protocol.
   In a CBHE-compressed primary block, the eight SDNVs that normally
   contain EIDs' offsets within the dictionary are instead used to
   contain the eight integer values listed below, in the order shown:

   1.  The node number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   2.  The service number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   3.  The node number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the source
       endpoint is the null endpoint.

   4.  The service number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the
       source endpoint is the null endpoint.

   5.  The node number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   6.  The service number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   7.  The node number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero if
       the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   8.  The service number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero
       if the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   Further, the dictionary is omitted from the primary block and the
   primary block's dictionary length is set to zero.

   Upon reception the receiving convergence-layer adaptation de-
   compresses the block by simply reversing the process so that the
   bundle presented to the bundle protocol agent has the standard form
   (i.e., the dictionary is reconstituted).


3.  Specification

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence



Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


   layer adaptation implementations.

   Bundle Protocol convergence-layer adapters that conform to the CBHE
   specification must implement the following procedures.

3.1.  Transmission

   When and only when required by the bundle protocol agent to transmit
   to some CBHE-conformant convergence-layer adapter a bundle whose
   primary block's endpoint IDs satisfy the constraints identified in
   section 2.1 above, the convergence layer adapter may encode the
   primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE compression
   convention described in section 2.2 above.

3.2.  Reception

   Upon receiving a bundle whose dictionary length is zero (and only in
   this circumstance), a CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter MUST
   decode the primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE
   compression convention described in section 2.2 above before
   delivering it to the bundle protocol agent.

   Note that when a non-CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter
   receives a bundle whose dictionary length is zero, it has no choice
   but to pass it to the bundle agent without modification.  In this
   case the bundle agent will be unable to dispatch the received bundle,
   because it will be unable to determine the destination endpoint.  The
   behavior of the bundle agent in this circumstance is an
   implementation matter.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.


5.  Security Considerations

   The Bundle Security Protocol may under some conditions insert
   additional endpoint ID strings into the dictionary of a bundle and
   reference those strings in BSP blocks.  Because a bundle which
   includes any extension blocks containing EID references to endpoint
   IDs other than the block's destination, source, report-to, and
   current custodian cannot be CBHE-compressed, bundles cannot be
   compressed under those conditions.

   Specifically, the specification detailed above implies that a bundle
   cannot be CBHE-compressed when the security source endpoint for the



Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                        April 2009


   Bundle Authentication Block (BAB) is noted in the dictionary
   (typically because there is no other way for the receiving bundle
   protocol agent to determine the security source endpoint), when the
   security destination endpoint for the BAB is noted in the dictionary
   (in the rare case that the receiving endpoint is not the security
   destination endpoint), when the security source endpoint for the
   Payload Integrity Block (PIB), Payload Confidentiality Block (PCB),
   or Extension Security Block (ESB) is not the source endpoint, or when
   the security destination endpoint for the PIB, PCB, or ESB is not the
   destination endpoint.

   These caveats aside, CBHE introduces no new security considerations
   beyond those discussed in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Bundle Security
   Protocol specifications.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov












Burleigh                Expires October 11, 2009                [Page 8]


