Network Working Group		               Bharat M Gaonkar
Internet Draft		                       Sudhin Jacob
Intended status: Experimental		       Juniper Networks
Expires: July 2017		               Giuseppe Fioccola
					       Telecom Italia		
                                               Qin Wu
                                               Huawei Technologies
                                               Praveen Ananthasankaran
					       Nokia										   
	                                       January 27, 2017






           Packet Loss measurement Model
           draft-bhaprasud-ippm-pm-01.txt
				   
				   
Abstract

This document defines the loss measurement matrix models for service
level packets on the network which can be implemented in different
kind of network scenarios.




Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 4, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


            

	Expires July 4, 2017                              [Page 1]













Table of Contents



1. Introduction ..................................................3



2. Terminologies..................................................4



3. Loss Measurement Models........................................5



3.1. Complete data measurement....................................5



3.2. Color based data measurement.................................6



3.3. COS based Data measurement...................................6



3.4. COS and color based Data measurement.........................6



4. Active and Passive performance measurements.....................6



5. Use Case .......................................................7
   
 
 Appendix A Appendix ...............................................9 
 
   
 Authors' Addresses ................................................9





   
   



	Expires July 4, 2017                                [Page 2]




   
   
   




1. Introduction

   Today, Performance monitoring is a key technology to strengthen
   service offers based on enhanced QoE and SLAs.  The draft aims to
   define performance monitoring loss measurement matrix models for
   service level packets on the network.

   The network would be provisioned with multiple services having
   different SLAs based on the customers' requirement.This models aims
   at computing Loss measurement for these services independently for
   each defined SLA matrixes.

   The class-of-service and packet color classification defined in the
   network drives the SLA factors and the implementation to achieve 
   these SLAs.This draft uses the class-of-service model and color
   based model for any given network to define the packet loss measurement
   for the different SLAs.

   The proposed matrix models is suitable mainly for passive performance
   measurements but can be considered for active and hybrid performance
   measurements as well.

   This solution models loss measurement in different kinds of network
   scenarios.  The different models explained here will help to analyse
   packet loss pattern, analyze the network congestion in a better way
   and model the network in a better way.
   Loss measurement is carried out between 2 end points.The underlying
   technology could be an active loss measurement or a Passive loss
   measurement.

   Any loss measurement will require 2 counters

   o  Number of packets transmitted from one end point.

   o  Number of packets received at the other end point.

   This draft explains the different ways to model the above data and
   get meaningful result for the loss measurement compulation.  The
   underlying technology could be an MPLS Loss measurement, or based
   loss measurement or an IP based loss measurement.





   
   
  





  
   
  Expires July 4, 2017                                             [Page 3]
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
2. Terminologies




    Color Identifier: It is used to identify the color that applies to the 
                       data packet.
				 

   COS Identifier: It is used to identify the COS that applies to the 
                   data packet.
				   
				   
   Complete data measurement: Complete data measurement is a data measurement
   method which monitors every packet and condense a large amount of information
   about packet arrivals into a small number of statistics. The aim of
   "monitoring every packet" is to ensure that the information reported is not
   dependent on the application.
   
   

   Color based data measurement: Color based data measurement is a data 
   measurement method which monitors the data packet with the same color
   identifier. 

   
   COS based data measurement: Color based data measurement is a data 
   measurement method which monitors the data packet with the same COS
   identifier. 
   
   
   COS identifier could be C-Tag Priority Code Point(PCP) or DSCP.
   
   

   COS and color based Data measurement: COS and color based Data measurement
   is a data measurement method which monitors the data packet with the same
   defined SLA matrix.The SLA matrix is an array of Color identifier attribute
   and COS identifier attribute.







  








  Expires July 4, 2017                                             [Page 4]



  
  

3. Loss Measurement Models



3.1. Complete data measurement


   This model uses the complete data traffic between the 2 
   end-points to compute loss measurement. This will result in
   computation of loss measurement for the entire traffic in the
   network in one direction. This is primarily used in cases of
   backbone traffic where traffic from different services are 
   aggregated and send into the core network.This will count all
   the packet, this gives the overall loss measurment between one
    endpoint to other.
          
		  
		  

3.2. Color based data measurement

   This is same as the above section of "complete data measurement" with
   a minor difference, only monitoring the data packet with specific 
   color identifier.

   In this model the packets are counted in the following
   Way:
	Count specific data traffic with different color identifier between 2
	end points for loss measurement.One example of Color based data 
	measurement is to count two type of color based traffic:
	
   o  Count all committed traffic between the 2 end-point for loss
      measurement.

   o  Count all Excess traffic which is beyond the committed traffic for
      the specific network.

   When both of these are combined then it becomes the model for
   complete traffic as mentioned in the above section.

   In practice the Color of traffic can be using any mechanism based on
   the network encapsulation.As long as the packets could be treated
   differently based on the underlying encapsulation this mechanism
   could be used.

   This is used in core networks where the aggregated traffic has
   differential priority and loss measurement can be computed on the
   committed traffic which is guaranteed in the network when compared
   with excess traffic which could be dropped based on network load and
   provisioning.




  Expires July 4, 2017                                            [Page 5]  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 

 
   
3.3. COS based Data measurement

   This model uses the data traffic in the network which is flowing in a
   specific COS to measure the loss in the network.Based on the class
   of traffic in the network the transmitted and received packets are
   counted to calculate the loss measurement.

   Cos is differentiated from Color as COS treats the network streams
   with different COS identifier as different classes of traffic 
   whereas color differentiates a set of packets with different color.

   Primary use of this kind of loss measurement is to measure loss
   measurement for a specific service which has strict SLAs.  The
   service could be a point-to-point layer2 service, an MPLS based
   service.


3.4. COS and color based Data measurement

    This model uses a combination of both Color based data measurement
	and Cos based data measurement. Packets are counter for a specific COS
	with a specific color.This can count both in profile packet which are
	green and yellow which are out profile packets. This will not count the
	red packet which violates the SLA.This will count the packet for each
	SLA and color separately.



4. Active and Passive performance measurements


   This model reinforces the use of well known methodologies for passive
   performance measurements.A very simple, flexible and straightforward
   mechanism is presented in [I-D.ietf-ippm-alt-mark].The basic idea
   is to virtually split traffic flows into consecutive batches of 
   packets:each block represents a measurable entity unambiguously 
   recognizable thanks to the alternate marking. This approach, called
   Alternate Marking method, is efficient both for passive performance
   monitoring and for active performance monitoring.




   
   
   Expires July 4, 2017                                            [Page 6]  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  



  
   
   
   
5. Use Case

         +-------+              +-------+
         |       |              |       |
P2P service      +---------------+      |
         |       |              |       |
         +-------+              +-------+
            Router A               Router B
        
		Figure 1
		
	 Consider a  provider running point to point service between router A and B for his
	 customer "X".Customer "X" has voice traffic which requires special treatment,then
	 he requires attention for database traffic. The customer "X" has SLA with the
	 provider.Now the challenge faced by the provider is how to measure the traffic
	 of customer "X" for each calss and calculate the bandwidth, moreover the provider has
	 to see whether the "X" is sending traffic which is exceeding the level so that he can
	 make tariff accordingly.This problem is solved by the above models which can measures
	 the packet for each class of traffic and tabulates the data.Later point of time this 
	 data can be pulled for evaluation.
	 















   

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Expires July 4, 2017                                            [Page 7]  
   









6.  Acknowledgements

    We would like to thank Brian Trammell for giving us the opportunity
    to present our draft.We would like to thank Greg Mirsky for the comments. 
   

7. Security Considerations

NA

8.IANA Considerations

NA	
																		
								
										
						



9. References

9.1 Normative References

   
   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

			  
	9.2  Informative References

    	[I-D.ietf-ippm-alt-mark]
		Capello, A., Cociglio, M., Fioccola, G., Castaldelli, L.,
		and A. Bonda, "Alternate Marking method for passive
		performance monitoring", draft-ietf-ippm-alt-mark-00 (work
		in progress), July 2016.





		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	
	
		
		
		
		
	

      Expires July 4, 2017                                          [Page 8] 
	  
	  
Appendix A.  Appendix

Authors' Addresses

    Bharat M Gaonkar
    Juniper Networks
    1133 Innovation Way
    Sunnyvale, California 94089 USA
	
    Email: gbharat@juniper.net

    Sudhin Jacob
    Juniper Networks
    1133 Innovation Way
    Sunnyvale, California 94089 USA
	
   Email: sjacob@juniper.net


   Giuseppe Fioccola
   Telecom Italia
   Via Reiss Romoli, 274
   Torino  10148 Italy
	
   Email: giuseppe.fioccola@telecomitalia.it

   Qin Wu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Phone: +86-25-56629042
   EMail: sunseawq@huawei.com


    Praveen Ananthasankaran
    Nokia
    Manyata Embassy Tech Park,
    Silver Oak (Wing A), Outer Ring Road,
    Nagawara, Bangalore-560045
  	
    Email: praveen.ananthasankaran@nokia.com

			
			
 Expires July 4, 2017                                      [Page 9]