BTNS WG                                     J. Touch, D. Black, Y. Wang 
Internet Draft                              USC/ISI, EMC, and Microsoft 
Intended status: Informational                          October 2, 2007 
Expires: April 2008 
                                    
 
                                      
                    Problem and Applicability Statement  
                  for Better Than Nothing Security (BTNS) 
                  draft-ietf-btns-prob-and-applic-06.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 2, 2008. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

Abstract 

   The Internet network security protocol suite, IPsec, consisting of 
   IKE, ESP, and AH, generally requires authentication of network layer 
   entities to bootstrap security. This authentication can be based on 
   mechanisms such as pre-shared symmetric keys, certificates and 
 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   associated asymmetric keys, or the use of Kerberos.  The need to 
   deploy authentication information and its associated identities to 
   network layer entities can be a significant obstacle to use of 
   network security.  This document explains the rationale for extending 
   the Internet network security suite to enable use of IPsec security 
   mechanisms without authentication. These extensions are intended to 
   protect communication in a "better than nothing" (BTNS) fashion. The 
   extensions may be used on their own (Stand Alone BTNS, or SAB), or 
   may be useful in providing network layer security that can be 
   authenticated by higher layers in the protocol stack, called Channel 
   Bound BTNS (CBB). This document also explains situations in which use 
   of SAB and CBB extensions are appropriate. 

Conventions used in this document 

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
   server respectively. 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 Error! 
   Reference source not found.. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Problem Statement..............................................4 
      2.1. Network Layer.............................................5 
         2.1.1. Authentication Identities............................5 
         2.1.2. Authentication Methods...............................5 
         2.1.3. Current IPsec Limits on Unauthenticated Peers........6 
      2.2. Upper Layer...............................................6 
         2.2.1. Transport Protection from Packet Spoofing............6 
         2.2.2. Authentication at Multiple Layers....................7 
   3. BTNS-IPsec Overview and Threat Models..........................9 
      3.1. BTNS-IPsec Overview.......................................9 
      3.2. BTNS-IPsec Security Services.............................10 
      3.3. BTNS-IPsec Modes.........................................11 
   4. Applicability Statement.......................................12 
      4.1. Benefits.................................................13 
      4.2. Vulnerabilities..........................................13 
      4.3. Stand-Alone BTNS (SAB)...................................14 
         4.3.1. Symmetric SAB.......................................14 
         4.3.2. Asymmetric SAB......................................14 
      4.4. Channel-Bound BTNS (CBB).................................15 
      4.5. Summary of Uses, Vulnerabilities, and Benefits...........16 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   5. Security Considerations.......................................16 
      5.1. Threat Models and Evaluation.............................16 
      5.2. Interaction with Other Extant Security...................17 
      5.3. MITM and Masquerader Attacks.............................17 
      5.4. DoS Attacks and Resource Consumptions....................18 
      5.5. Exposure to Anonymous Access.............................19 
      5.6. ICMP Attacks.............................................19 
      5.7. Leap of Faith............................................19 
      5.8. Connection Hijacking through Rekeying....................20 
      5.9. Configuration Errors.....................................22 
   6. Related Efforts...............................................22 
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................22 
   8. Acknowledgments...............................................22 
   9. References....................................................23 
      9.1. Normative References.....................................23 
      9.2. Informative References...................................23 
   Author's Addresses...............................................25 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................25 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................26 
    
1. Introduction 

   Network security is provided by a variety of protocols at different 
   layers in the stack. At the network layer, the IPsec protocol suite 
   is used to secure IP traffic. IPsec and Internet Key Exchange 
   protocol (IKE) present an all-or-nothing alternative by providing 
   protection from a wide array of possible threats, but requiring 
   authentication [4][8][9][10].  In turn authentication requires 
   deployment of network-level authentication credentials, and this can 
   be an obstacle to IPsec usage. This document discusses the issues 
   with regard to this dependency, and introduces "Better Than Nothing 
   Security" (BTNS) as one solution. It also describes various modes of 
   BTNS, and explores the characteristics of applications that will 
   benefit from using each mode. The remainder of this section provides 
   an overview of the background and problem scenario. 

   The process of establishing secure network communications consists of 
   two functions: policy and mechanism. The policy function determines 
   "who" gets which types of security services, and the mechanism 
   function applies the selected services to the corresponding 
   communication traffic. The requirement for authentication credentials 
   stems from the need to verify the "who;" i.e., to authenticate the 
   identities of the communicating peers. 

   There are two basic approaches to authentication: using pre-deployed 
   information, or employing out-of-band communications. Out-of-band 
   authentication can be done through a trusted third party, a separate 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   channel to the peer, or the same channel but at a higher layer. It 
   requires mechanisms and interfaces to bind the authenticated 
   identities to the secure channels, and is out-of-scope for this 
   document (although it may be possible to extend the channel binding 
   mode of BTNS to work with such mechanisms). Pre-deployed information 
   includes pre-shared secrets and credentials authenticated by trusted 
   authorities. This form of authentication often requires manual 
   deployment and coordination among communicating peers. Furthermore, 
   authenticated credentials such as certificates signed by 
   certification authorities (CA) can be cumbersome and expensive to 
   obtain. 

   These factors increase the impact of IKE's requirement for successful 
   authentication based on pre-deployed information before security 
   services are offered. Consequently, users and applications often do 
   not use IPsec to protect the network layer, but rely solely on higher 
   layer security protocols or no security at all. As the problem 
   statement section will describe, higher layer security protocols may 
   not be enough to protect against some network layer spoofing attacks. 

   To improve the situation, one could either reduce the hurdles to 
   obtain and configure authentication information, or remove 
   authentication at the network layer. The latter is the core idea of 
   BTNS, which provides anonymous (unauthenticated) keying for IPsec to 
   create Security Associations (SAs) with peers who do not possess 
   valid authentication credentials. This requires extensions to the 
   IPsec architecture and possibly extensions or profiles of IKE. As the 
   new BTNS modes in IPsec relax the authentication requirement, the 
   impacts, tradeoffs, and risks must be thoroughly understood before 
   applying BTNS to any communications. More specifically, this document 
   will address the issues on whether and when network layer 
   authentication can be removed, the risks of using BTNS, and finally, 
   the impacts to the existing IPsec architecture. 

   The next section discusses the issues that IKE's strict requirements 
   for network layer authentication cause for IPsec. Section 3 provides 
   a high level overview of BTNS-IPsec, including the security services 
   offered. Section 4 explores the applicability of BTNS-IPsec, followed 
   by a discussion of the risks and other security considerations in 
   Section 5. Section 6 lists other related efforts. 

2. Problem Statement 

   This section describes the problems that motivated the development of 
   BTNS. The primary concern is that IPsec is not widely utilized 
   despite rigorous development effort and emphasis on network security 
   by users and organizations. There are also debates on which layer is 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   best for securing network communications, and how security protocols 
   at different layers should interact. The following discussion roughly 
   categorizes these issues by layers: network layer and higher layers. 

2.1. Network Layer 

   At the network layer, one of the hurdles is to satisfy the 
   authentication requirements of IPsec and IKE. This section 
   investigates the problems on network layer authentication and the 
   result of this requirement. 

2.1.1. Authentication Identities 

   Current IPsec authentication supports several types of identities in 
   the Peer Authorization Database (PAD): IPv4 addresses, IPv6 
   addresses, DNS names, Distinguished Names, RFC 822 email addresses, 
   and Key IDs [10]. All require either CA-signed certificates or pre-
   shared secrets to authenticate. These can be roughly categorized into 
   network layer identifiers and other identifiers. 

   The first three, IPv4/IPv6 addresses and DNS names are network layer 
   identifiers. The main issue with IP addresses is that they are no 
   longer stable identifiers representing the same physical systems 
   consistently due to dynamic address assignments (DHCP) and increases 
   in system mobility. DNS names are affected because the name to 
   address mapping is not always up to date as a result. 

   There are two main drawbacks with other, non-network-layer 
   identifiers. It is too restrictive because there are likely other 
   forms of identifiers not covered by the PAD specification. It could 
   also result in multiple authentications on the same identifiers at 
   different layers. In addition, the list of identifiers is not 
   complete; some higher layer protocols use additional types of 
   identifiers that are not supported by IPsec.  These issues are also 
   related to channel binding and will be further discussed later. 

2.1.2. Authentication Methods 

   As described earlier, CA-signed certificates and pre-shared secrets 
   are the only methods of authentications accepted by current IPsec and 
   IKE specifications. Pre-shared secrets require manual configuration 
   and out-of-band communications. The verification process of CA-signed 
   certificates is cumbersome and there may be a monetary cost in 
   obtaining the certificates. The combination of these factors is one 
   likely reason why IPsec is not widely used except in environments 
   with the highest security requirements. 

 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

2.1.3. Current IPsec Limits on Unauthenticated Peers 

   Pre-configuration only works if the peer identities are known in 
   advance. The lack of unauthenticated IPsec modes prevents secure 
   communications at the network layer with unauthenticated or unknown 
   peers, even when they are subsequently authenticated in a higher 
   layer protocol or application. The lack of a channel binding API 
   between IPsec and upper layer protocols further forces such 
   communications to completely bypass IPsec, leaving network layer 
   unprotected. 

2.2. Upper Layer 

   For upper layers, the following discussion first focuses on whether 
   IPsec is necessary if transport layer security is already in use. 
   This would further motivate the need to reduce the hurdle of using 
   IPsec. Another issue is regarding authentication at both IPsec and 
   higher layer protocols for the same connection. 

2.2.1. Transport Protection from Packet Spoofing 

   Consider the case of transport protocols. Increases in network 
   performance and the use of long-lived connections have resulted in 
   increased vulnerability of connection-oriented transport protocols to 
   attacks. TCP, like many other protocols, is susceptible to off-path 
   third-party attacks, such as injection of a TCP RST [20]. The network 
   lacks comprehensive ingress filtering to drop such spoofed traffic. 
   These attacks can affect BGP sessions between core Internet routers, 
   and are thus of significant concern [2]. As a result, a number of 
   proposed solutions have been developed; most of these are transport 
   layer solutions. 

   Some of these solutions augment the transport protocol by improving 
   its own security, e.g., TCP/MD5 [5]. Others modify the core TCP 
   processing rules to make it harder for off-path attackers to inject 
   meaningful packets either during the initial handshake (e.g. 
   SYNcookies) or after a connection is established (e.g., TCPsecure) 
   [17][19]. Some of these modifications are new to TCP, but have 
   already been incorporated into other transport protocols (e.g., SCTP) 
   or intermediate (so-called L3.5) protocols (e.g., HIP) [13][18]. 

   The TCP-specific modifications are, at best, temporary patches to the 
   ubiquitous vulnerability to spoofing attacks. The obvious solution to 
   spoofing is to validate the segments of a connection, either at the 
   transport layer or the network layer. The IPsec suite already 
   provides authentication of a network layer packet and its contents, 

 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   but the infrastructure required for deployment of IPsec can be 
   prohibitive. 

   Protecting systems from spoofed packets is ultimately an issue of 
   authentication, ensuring that a receiver's interpretation of the 
   source of a packet is accurate. Authentication validates the identity 
   of the source of the packet. The current IPsec suite assumes that 
   identity is validated either by a trusted third party - e.g., a 
   certification authority - or by a pre-deployed shared secret. Such an 
   identity is unique and invariant across associations (pair-wise 
   security configuration), and can be used to reject packets that are 
   not authentic. 

   There is weaker notion of identity, one which is bootstrapped from 
   the session association itself. The identity doesn't mean "Bill 
   Smith" or "owner of shared secret X2YQ", but means something more 
   like "the entity with which I have been communicating on connection 
   #23". Such identity is not invariant across associations, but because 
   it is invariant within an association it can still be used to provide 
   protection during the lifetime of that association. This is the core 
   notion of identity used by BTNS. 

   BTNS thus provides a kind of intra-association integrity, a form of 
   authentication where the identity is not authenticated across 
   separate associations or out-of-band, but does not change during the 
   association. This mode of BTNS is called Stand Alone BTNS (SAB), 
   because the protection is afforded solely by the use of BTNS 
   extensions, without authentication from higher layers in the protocol 
   stack. 

   With regard to BGP in particular, it has been understood that the use 
   of appropriate authentication is the preferred solution [2] to TCP 
   spoofing attacks. Supporting authentication, e.g., by using signed 
   certificates, at one router does not solve the problem; that router 
   is still at the mercy of all routers it peers with, as it depends on 
   them to also support authentication. The reality is that few routers 
   are configured to support authentication, and the result is the use 
   of unsecured TCP for sending BGP packets. BTNS allows an individual 
   router to relax the need for authentication, in order to enable the 
   use of protected sessions that are not authenticated. The latter is 
   "better than nothing" in cases where "nothing" is the alternative. 

2.2.2. Authentication at Multiple Layers 

   Some existing protocols used on the Internet provide authentication 
   at a layer above the transport, but rely on the IPsec suite for 
   packet-by-packet cryptographic integrity and confidentiality 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   services.  Examples of such protocols include iSCSI and the CCM mode 
   for NFSv4 security [15][16].  With the current IPsec suite, the 
   result is two authentications; one at the IPsec layer, using an 
   identity for IKE and an associated secret or key, and another by the 
   higher layer protocol using a higher layer identity and secret or 
   key. This is necessary if the identity and key formats differ between 
   IPsec and the higher layer protocol, and because there is no standard 
   interface to pass authentication credentials across these layers. 
   End-node software is then responsible for making sure that the 
   identities used for these two authentications are consistent in some 
   fashion, an authorization policy decision.  In principle a single 
   authentication should suffice, removing the need for: 

   o  the second authentication 

   o  configuration and management of the identities and secrets or keys 
      for the second authentication 

   o  determining in some fashion that the two authenticated identities 
      are consistent.  Note that there are significant potential 
      vulnerabilities if this is not done. 

   IPsec is not always present for these higher layer protocols, and 
   even when present, will not always be used.  Hence, if there is a 
   choice, the higher layer protocol authentication is preferable as it 
   will always be available for use independent of IPsec. 

   A "better than nothing" security approach to IPsec can address this 
   problem by setting up IPsec without an authentication and then 
   extending the higher layer authentication to establish that the 
   higher layer protocol session is protected by a single IPsec SA. This 
   counters man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks on BTNS IPsec session 
   establishment by terminating the higher layer session when such an 
   attack occurs. This approach is based on the fact that an MITM attack 
   on a BTNS SA will result in two different BTNS SAs, each connecting 
   the MITM to one of the higher layer endpoints. These different SAs 
   contribute different cryptographic binding material to the higher 
   layer authentication, causing that authentication to fail, which 
   should then cause the higher layer protocol session to terminate. In 
   contrast to use of IKE authentication, this approach detects the man-
   in-the-middle after the SAs have been set up, and hence does not 
   match IKE's resistance to denial of service attacks at the network 
   layer. 

   This check is referred in this document as "channel binding", thus 
   the name Channel Bound BTNS (CBB) [22]. Channel binding must be done 
   in a fashion that prevents a man-in-the-middle attack from changing 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   the SA identity when it is checked and from causing two different SAs 
   to have the same identity.  Adding the SA identifier to 
   authentication mechanisms based on one-way hashes, key exchanges, or 
   (public key) cryptographic signatures are three means by which 
   channel binding can be accomplished with resistance to man-in-the-
   middle attacks.  This requires that the SA identifier be the same at 
   both ends of the SA [22]. 

   Currently, the IPsec protocol suite does not define the notion of 
   channels for channel binding. Such channels can be constructed by 
   transport protocols layered above IP through cooperation between 
   these protocols and IPsec, to ensure that all packets for a given 
   channel are protected by similar SAs, where similar relates to, among 
   other things, the IDs of the peers.  Interfaces between applications 
   and transport protocols are also needed for communicating channel 
   binding data to applications, and for applications to construct their 
   own IPsec channels over connection-less, datagram-oriented 
   transports. 

3. BTNS-IPsec Overview and Threat Models 

   This section provides an overview of BTNS-IPsec and the security 
   services it offers. It also describes the modes of BTNS-IPsec. 

3.1. BTNS-IPsec Overview 

   This is an overview of what is needed to enable BTNS-IPsec. The 
   detailed specifications of the extensions will be addressed by the 
   relevant protocol specifications. 

   The main update to IPsec is adding extensions to security policy that 
   permit secure communications with un-authenticated peers. These 
   extensions are necessary for both IPsec and IKE. For IPsec, the 
   extension applies to the PAD, which specifies the forms of 
   authentication for each entry ID. In addition to CA-signed X.509 
   certificates and pre-shared secrets, the extension adds two more 
   categories: un-authenticated (either null or self-signed 
   certificates) and channel binding, to support BTNS and BTNS with 
   channel binding respectively. For IKE, the AUTH payload should be 
   expended to allow either null payload or self-signed certificates to 
   match the proposed PAD extensions. 

   The changes to enable channel binding between IPsec and higher layer 
   protocols or applications will be more complex than the policy 
   extensions above. It will involve specifications of APIs and 
   interactions between IPsec and higher layer protocols. This document 

 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   assumes such provisions will eventually be developed, but does not 
   address their details. 

3.2. BTNS-IPsec Security Services 

   The changes and extensions of BTNS primarily affect policy as 
   described above. Other parts of IPsec and IKE specifications are 
   unchanged. BTNS-IPsec does not establish nor does it require a 
   separate IPsec context. It is integrated with any existing IPsec 
   context in a system. The scope of BTNS-IPsec applies only to the SAs 
   matching the policies that explicitly specify or enable BTNS modes in 
   the PAD. All other non-BTNS policy entries, including entries in the 
   SPD and the PAD, and any non-BTNS SAs will not be affected by BTNS-
   IPsec in terms of security services and requirements. 

   In principle, the result of removing authentication at the network 
   layer is that BTNS-IPsec can establish secure connections in a 
   fashion similar to regular IPsec and IKE, but it cannot verify or 
   authenticate the peer identities of these secure connections. The 
   following is a list of security services offered by IPsec protocol 
   suite. The notes address only the differences when applied to BTNS-
   IPsec. 

   1. Access Control 
       
      Because BTNS-IPsec is integrated with any existing IPsec 
      contexts, the same access control mechanisms apply to BTNS-IPsec 
      entries in all relevant databases except that the entity IDs for 
      BTNS in the PAD are not authenticated. Channel bound BTNS can 
      authenticate after the secure connection is established at the 
      network layer. 

   2. Connectionless Integrity 

   3. Data Origin Authentication 

   4. Anti-Replay Protection 

   5. Confidentiality 

   6. (Limited) Traffic Flow Confidentiality 
       
      For the remaining security services offered by IPsec, items 2 
      through 6, it is possible to establish secure connections with 
      rogue peers in BTNS-IPsec because authentication is not required. 
      But once a secure connection is established, the communication is 
      afforded the same security services as regular IPsec. 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

3.3. BTNS-IPsec Modes 

   The previous sections have described two ways of using BTNS: Stand-
   alone (SAB) or with Channel Binding (CBB). It can also be used either 
   symmetrically, where both parties lack network layer authentication 
   information, or asymmetrically, where only one party lacks the 
   ability to authenticate at the network layer. There are a number of 
   cases to consider, based on the matrix of the endpoint security 
   capabilities of SAB, CBB, and conventional authentication (denoted as 
   IKE below). The following table shows all the combinations based on 
   the capabilities of the two security endpoints: 

           |  IKE  |  SAB  |                | CB-IKE |   CBB   | 
      -----+-------+-------+         -------+--------+---------+ 
           |       |       |                |        |         | 
      IKE  |  IKE  | A-SAB |         CB-IKE | CB-IKE |  A-CBB  | 
           |       |       |                |        |         | 
      -----+-------+-------+         -------+--------+---------+ 
           |       |       |                |        |         | 
      SAB  | A-SAB | S-SAB |           CBB  |  A-CBB |  S-CBB  | 
           |       |       |                |        |         | 
      -----+-------+-------+         -------+--------+---------+ 
    
        No Channel Binding               With Channel Binding 
    
   The first three modes consist of network layer authentication schemes 
   used without channel binding to higher layer authentication: 

   1. IKE: both sides possess conventional, IKE-supported authentication 

   2. Symmetric SAB (S-SAB, or just SAB): both sides lack network layer 
      authentication information 

   3. Asymmetric SAB (A-SAB): one side lacks network layer 
      authentication information, but the other possesses it 

   The following modes are the same as above at the network layer, but 
   used with channel binding to higher layer authentication credentials: 

   4. CB-IKE: this is the case where channel binding is used with 
      conventional IKE-authenticated IPsec SAs 

   5. Symmetric CBB (S-CBB, or just CBB): both sides lack network layer 
      authentication information, but channel binding is used to bind 
      the SAs with higher layer authentication credentials 


 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   6. Asymmetric CBB (A-CBB): this is asymmetric SAB (A-SAB) used with 
      channel binding; at the network layer, one side lacks network 
      layer authentication information and the other possesses IKE-
      supported authentication, and channel binding is used to bind the 
      secure channel to higher layer authentication credentials 

   There are three security mechanisms involved in BTNS with channel 
   binding: BTNS-IPsec at the network layer, higher layer 
   authentication, and the channel binding mechanisms that bind the 
   higher layer authentication credentials with the secure channel (or 
   its corresponding abstract, cryptographic representation) presented 
   by BTNS-IPsec. Both BTNS-IPsec and the higher layer authentication 
   can be either symmetric or asymmetric, when one side lacks properly 
   authenticated credentials at either layer. The channel binding 
   mechanisms, however, must be applied at both ends of the 
   communication to prevent MITM attacks. Existing channel binding 
   mechanisms and APIs for this purpose, such as defined in GSS-API 
   [12], mandate the exchange and verification of the channel binding 
   values at both ends to ensure that correct, non-spoofed channel 
   characteristics are bound to the higher layer authentication. 

4. Applicability Statement 

   BTNS is intended for services open to the public but for which 
   protected associations are desired, or for services that can be 
   authenticated at higher layers in the protocol stack. BTNS can also 
   provide some level of protection for private services when the 
   alternative is no protection at all (as in the case of BGP, for 
   instance). 

   BTNS-IPsec uses the IPsec protocol suite, therefore should not be 
   used in situations where IPsec or IKE are unsuitable. IPsec and IKE 
   incur additional computation overhead, and IKE further requires extra 
   message exchanges and round-trip times to setup security 
   associations. These are generally undesirable in environments with 
   limited computational resources and/or high communication latencies. 

   This section provides an overview of the types of applications 
   suitable for various modes of BTNS. The next two sections describe 
   the overall benefits and vulnerabilities, followed by the 
   applicability analysis for each BTNS-IPsec mode. The applicability 
   statement covers BTNS-specific modes. IKE and CB-IKE are out of scope 
   for this discussion. 




 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

4.1. Benefits 

   BTNS protects associations once established. It reduces vulnerability 
   after associations have been established to attacks from parties not 
   participating in the association. BTNS-IPsec protects network and 
   transport layers without requiring network layer authentication 
   information. It can be deployed without pre-deployment of 
   authentication material for IPsec or pre-shared information, and 
   protects all transport layer protocols using a single mechanism.  

   BTNS also helps protect systems from low-effort attacks on sessions 
   or connections involving higher levels of resources. It raises the 
   level of effort for many types of network or transport layer attacks. 
   Casual, simple packet attacks need to be augmented to full 
   associations and connection establishment for SAB, so that an 
   attacker must perform as much work as regular host. SAB thus raises 
   the effort for a DDoS attack to that of emulating a flash crowd. For 
   open services, there may be no way to distinguish such a DDoS attack 
   from a legitimate flash crowd anyway. 

   BTNS also allows individual associations to be protected without 
   requiring pre-deployed authentication credentials. We anticipate that 
   it will use the extant, ephemeral Diffie-Hellman exchange employed in 
   IKE to establish pairwise secret keys between ends of an association, 
   effectively removing the authentication responsibility from IKE. 

4.2. Vulnerabilities 

   BTNS removes network layer authentication. Hosts connecting to BTNS 
   hosts are vulnerable to communicating with a masquerader throughout 
   the association for SAB, or until higher layers provide additional 
   authentication for CBB. As a result, authentication data (e.g., 
   passwords) sent to a masquerading peer could be disclosed to an 
   attacker. This is a deliberate design tradeoff; in BTNS, network and 
   transport layer access is no longer gated by the identity presented 
   by the other host, so this opens hosts to masquerading and flash 
   crowd attacks. Conversely, BTNS secures connections to hosts that 
   cannot authenticate at the network layer, so the network and 
   transport layers are more protected. 

   Lacking network layer authentication information, other means must be 
   used to provide access control for local resources. Traffic selectors 
   of the BTNS SPD entries can be used to limit which interfaces, 
   address ranges, and port ranges can access BTNS-enabled services. 
   Rate limiting can further restrict resource usage. For SAB, these 
   protections need to be considered throughout associations, whereas 
   for CBB they need be present only until higher layer protocols 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   provide the missing authentication. CCB also relies on the 
   effectiveness of the binding of higher layer authentication to the 
   BTNS network association.  

4.3. Stand-Alone BTNS (SAB) 

   SAB is intended for applications without IKE-compatible 
   authentication credentials and without any higher layer protection. 
   It is also suitable when the identities of either party are not 
   important, or are deliberately omitted. This section discusses 
   symmetric and asymmetric SAB. 

4.3.1. Symmetric SAB 

   Symmetric SAB (S-SAB) assumes that both parties lack network layer 
   authentication information and that authentication is not available 
   from higher layer protocols. S-SAB can still protect network and 
   transport protocols, but does not provide authentication at all. It 
   is useful where large files or long connections would benefit from 
   not being interrupted by DoS attacks, but where the particular 
   endpoint identities are not important. 

   Open services, such as web servers, and peer-to-peer networks could 
   utilize S-SAB when their identities need not be authenticated, but 
   where the communication would benefit from protection. Such services 
   might provide files either not validated or validated by other means 
   (e.g., published MD5 hashes). These transmissions present a target 
   for off-path attacks, which could be mitigated by the use of S-SAB. 
   S-SAB may also be useful for protecting the transport of voice-over-
   IP (VoIP) between peers, such as direct calls between VoIP clients. 

   SAB is also useful in protecting any transport protocol when the 
   endpoints decide not to deploy authentication, for whatever reason. 
   This is the particular case for BGP TCP connections between core 
   routers, where the protection afforded by S-SAB is better than no 
   protection at all, even though BGP is not intended as an open 
   service. 

4.3.2. Asymmetric SAB 

   Asymmetric SAB (A-SAB) allows one party lacking network layer 
   authentication information to establish associations with another 
   party that possesses authentication credentials, the latter by any 
   applicable IKE authentication mechanisms. 

   Asymmetric SAB is useful for protecting transport connections for 
   open services on the Internet, e.g., commercial web servers, etc. In 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   these cases, the server is typically authenticated by a widely known 
   CA, as is done with TLS at the application layer, but the clients 
   need not be authenticated [3]. Although this may result in IPsec and 
   TLS being used on the same connection, it is necessary because TLS 
   does not protect from certain spoofing attacks as described in the 
   problem statement section (e.g., TLS cannot prevent a spoofed TCP 
   RST, as the RST is processed by TCP instead of being passed to TLS).  

   A-SAB also secures transport for streaming media as would be used to 
   view broadcast streaming such as webcasts for remote education and 
   entertainment. 

4.4. Channel-Bound BTNS (CBB) 

   CBB allows hosts without network layer authentication information to 
   cryptographically bind the BTNS-IPsec channels with authentication at 
   higher layers. It is intended for applications with higher layer 
   authentication, but could benefit from additional network layer 
   security to enhance protection. CBB decouples authentication from 
   network layer security services. With CBB, applications with IKE-
   incompatible authentication credentials can access security services 
   provided by the IPsec security suite. CBB allows IPsec to work with 
   more authentication mechanisms, and frees higher layer applications 
   and protocols from duplicating security services already available in 
   IPsec. 

   Symmetric CBB integrates channel binding with S-SAB, as does 
   asymmetric CBB with A-SAB. Their target applications have similar 
   characteristics at the network layer to their non-channel-binding 
   counterparts. The only exception is the binding of authentication 
   credentials at higher layer to the resulting IPsec channels. 

   Although the modes of CBB refer to the authentication at the network 
   layer, higher layer authentication can also be either asymmetric 
   (one-way) or symmetric (two-way). Asymmetric CBB can be used to 
   complement one-way authentication at higher layer by providing one-
   way authentication of the opposite direction at the network layer. 
   Consider an application with one-way, client-only authentication. The 
   client can utilize A-CBB where the server must present IKE-
   authenticated credentials at the network layer. This form of A-CBB 
   achieves mutual authentication albeit at separate layers. Many remote 
   file system protocols, such as iSCSI and NFS, fit into this category, 
   and can benefit from channel binding with IPsec for better network 
   layer protection and to ensure no MITM attacks. 

   Mechanisms and interfaces for channel binding with IPsec are 
   discussed in further detail in [22]. 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

4.5. Summary of Uses, Vulnerabilities, and Benefits 

   The following is a summary of the properties of each type of BTNS 
   based on the previous subsections: 

                 SAB                          CBB 
     -------------------------------------------------------------- 
     Uses     Open services                Same as SAB but plus 
              Peer-to-peer                 higher layer auth, e.g. 
              Zero-config Infrastructure   iSCSI [15], Kerberos [11] 
    
     Vuln.    Masqueraders                 Masqueraders until bound 
              Needs data rate limit        Needs data rate limit 
              Load on IPsec                Load on IPsec 
              Exposure to open access 
 
     Benefit  Protects L3 & L4             Protects L3 & L4 
              Avoids all auth. keys        Avoids L3 auth keys 
                                           Full auth. once bound 
    
    
   These issues were mostly noted in previous sections; some of the more 
   generic issues, such as the increased load on IPsec processing, are 
   addressed in the Security Considerations section of this document. 

5. Security Considerations 

   This section presents the threat models for BTNS, and discusses other 
   security issues based on the threat models for different modes of 
   BTNS. Some of the issues were mentioned previously in the document, 
   but are listed again for completeness. 

5.1. Threat Models and Evaluation 

   BTNS is intended to protect sessions from a variety of threats, 
   including on-path, man-in-the-middle attacks after key exchange, 
   other on-path attacks after key exchange, and off-path attacks. It is 
   intended to protect the contents of a session once established using 
   a "leap of faith" authentication during session establishment, but 
   does not protect session establishment itself. 

   BTNS is not intended to protect the key exchange itself, so this 
   presents an opportunity for a man-in-the-middle attack or a well-
   timed attack from other sources. Furthermore, Stand-alone BTNS is not 
   intended to protect the endpoint from nodes masquerading as 
   legitimate clients. Channel-Bound BTNS can protect from such 

 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   masquerading, though at a later point after the security association 
   is established. 

   BTNS is also not intended to protect from DoS attacks that seek to 
   overload a CPU performing authentication and other security 
   computations, nor is it intended to protect from configuration 
   mistakes. These final assumptions are the same as that of the IP 
   network protocol security suite. Finally, manual keying is not 
   considered in because it is unsafe for protocols that exchange large 
   amounts of traffic such as IP Storage (e.g., RFC-3723 forbids use of 
   manual keying with the IP Storage protocols) [1]. 

   The following sections discuss the implications of the threat models 
   in more details. 

5.2. Interaction with Other Extant Security 

   As with any aspect of network security, the use of BTNS must not 
   interfere with extant security services. Within an IPsec context, the 
   scope of BTNS must be limited to the SPD and PAD entries that 
   explicitly specify BTNS, and to the resulting SAD entries. It is 
   incumbent on system administrators to deploy BTNS only where safe, 
   preferably as a substitute to the use of "bypass" which exempts 
   specified traffic from IPsec cryptograph protection. In other words, 
   BTNS should be used only as a substitute for no security, rather than 
   as a substitute for stronger security. This is particularly relevant 
   for the use of BTNS for BGP. Full authentication is preferred for 
   BGP. When that is not available, other methods, such as IP address 
   filtering, can help reduce the vulnerability of SAB to exposure to 
   anonymous access. 

5.3. MITM and Masquerader Attacks 

   Previous sections have described how CBB can counter MITM and 
   masquerader attacks, even though BTNS does not protect key exchange 
   nor does it authenticate peer identities at the network layer. 
   Nonetheless, there are some security issues regarding CBB that must 
   be carefully evaluated before deploying BTNS. 

   For regular IPsec/IKE, a man in the middle cannot subvert IKE 
   authentication, and hence an attempt to attack it via use of two 
   separate security associations will cause an IKE authentication 
   failure. On the other hand, a man-in-the-middle attack on IPsec with 
   CBB is discovered later than if IKE authentication were used. With 
   CBB, the BTNS-IKE step will succeed because it is unauthenticated, 
   and the security association will be set up. The man in the middle 
   will not be discovered until the higher layer authentication fails. 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   There are two security concerns with this approach: possible exposure 
   of sensitive authentication information to the attackers, and 
   resource consumption before attacks are detected. 

   The exposure of information depends on the higher layer 
   authentication protocols used in applications. If the higher layer 
   authentication requires exchange of sensitive information (e.g., 
   password-derived materials) that can be attacked offline, the 
   attackers can gain such information even though they will be 
   detected. Therefore, CBB must not be used with higher layer protocols 
   that may expose sensitive information during authentication exchange. 
   For example, Kerberos V AP exchanges would leak little other than the 
   target's krb5 principal name, while Kerberos V AS exchanges using PA-
   ENC-TIMESTAMP pre-authentication would leak material that can then be 
   attacked offline. The latter should not be used with BTNS, even with 
   Channel Binding. Further, the ways in which BTNS is integrated with 
   the higher layer protocol must take into consideration 
   vulnerabilities that could be introduced in the APIs between these 
   two systems or in the information that they share. 

   The resource consumption issue is addressed in the next section on 
   DoS attacks.  

5.4. DoS Attacks and Resource Consumptions 

   BTNS deployment means that more traffic will require cryptographic 
   operations, which increase the load on those receiving protected 
   traffic and/or verifying incoming traffic. The additional computation 
   raises vulnerability to overloading, which can be the result of 
   legitimate flash crowds or from zombies utilized in DoS attacks. 
   Although this may itself present a substantial impediment to 
   deployment, it is a challenge to all cryptographically protected 
   communication systems, and BTNS does not create or amplify that 
   aspect per se. This document does not address the impact BTNS has on 
   such load. 

   The effects of the increased resource consumption are twofold. It 
   raises the level of effort for attackers such as MITM, but it also 
   consumes more resources to detect such attacks or to reject spoofed 
   traffic. At the network layer, proper limits or access controls for 
   resources should be setup for all BTNS sessions. CBB sessions can be 
   granted with better access once the higher layer authentications 
   succeed. The same principles apply to the higher layer protocols in 
   the CBB sessions. Special care must be taken to avoid undue resource 
   usage before the authentication is established in the applications. 


 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

5.5. Exposure to Anonymous Access 

   The use of SAB necessarily implies that a service is being offered 
   for open access, since network layer authentication information is 
   not available. SAB must not be used with services that are not 
   intended to be openly available. 

5.6. ICMP Attacks 

   This document does not consider ICMP attacks because the use of BTNS-
   IPsec does not change the existing guideline [9] on how ICMP traffic 
   is handled. BTNS-IPsec focuses on authentication part of establishing 
   security associations. It does not alter the IPsec traffic processing 
   model and protection boundary. As a result, the entire IPsec packet 
   processing guidelines, including ICMP processing, remain the same for 
   BTNS-IPsec. 

5.7. Leap of Faith 

   BTNS allows systems to accept and establish security associations 
   with peers without authenticating their identities. This can enable 
   functionality similar to "Leap of Faith" utilized in other security 
   protocols and applications such as SSH [23]. 

   SSH implementations may accept unknown peer credentials (host public 
   keys) without authentication, and the applications are further 
   allowed to cache these unauthenticated credentials in local databases 
   for future authentication of the same peers. Similar to BTNS, such 
   measures are allowed due to the lack of 'widely deployed key 
   infrastructure' [23] and to improve ease of use and end-user 
   acceptance. There are still subtle differences. The following table 
   compares the behaviors of SSH and BTNS regarding Leap of Faith. 

                                     |   SSH   |  BTNS   | 
      -------------------------------+---------+---------+ 
       Accept unauthenticated        |   Yes   |   Yes   | 
       Credentials                   |         |         | 
      -------------------------------+---------+---------+ 
       Options/Warnings to reject    |   Yes   |   No    | 
       unauthenticated credentials   |         |         | 
      -------------------------------+---------+---------+ 
       Cache unauthenticated         |Required | Allowed | 
       credential for future refs    |         |         | 
      -------------------------------+---------+---------+ 
    
   SSH requires proper warnings and options in the applications to 
   reject unauthenticated credentials, while BTNS will accept those 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   automatically if they match the corresponding policy entries. Once 
   SSH accepts a credential for the first time, it should be cached, and 
   can be reused automatically without further warnings.  BTNS 
   credentials can be cached for future use, but there is no security 
   advantage to doing so, as a new unauthenticated credential that is 
   allowed by the policy entries will be automatically accepted, and 
   BTNS-IPsec does not require IPsec to reuse credentials in a manner 
   similar to SSH.  When IPsec does reuse unauthenticated credentials, 
   there may be implementation advantages to caching them in BTNS-IPsec. 

   SSH-style credential caching for reuse with SAB could be addressed by 
   future extension(s) to BTNS-IPsec; such extension(s) would need to 
   provide warnings about and a mechanism for user acceptance of 
   unauthenticated credentials in order to establish a level of 
   assurance of authentication comparable to SSH's "Leap of Faith," and 
   would also need to deal with issues caused by the absence of 
   identities in BTNS-IPsec.  At best a cached BTNS-IPsec credential 
   reauthenticates the network-layer source of traffic when the 
   credential is reused - in contrast, SSH credential reuse 
   reauthenticates an identity.  Network layer re-authentication is 
   further complicated by the ability of NATs to cause multiple 
   independent network layer sources of traffic to appear to be one 
   source (potentially requiring acceptance and caching of multiple 
   BTNS-IPsec credentials), the ability of multihoming to cause one 
   network layer source of traffic to appear to be multiple sources 
   (potentially triggering unexpected warnings and requiring a user to 
   re-accept the same BTNS-IPsec credential), and interactions with both 
   mobility and address ownership changes (potentially requiring 
   controlled BTNS-IPsec credential reassignment and invalidation).  
   These issues are left to be addressed by possible future work on 
   addition of "Leap of Faith" functionality to BTNS-IPsec. 

   In contrast, for CBB, credential caching and verification are usually 
   done at the higher layer protocols or applications, as will be 
   discussed in the next section. Caching credentials for CBB at the 
   BTNS-IPsec level is not as important because the channel binding will 
   bind whatever credentials are presented (new or cached) to the higher 
   layer protocol identity. 

5.8. Connection Hijacking through Rekeying 

   Each IPsec SA has a limited lifetime (defined as a time and/or byte 
   count), and it must be rekeyed or terminated when the lifetime 
   expires. Rekeying SA provides a small window of opportunity where an 
   on-path attacker can step in and hijack the connection by spoofing 
   the victim during rekeying. This vulnerability affects both regular 
   IPsec and BTNS, although BTNS, more specifically SAB, makes it easier 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   to spoof without authentication. CBB, on the other hand, can detect 
   such attacks by detect the changes in the secure channel properties 
   as will be described later. 

   To hijack an existing SA (ESP or AH) between Alice and Bob (victim), 
   Charles (attacker) must posses credentials that match to the same 
   entry in Alice's PAD as Bob. It is possible because of wildcards in 
   PAD entry IDs, though the authentication requirements of the regular 
   IPsec do provide more of a hurdle to the attackers than BTNS-IPsec. 
   The attacker, Charles, must initiate the attack when the IKE SA 
   between Alice and Bob expires; or the existing IKE SA would protect 
   the rekeying from spoofing attacks. After the IKE SA has expired, 
   Charles can spoof Bob to create a new IKE SA and subsequent CHILD SAs 
   with Alice through the same PAD entry. It requires precise timing, 
   and the attacker must be able to block the IKE rekeying requests 
   between Alice and Bob. 

   The problem is the lack of inter-session binding or latching of IKE 
   SAs with the corresponding credentials of the two peers. Connection 
   latching [21], together with channel binding, enables such binding, 
   but requires upper layer protocols or applications to verify the 
   consistency across IKE sessions. Connection latching defines a set of 
   SA parameters, along with corresponding peer identities and 
   authentication data, as a representation of a secure channel. It 
   provides this data to the upper layer protocols that wish to "latch" 
   on to the channel. Channel binding binds this secure channel (or 
   "latch") to higher layer authentication. It is the upper layer 
   protocols or applications that determine whether to cache and verify 
   the consistency of the peer identities across sessions. If the upper 
   layer session is still active, channel binding will lock down the 
   channel and prevent the spoofing attack. If the upper layer session 
   has also expired, it will require re-authentication at the higher 
   layer. The later re-authentication and binding should prevent the 
   spoofing whether or not the BTNS-IPsec credentials are cached. 
   Without the additional session information from higher layer 
   protocols, it is very difficult for network layer protocols such as 
   IPsec to predict the lengths of connections and to distinguish 
   between legitimate changes of peers vs. spoofing. 

   In summary, connection latching defines the notion of a secure 
   channel, and channel binding enables higher layer protocol to bind 
   its authentication to this secure channel. Caching of this "latch" 
   across session is necessary to counter inter-session spoofing 
   attacks, and can be done at either the BTNS-IPsec layer or at the 
   higher layer. 


 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

5.9. Configuration Errors 

   BTNS does not address errors of configuration that could result in 
   increased vulnerability; such vulnerability is already possible using 
   "bypass". This work presumes that associations using BTNS will 
   consist of SPD entries, just as "bypass," therefore separated from 
   associations with more conventional, stronger security. 

6. Related Efforts 

   There are a number of related efforts in the IETF and elsewhere to 
   reduce the configuration effort of deploying the Internet security 
   suite. 

   PKI4IPsec is an IETF WG focused on providing an automatic 
   infrastructure for the configuration of Internet security services, 
   e.g., to assist in deploying signed certificates and CA information 
   [7]. The IETF KINK WG is focused on adapting Kerberos for IKE, 
   enabling IKE to utilize the Kerberos key distribution infrastructure 
   rather than requiring certificates signed by CAs or shared private 
   keys [6]. KINK takes advantage of an existing architecture for 
   automatic key management in Kerberos. Opportunistic Encryption (OE) 
   is a system for automatic discovery of hosts willing to do a BTNS-
   like encryption, with authentication being exchanged by leveraging 
   existing use of the DNS [14]. BTNS differs from all three in that 
   BTNS is intended to avoid the need for such infrastructure 
   altogether, rather than to automate it. 

7. IANA Considerations 

   There are no IANA issues in this document.  

   This section should be removed by the RFC-Editor prior to final 
   publication. 

8. Acknowledgments 

   This document was inspired by discussions on the IETF TCPM WG about 
   the recent spoofed RST attacks on BGP routers and various solutions, 
   as well as discussions in the nfsv4 and ips WGs about how to better 
   integrate with IPsec.  The concept of BTNS was the result of these 
   discussions as well as with USC/ISI's T. Faber, A. Falk, and B. Tung, 
   and discussions on the IETF SAAG WG and IPsec mailing list. The 
   authors would like to thank the members of those WGs and lists, as 
   well as the IETF BTNS BOFs and WG and its associated ANONsec mailing 
   list (http://www.postel.org/anonsec) for their feedback, in 

 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   particular, Steve Kent, Sam Hartman, Nicolas Williams, and Pekka 
   Savola. 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

9. References 

9.1. Normative References 

   (none) 

9.2. Informative References 

   [1]   Aboba, B., J. Tseng, J. Walker, V. Rangan, and F. Travostino, 
         "Securing Block Storage Protocols over IP," RFC-3723, April 
         2004. 

   [2]   CERT Vulnerability Note VU#415294, "The Border Gateway Protocol 
         relies on persistent TCP sessions without specifying 
         authentication requirements," 4/20/2004. 

   [3]   Dierks, T. E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security (TLS)        
         Protocol Version 1.1," RFC-4346, April 2006. 

   [4]   Harkins, D., D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)," 
         RFC-2409, Nov. 1998. 

   [5]   Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 
         Signature Option," RFC-2385, Aug. 1998. 

   [6]   IETF KINK WG web pages, 
         http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/kink-charter.html 

   [7]   IETF PKI4IPSEC WG web pages, 
         http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/pki4ipsec-charter.html 

   [8]   Kaufman, C., (ed.), "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol," 
         RFC-4306, Dec. 2005. 

   [9]   Kent, S., R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
         Protocol," RFC-2401, Nov. 1998. 

   [10]  Kent, S., K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
         Protocol," RFC-4301, Dec. 2005. 

   [11]  Neuman, C., T. Yu, K. Raeburn "The Kerberos Network 
         Authentication Service (V5)," RFC-4120, Jul. 2005. 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   [12]  Linn, J, "Generic Security Service Application Program 
         Interface Version 2, Update 1," RFC-2743, Jan. 2000. 

   [13]  Mostkowitz, R., P. Nikander, P. Jokela (ed.), T. Henderson, 
         "Host Identity Protocol," (work in progress), 
         draft-ietf-hip-base-09, Oct. 2007. 

   [14]  Richardson, M., Redelmeier, D., "Opportunistic Encryption using 
         The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)," RFC-4322, Dec. 2005. 

   [15]  Satran, J., K. Meth, C. Sapuntzakis, M. Chadalapaka, E. 
         Zeidner, "Internet Small Computer Systems Interface (iSCSI)", 
         RFC-3720, April 2004. 

   [16]  Shepler, S., B. Callaghan, D. Robinson, R. Thurlow, C., Beame, 
         M. Eisler, D. Noveck, "Network File System (NFS) version 4 
         Protocol," RFC-3530, April, 2003. 

   [17]  Steward, R., Dalal, M., "Improving TCP's Robustness to Blind 
         In-Window Attacks," (work in progress), 
         draft-ietf-tcpm-tcpsecure-08, Jul. 2007. 

   [18]  Stewart, R., et al., "Stream Control Transmission Protocol," 
         RFC-2960, Oct. 2000. 

   [19]  TCP SYN-cookies, http://cr.yp.to/syncookies.html 

   [20]  Touch, J., "Defending TCP Against Spoofing Attacks," RFC-4953, 
         Jul. 2007. 

   [21]  Williams, N., "IPsec Channels: Connection Latching," (work in 
         progress), draft-ietf-btns-connection-latching-03, Sep. 2007. 

   [22]  Williams, N., "On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure 
         Channels," (work in progress), 
         draft-williams-on-channel-binding-04, Aug. 2007. 

   [23]  Ylonen, T, Lonvick, C. (ed.), "The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol 
         Architecture," RFC-4251, Jan. 2006. 








 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Joe Touch 
   USC/ISI 
   4676 Admiralty Way 
   Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
   U.S.A. 
       
   Phone: +1 (310) 448-9151 
   Email: touch@isi.edu 
    

   David Black 
   EMC Corporation 
   176 South Street 
   Hopkinton, MA 01748 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 (508) 293-7953 
   Email: black_david@emc.com 
    

   Yu-Shun Wang 
   Microsoft 
   One Microsoft Way 
   Redmond, WA 98052 
   U.S.A. 
       
   Phone: +1 (425) 722-6980 
   Email: yu-shun.wang@microsoft.com 
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability         October 2007 
    

   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    














 
 
Touch, Wang, Black      Expires April 2, 2008                 [Page 26] 

