

Network Working Group                                       R. Craig
INTERNET-DRAFT                                         Cisco Systems
Expiration Date:  May 1997                                  Nov 1996

                 Terminology for Cell/Call Benchmarking
                     <draft-ietf-bmwg-call-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   The purpose of this draft is to add terminology specific to the cell
   and call-based switch environment to that defined by the Benchmarking
   Methodology Working Group (BMWG) of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF) in RFC1242.

   While primarily directed towards wide area switches, portions of the
   document may be useful for benchmarking other devices such as ADSU's.

1.  Introduction

   In light of the increasing use of cell-based and/or circuit-switched
   transport layers in building networks, it would be useful to develop
   a set of benchmarks with which to compare technologies,
   implementation strategies, and products.

   1.1  Terminology Brought Forward

      The terminology defined in RFC 1242 applies equally well to this
      memo.  There is also a certain amount of overlap with terms
      defined in draft-ietf-bmwg-lanswitch-00.txt.




Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


2.  Definition Format (from RFC1242)

   Term to be defined.

   Definition:
      The specific definition for the term.

   Discussion:
      A brief discussion of the term, its application and any
      restrictions on measurement procedures.

   Measurement units:
      Units used to record measurements of this term, if applicable.

3.  Term Definitions

3.1  Virtual Circuit

   This group applies to those switches that are connection-oriented.

   3.1.1  Call setup time

      Definition:  the length of time for the virtual circuit to be
      established.

      Discussion:  as measured from the initiation of the signalling to
      circuit establishment.

      Measurement units:  fractional seconds

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.1.2  Call setup rate (sustained)

      Definition:  the maximum sustained rate of successful connection
      establishment.

      Discussion:  without loss of existing calls.

      Measurement units:  calls per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.1.3  Call maintenance overhead



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      Definition:  the amount of work required to maintain the calls
      that have been established.

      Discussion:  a method to obtain the desired result would be to
      benchmark with PVC's in place, then with SVC's.  The difference in
      results would be the overhead.

      Measurement units:

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.1.4  Call teardown time

      Definition:  the length of time for the virtual circuit to be torn
      down.

      Discussion:  measured from the start of the signalling to the
      freeing of the resources associated with that call (end to end, if
      applicable).

      Measurement units:  fractional seconds

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.1.5  Call teardown rate (sustained)

      Definition:  the maximum rate at which calls can be successfully
      torn down.

      Discussion:  without loss of existing calls, and without failure
      to tear down any calls that have been signalled to be destroyed.

      Measurement units:  teardowns per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.1.6  Impact of Signalling on Forwarding

      Definition:  cells per second versus calls per second

      Discussion:  some devices use the same engine for cell forwarding
      and call maintenance.  In this case, interaction between the two



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      will be inevitable.  More interesting, however, would be the case
      where the two processing functions are clearly separate, yet still
      interact.

      Measurement units:  cells per second versus calls per second

      Issues:

      See also:

3.2  Cell/Packet Interaction

   This group applies to cell-based switches, connection-oriented or
   not.

   3.2.1  Packet disassembly/reassembly time (peak)

      Definition:  the length of time to disassemble a layer 3 packet
      into layer 2 cells, or reassemble cells into a packet.

      Discussion:  with no packet or cell loss or corruption.

      Measurement units:  the appropriate fraction of a second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.2.2  Packet disassembly/reassembly rate (sustained)

      Definition:  the maximum sustained rate at which packets can be
      disassembled/reassembled into/from cells.

      Discussion:  without loss or corruption.

      Measurement units:  packets per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.2.3  Full packet drop rate (on cell loss)

      Definition:  the rate at which cell loss triggering full packet
      drop can be detected/sustained.

      Discussion:  When a packet is disassembled into cells, typically
      many cells result.  When these cells are transmitted, they are



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      subject to loss or corruption. The device should recognize at the
      cell/packet boundary that a cell or cells belonging to a given
      packet has been lost and should drop that packet, immediately
      freeing those resources.  A couple of things are of interest here:
      whether the switch is able to detect very small amounts of cell
      loss and correctly drop the associated packets and whether large
      amounts of cell loss perturb this ability in any way.

      Measurement units:  (dropped) packets per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.2.4  End to end data integrity

      Definition:  the percentage of packets (post-reassembly) that
      actually contain undetected data link layer corruption.

      Discussion:  some network devices have been known to regenerate
      CRC's over the re-assembled packet (i.e., the CRC is not carried
      end to end), resulting in undetected data link layer corruption or
      re-ordering of cells in a packet.

      Measurement units:  percentage

      Issues:  production of a stream of traffic containing internal
      checksums sufficiently strong to detect cell re-ordering (the IP
      checksum is not).  The ISIS LSP checksum is.

      See also:

3.3  Switch Fabric

   This group applies to all switches.

   3.3.1  Switch type

      Definition:  the type of switch architecture.

      Discussion:  Is this of any importance?  We are concerned with
      interesting "metrics" and how they affect the performance of a
      device.  I'm not sure switch architecture falls into this category
      except as an perhaps interesting bit of trivia.

      Measurement units:  n/a

      Issues:



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      See also:

   3.3.2  Topology Table Size

      Definition:  number of network elements supported.

      Discussion:  switches may support a limited topology due to static
      table sizes or processing limitations.  This is true whether it's
      a "LAN" switch running spanning tree or a "WAN" switch running
      OSPF.  The effect of a limited topology table on a switch in a
      real-world environment can be disastrous.

      A similar metric (2.14 Address handling) is mentioned in "draft-
      ietf-bmwg-lanswitch-00.txt".  Here, a more general metric is
      intended.

      Measurement units:  number

      Issues:  Measuring the effects of an overflow is probably
      meaningless, since in the multi-switch case, there is no longer
      any network to speak of, hence, nothing to measure.

      If a device handles table overflow gracefully, this should be
      noted.  Similarly, if a device crashes and burns on table
      overflow, this should be noted.

      See also:

   3.3.3  Topology Table Learning Rate

      Definition:  the rate at which the topology table can be filled or
      updated.

      Discussion:  a single switch in isolation learning MAC addresses
      will flood frames when the rate exceeds its learning capability.
      This metric is covered in "2.15 Address learning speed" of
      "draft-ietf-bmwg-lanswitch-00.txt".  We generalize the metric here
      to include the topological databases of routing protocols used in
      switched networks (among the switches themselves) as well as the
      spanning tree recalculation among multiple LAN switches.

      Measurement units:  frames per second 1) with maximum diversity of
      addresses, 2) with routing instability introduced.

      Issues:

      See also:




Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


   3.3.4  "Bandwidth"

      Definition:  internal bandwidth of the switch fabric.

      Discussion:  open to some interpretation ;-).  Should probably be
      stated as some combination of the slowest and fastest elements in
      the switching path.

      Measurement units:  bits per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.3.5  Throughput (from RFC1242) (Cell forwarding rate)

      Definition:  The maximum rate at which none of the offered frames
      are dropped by the device.

      Discussion:  This metric probably overlaps work being done in the
      ATM Forum.

      Measurement units:  cells per second

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.3.6  Non-Blocking factor

      Definition:  simultaneous communication amongst multiple ports.

      Discussion:  a switch is termed "non-blocking" if multiple ports
      are able to communicate across the switch fabric at the same time.
      If a popular destination port can accept connections from more
      than one source port, the number of those connections is the non-
      blocking factor.  We are interested in the number of ports which
      can simultaneously transmit to a single port (N), the number of
      ports which can simultaneously receive from N other ports (M), and
      the total number of ports on the switch (P).

      Measurement units:  N:1, N:M:P (switch-wide measurement)

      Issues:

      See also:

3.4  Buffering



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


   This group applies to all switches.

   3.4.1  Buffering strategy

      Definition:  central pool of buffers versus distributed pools.
      Pools of one size versus multiple MTU sizes.

      Discussion:  There are tradeoffs in each approach:  bus bandwidth
      and arbitration cycles for centrality, over-configuration of
      memory for distributed pools and one-size-fits-all, greater number
      of drops due to buffer exhaustion with MTU-tailored buffers.

      The effectiveness of the given strategy is revealed by the
      performance of the device in overload conditions.  For example,
      one might cause the majority of input buffers to migrate to one
      port which is experiencing a sustained burst of traffic, and then
      cause another port to burst, creating input drops due to lack of
      buffers while the device re-allocates its buffer pool.

      Measurement units:  underruns (can't feed transmitting interface
      quickly enough, indicative of bus bw or access problem),
      input/output drops (buffer exhaustion), overruns (another
      indicator of either buffer or CPU exhaustion)

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.4.2  Buffering per output

      Definition:  the number of buffers per output port and their size.

      Discussion:  It must also be noted whether the buffers are local
      to the line card, whether they are dynamically allocated from a
      central pool, whether they are MTU-tailored, and so on.

      Measurement units:  octets

      Issues:

      See also:  3.4.1

   3.4.3  Buffering per input

      Definition:  the number of buffers per input port and their size.

      Discussion:  see 3.4.2




Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 8]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      Measurement units:  octets

      Issues:

      See also:  3.4.1

3.5  Congestion Control

   This group applies to all switches.

   3.5.1  Congestion avoidance

      Definition:  effectiveness of measures taken by the switch to
      avoid congestion.

      Discussion:  connections that are bursting above their committed
      rate may have cells buffered at the ingress, in order to avoid
      congestion in the trunks and impact on other connections, or they
      may simply be marked "discard-eligible" and forwarded into the
      network, hoping for the best.

      Distinguishing between these two approaches should be relatively
      simple.  In the first case, latency for the bursting session
      increases, but there is no cell loss.  Other sessions are
      unaffected.  In the second case, there may be cell loss across any
      of the sessions, and latency may increase across all.

      Measurement units:  dropped cells, latency

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.5.2  Congestion management

      Definition:  effectiveness of measures taken by the switch to deal
      with congestion.

      Discussion:  in the face of sustained traffic above committed rate
      on multiple sessions, a switch has little choice but to begin
      discarding cells, since buffering cannot be infinite.  This case
      might arise if one were wildly profligate in over-subscribing
      trunk bandwidth, or if one had neglected to analyze the network
      applications to be run over the network and they were found to be
      network-hostile (UDP, IPX, AT, NetBIOS, for example).

      The switch has some discretion in deciding which cells to drop.
      Presumably, the strategy should involve something resembling



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                          [Page 9]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      "fairness".

      The basic idea is that ill-behaved connections should not starve
      others for resources.

      Measurement units:  latency, cell drops

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.5.3  Queueing strategies

      Definition:  the method used for queueing frames.

      Discussion:  FIFO, WFQ, SFQ, tail drop, RED.  Queue per interface,
      per rate or per connection?

      Measurement units:

      Issues:

      See also:

3.6  Inter-switch protocols

   This group applies to all switches.

   3.6.1  Impact of Routing on Forwarding

      Definition:  interaction between routing protocol and data
      forwarding operations.

      Discussion:  No amount of routing fluctuation should have an
      impact on data forwarding for unaffected destinations.  Similarly,
      no amount of data forwarding should cause the routing to become
      unstable.

      Measurement units:  route flaps per second versus cells per
      second, cells per second versus route stability (table fluctuation
      or peer loss).

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.6.2  Impact of Congestion Control




Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                         [Page 10]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      Definition:  interaction between congestion control and data
      forwarding operations.

      Discussion:  switches may share views of congestion in-band
      through the network.  Should these feedback messages be delayed or
      lost, the potential exists for an incorrect picture of current
      network conditions, which may exacerbate congestion and lead to
      cell loss.  Worse, it is possible to enter a stable oscillation
      state, where ever-increasing waves of congestion overwhelm the
      switches.

      Measurement units:

      Issues:

      See also:

3.7  Quality of Service

   This group applies to all switches.

   3.7.1  Traffic Management

      Definition:  impact of misbehaving class on others, for example
      data forwarding on voice or video frames and vice versa.

      Discussion:  we wish to quantify the potential interaction amongst
      the various classes of service.  Constant bit rate (CBR), variable
      bit rate (VBR) (real and non-real time?), and available bit rate
      (ABR) streams are established, within their respective service
      levels, but sufficient to subscribe the trunk to 90%.  The bit
      rate of each is increased until it has exceeded its allocation by
      a degree which should cause loss or delay in the other streams.

      Measurement units:  cells (lost) per second, latency

      Issues:  some switches perform compression and silence
      suppression.  Should these features be disabled?

      See also:

   3.7.2  Mapping of IP ToS/Precedence onto QoS

      Definition:  some method is required to map IP type of service
      and/or precedence values onto the switch's notion of quality of
      service.

      Discussion:



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                         [Page 11]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


      Measurement units:

      Issues:

      See also:

3.8  Multicast

   3.8.1  Cell replication

      Definition:  the device's ability to forward a cell to multiple
      ports simultaneously (multicast).

      Discussion:

      Measurement units:  replication factor 1:N and cells per second
      measured at ingress versus cells per second measured at the
      egresses

      Issues:

      See also:

   3.8.2  Impact of multicast on unicast

      Definition:  switch's ability to insulate unicast traffic from the
      effects of multicast.

      Discussion:  a poorly-designed replication scheme could easily
      swamp unicast traffic.  Yet, multicast traffic often has QoS
      needs.  How does one reconcile the competing requirements?

      Measurement units:  cell loss, delay

      Issues:

      See also:


Security Considerations

   Security issues are not addressed in this memo.

Editor's Address

   Robert Craig
   Cisco Systems
   7025 Kit Creek Road



Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                         [Page 12]





INTERNET-DRAFT     Cell/Call Benchmarking Terminology           Nov 1996


   PO Box 14987
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
   (919) 472-2886
   rcraig@cisco.com















































Benchmarking Methodology Working Group                         [Page 13]



