draft-latzko-aaa-authentication-reqs-00.txt               A Latzko
                                                Rutgers University
             AAA Authentication Requirements and Discussion
Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in  full  conformance  with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents  of  the  Internet  Engineering
   Task  Force  (IETF),  its  areas,  and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may  also  distribute  working  documents  as  Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and  may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate  to  use  Internet-  Drafts  as  reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The  list   of   current   Internet-Drafts   can   be   accessed   at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow  Directories  can  be  accessed  at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   A common definition base for Authentication, Authorization and
   Accounting service in the internet is highly desirable if for growth
   in a common direction.  It is possible for Accounting to stand alone
   if one is willing to trust what the other person says.  Authentication
   is required if Authorization is to work.  This documents is a
   discussion and flow trace of a basic authentication flow.

   Assumptions

   One assumption which is made here is there is a single client talking
   to a single server for each transaction.  The server may be a relay to
   other servers which actually host the authentication data.

   A second assumption is state is only maintained for the length of the
   authentication transaction before being passed to the authorization
   server, which itself may be a co-process or not.

   The third assumption is authentication may be the end of the
   transaction with no further authorization, or accounting performed.

   Fourthly, no assumptions are made to the actual mechanism performing
   the transaction.



Latzko                   expires December 1999                  [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              24 June 1999


   Security

   This is essentially a security service, however, the actual transaction
   security is beyond the realm of this document and refers to well known
   security techniques documented elsewhere.

   Transaction flow


   client sends request for authentication service:

           either
           as part of the request the client send a handshake
           request using a shared secret key so there is reasonable
           trust between the client and server.

           or
           as part of the request a symmetrical key exchange
           (diffie-hellman for example) will occur so there is reasonable
           trust between the client and server.


   server responds with one of three things
           1>yes, I'll serve you and the transaction continues

           2>no,  I won't serve you, and the transaction stops

           3>maybe, I don't know you, send me something meaningful
           If maybe, then after some configured timeout, you either try
           the handshake again or stop. The timeout prevents a denial-
           of-service attack.


   The authentication server will then send to the client a request
           for token(s).(1) Along with this may be a series of key
           phrase prompts or other fixed string information needed
           by the client.

           [After the initial handshake the client then sends to the
           authentication server the token(s) to be authenticated. Done
           earlier...see above.]

           The minimum the token(s) must contain is a unique identifier
           (principle string) for the person or service being
           authenticated.   The initial token exchange may also
           contain the a pass phrase or other information derivable
           only be the client entity.




Latzko                   expires December 1999                  [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              24 June 1999


           Depending on the severity level required the response from
           the authentication server will be:

           denied ( included token incorrect )

           denied ( out of resource ( time, login slots, cpu, whatever)
           accepted ( the token contained unique identification
                      such as tautology, a biometric string, or
                      a pass phrase embedded in the initial token
                      exchange )
           accepted for further processing.  At this point if a
                   challenge/response method is being used the
                   challenge will be sent.
                   If a biometric is being used the biometric device
                   (having passed the key exchange and being trusted)
                   then the biometric will be prompted for if it
                   wasn't sent.

                   If after further processing  (which may be an
                   iterative process ) validity is determined, then
                   an accept message will then be sent.


   Random thoughts of completion.

   The security of the authentication server is only as good as the
   security of the token.  If someone steals your password, you're out of
   luck

   The back end database used in this memo is not specified since that's
   an implementation specific problem.

   All transactions between the client and server will be encrypted.

   [1] in this case, a token is defined as
           '1. a thing serving as a symbol, reminder, or distinctive mark of
           something' in the form of a string of octets.


   Authors Address
   Alex Latzko
   Rutgers University Computing Services
   110 Freylinghuysen Road
   Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8089

   Telephone: 1 732 445 5021
   Email:     latzko@noc.rutgers.edu




Latzko                   expires December 1999                  [Page 3]


