Internet Engineering Task Force                                        
INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Author
Transport Working Group                                Greg Sidebottom
Category: Informational                                Nortel Networks
February  1999
Expires: September 1999


                Functional Description of SSCOP
            < draft-side-sigtran-ips7-rtsp-00.txt > 



Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working 
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute 
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This document provides a functional description of the services provided 
by the Service Specific Connection Oriented Protocol (SSCOP) as 
described in ITU Recommendation Q.2110.  SSCOP performs connection 
control, transfer of variable length user data units, sequence 
integrity, error correction, and flow control functions to its users.  
These services are currently used to support the transport requirements 
of signalling applications which require reliable, ordered, low-latency 
transfer over large bandwidth paths.  Although SSCOP is currently 
defined to transfer information between Layer 3 entities across the 
UNI and NNI using ATM virtual channels it may be possible to apply the 
same concepts to provide transfer of information over UDP/IP.   














sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


Table of Contents

1. Introduction..............................................3
1.1  Overview................................................3
1.2  Scope...................................................3
2. Signaling Transport Requirements..........................3
2.1  Functional Requirements.................................3
2.2  Performance Requirements................................5
3. Services Provided by SSCOP................................5
3.1. Connection Establishment................................5
3.2. Connection Release......................................5
3.3. Assured Data Transfer...................................5
3.4. Unassured Data Transfer.................................6
3.5. Resynchronization.......................................6
3.6. Recovery................................................6
4. Functions of SSCOP........................................6
4.1  Transfer of User Data...................................6
4.2  Ordered Delivery........................................7
4.3  Error Correction (Retransmission).......................7
4.4  Flow Control............................................7
4.5  Keep-Alive..............................................7
4.6  Local Data Retrieval....................................8
4.7  Connection Control......................................8
5. Acknowledgements..........................................8
6. References................................................8
Author's Address.............................................8



























sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


1. Introduction

1.1 Overview

This document provides a functional description of the services provided 
by the Service Specific Connection Oriented Protocol (SSCOP) as 
described in ITU Recommendation Q.2110 [3].  SSCOP performs connection 
control, transfer of variable length user data units, sequence 
integrity, error correction, and flow control functions to its users. 
SSCOP, together with an appropriate Service Specific Coordination 
Function (SSCF) [4] [5] layer supports the communication between Layer 3 
Signalling entities such as DSS2 [6] and SS7 MTP [7] which requires 
reliable, ordered, low-latency transfer over large bandwidth paths.

Although SSCOP is currently defined to transfer information between 
Layer 3 entities using ATM virtual channels it may be possible to apply 
the same concepts to provide for the transport of information over 
UDP/IP.  

1.2 Scope

As described in the Architectural Framework for Signaling Transport [1], 
signaling transport focuses on transparent transport of message-based 
signaling protocols over IP networks.   The scope of this work includes 
definition of encapsulation methods, end-to-end protocol mechanisms and 
use of IP capabilities such as differentiated services to support the 
functional and performance requirements for signaling.

SSCOP provides a basic mechanism for reliable transport of the signaling 
payloads. SSCOP does not address other needs such as 
encapsulation/identification of the signalling protocol, security 
extensions, multiplexing, etc.


2. Signalling Transport Requirements

2.1. Functional Requirements

SSCOP addresses the following functional requirements detailed in [1]

  1) Transport of a variety of SCN protocol types, such as the 
  application and user parts of SS7 (including ISUP, SCCP, TCAP, MAP, 
  INAP, IS-41, etc.) and layer 3 of the DSS1/PSS1 protocols (i.e. Q.931 
  and QSIG).

   SSCOP potentially could provide the basic transport of a variety of 
   SCN protocol types given that, together with appropriate SSCF layers, 
   SSCOP already supports the transfer of MTP3 and DSS-2 messages 
   between signalling entities.  SSCOP is in operation today in the 
   support of SS7 High-speed links for SS7 networks.




sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 
 

  2) Provide an identifier for the particular SCN protocol being 
  transported.

   Not addressed. A layer above SSCOP would be required.

  3) Provide a common base protocol defining header formats, security 
  extensions and generic requirements for signaling transport, and 
  support extensions as necessary to add individual SCN protocols if 
  and when required.

   SSCOP addresses only the generic signalling transport requirements.

  4) In conjunction with the underlying network protocol (IP) and 
  transport protocol (TCP, UDP or other), provide the relevant 
  functionality as defined by the appropriate SCN lower layer.

   SSCF/SSCOP can today provide the complete SCN lower layer 
   functionality required by SS7 MTP3 and Q.2931.  SSCOP can support 
   flow control, in-sequence delivery of signalling messages, 
   retransmission, and information on the availability of peer entities. 
   SSCOP does not address logical identification of signalling 
   entities/physical interfaces or loadsharing over multiple signalling 
   transport sessions.  These requirements would need to be provided in 
   a layer above SSCOP.

   However, SSCOP is not today designed to operate over UDP|TCP/IP.  
   SSCOP operates over an ordered unreliable lower layer service.

  5) Support the ability to multiplex several higher layer SCN sessions 
  on one underlying signaling transport session.  This allows, for 
  example, the output of several DSS1 D-Channel sessions to be carried 
  in one signaling transport session.

   Not addressed. A layer above SSCOP would be required.

  6) Be able to transport complete messages of greater length than the 
  underlying SCN segmentation/reassembly limitations.  For example, 
  signaling transport should not be constrained by the length 
  limitations defined for SS7 lower layer protocol (e.g. 272 bytes in 
  the case of narrowband SS7) but should be capable of carrying longer 
  messages without requiring segmentation.

   Supported.

  7) Allow for a range of suitably robust security schemes to protect 
  signaling information being carried across networks. For example, 
  signaling transport shall be able to operate over proxyable sessions, 
  and be able to be transported through firewalls.

   Not addressed.



sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


  8) Provide for congestion avoidance on the Internet, by supporting 
  appropriate controls on signaling traffic generation (including 
  signaling generated in SCN) and reaction to network congestion.

   SSCOP does contain functions that could assist in congestion 
   avoidance but study would likely be required to make the congestion 
   mechanisms more IP network-friendly.


2.2 Performance requirements

The performance requirements are contained in 
draft-seth-sigtran-req-00.txt [8]


3. Services provided by SSCOP

3.1 Connection Establishment

SSCOP connection establishment is initiated by an SSCOP User request. A 
BEGIN message is sent by the initiating SSCOP to an SSCOP peer.  The 
BEGIN requests the clearing of the peer's transmitter and receiver 
buffer and initialization of the peer's transmit and receive state variables.

The SSCOP peer informs the peer SSCOP User of the connection request 
and based on the user response, responds with either a BEGIN 
ACKNOWLEDGE or BEGIN REJECT Message to accept or reject the connection 
request.

3.2 Connection Release

SSCOP connection release is initiated by a user request.  An END 
message is sent by the SSCOP initiating the release and an END 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT message is sent in response by the SSCOP peer.  The 
peer SSCOP user is informed of release.

3.3 Assured Data Transfer

The SEQUENCED DATA message is used by the SSCOP peers to transfer 
across an SSCOP connection sequentially numbered PDUs containing 
information fields provided by the SSCOP User.  

A POLL message is used to request status information about the peer 
SSCOP entity.  The POLL Message contains a Poll sequence number, and 
the sequence number of the next expected SEQUENCED DATA message.  

A SOLICITED STATUS message is used by the peer to respond to the POLL 
message. The SOLICITED STATUS message contains information regarding 
the reception status of SEQUENCED DATA messages (next expected 
SEQUENCED DATA message & a list of missing SEQUENCED DATA messages, 



sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP


identified by their sequence numbers), window credit information for 
the peer transmitter and the sequence number of the related POLL 
message to which it is responded. 

An UNSOLICITED STATUS message is used to immediately respond to the 
detection of one or more missing SEQUENCED DATA messages based on the 
examination of the sequence numbers of received messages.  The 
UNSOLICITED STATUS also contains window credit information for the peer 
transmitter and the sequence number of the next expected SEQUENCED DATA 
message.

3.4 Unassured Data Transfer

The UNNUMBERED DATA message is used to send unacknowledged unsequenced 
information between SSCOP peers.  These messages may be lost without 
notification or retransmission.  UNNUMBERED DATA message transfer is 
requested by the SSCOP User. 

3.5 Resynchronization

RESYNCHRONIZATION and RESYNCHRONIZATION ACKNOWLEDGEMENT messages are 
used by SSCOP peers to resynchronize the buffers and data transfer 
state variables.

3.6 Recovery

ERROR RECOVERY an ERROR RECOVERY ACKNOWLEGEMENT messages exchanged to 
recover from protocol error situations without releasing the connection.


4. Functions of SSCOP

4.1 Transfer of User Data

This function supports the Assured or Unassured delivery service 
requests from the SSCOP user.  For Unassured delivery, UNNUMBERED 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT messages are used.  Delivery of these messages is not 
ACKed or NACKed by the receiver and do not contain a sequence number.

For Assured delivery service, SEQUENCED DATA messages are used.  
Delivery of these messages is ACKed/NAKed within the 
POLL/SOLICITED_STATUS exchange or by UNSOLICITED STATUS messages.  
Note: the ACK/NACK mechanism is thus "out-of-band" and does not add 
overhead to the SEQUENCED DATA message exchange.

NAKed messages (identified by their sequence numbers) are retransmitted 
by a selective reject mechanism.  Retransmission requests are treated 
with priority (i.e., sent ahead of other messages waiting to be sent. 
Note that at the receiver, detection of a missing sequence number (or 
group) results in an immediate UNSOLICITED STATUS message to the 



sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


transmitter requesting retransmission.  UNSOLICITED STATUS messages are 
only sent once with respect to a particular missing sequence number.  
Thereafter, the missing sequence number will appear on a list of 
missing numbers in the SOLICITED STATUS message.

4.2 Ordered Delivery (Sequencing)

This function preserves the order of PDUs provided by the SSCOP User 
for transfer to a peer SSCOP User.  This is accomplished by the use of 
sequentially numbered SEQUENCED DATA messages between the SSCOP peers. 
SEQUENCED DATA messages received out of order are buffered until the 
missing message(s) are received, unless the message contains a sequence 
number that could not be expected given the next sequence number 
expected and the size of the window granted to the transmitter (these 
are discarded).  This mechanism will result in the deletion of 
duplicated messages.

4.3 Error Correction (Retransmission)

When a message is received with an unexpected sequence number or a 
POLL/SOLICITED STATUS exchange determines that there is a gap in the 
send sequence, an UNSOLICITED STATUS message is sent immediately, 
requesting retransmission of the missing message(s).

NAKed messages (identified by their sequence numbers) are retransmitted 
by a selective reject mechanism.  Retransmission requests are treated 
with priority (i.e., sent ahead of other messages waiting to be sent.  
Note that at the receiver, detection of a missing SEQUENCED DATA 
message (or group) results in an immediate UNSOLICITED STATUS message 
to the transmitter requesting retransmission.  UNSOLICITED STATUS 
messages are only sent once with respect to a particular missing 
SEQUENCE DATA message.  Thereafter, the missing SEQUENCE DATA message 
will appear on a list of missing messages in the SOLICITED STATUS 
message.

4.4 Flow Control

Flow Control is maintained through the use of a sliding window 
mechanism.  The POLL/SOLICITED STATUS exchange and UNSOLICITED 
STATUS messages accomplish the acknowledgement of the delivery of 
SEQUENCED DATA messages.  ACKs indicate successful delivery to the 
remote SSCOP peer and thus these messages can be deleted from the 
buffer and the window can be opened up.  The window size is granted at 
connection set-up and can be changed dynamically.

4.5 Keep Alive

The POLL/SOLICITED STATUS exchange in addition to providing 
"out-of-band" ACK/NAK capability also serves as a kind of keep-alive 
function which helps in determining the loss of a transport path.  
This mechanism assists in the case of prolonged absence of data 
transfer.

sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


4.6 Local Data Retrieval

SSCOP can provide for SSCOP-User retrieval of unsent / unacknowledged 
data PDUs in the event of the loss of the transport path.  This 
traffic could then be transferred to another transport path for 
delivery.

4.7 Connection Control

Connection establishment or release services of SSCOP are served by a 
two message exchange.  Establishment may be rejected by the peer SSCOP 
user.

The POLL/SOLICITED STATUS exchange in addition to providing 
"out-of-band" ACK/NAK capability also serves as a kind of keep-alive 
function which helps in determining the loss of a transport path.


5. Acknowledgements
 
The author would like to thank Lyndon Ong for his comments & 
suggestions


6. References

[1] L.Ong, I.Rytina, "Architectural Framework for Signaling Transport" 
    <draft-ietf-sigtran-framework-arch-00.txt>, February 1999, work in 
    progress.

[2] ITU-T Recommendation Q.2100, B-ISDN Signalling ATM Adaptation Layer 
    (SAAL) Overview Description

[3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.2110, "B-ISDN ATM Adaptation Layer - Service 
    Specific Connection Oriented Protocol (SSCOP), July, 1994

[4] ITU-T Recommendation Q.2130, "B-ISDN Signalling ATM Adaptation Layer 
    - Service Specific Coordination Function for support of signalling at 
    the user-to-network interface (SSCF at UNI).

[5] ITU-T Recommendation Q.2140, B-ISDN Signalling ATM Adaptation Layer - 
    Service Specific Coordination Function or Signalling at the Network 
    Node Interface (SSCF at NNI)

[6] ITU-T Recommendation Q.2931, B-ISDN - Digital Subscriber Signalling 
    System No. 2 (DSS2 - User network interface layer 3 specification 
    for basic call/connection control)

[7] ITU-T Recommendation Q.704 "Signalling Network Functions and 
    Messages", March 1993



sidebottom                   Informational                       [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Functional Description of SSCOP 


[8] T.Seth, A.Broscius, C.Huitema, H.Lin, "Performance Requirements for 
    Signaling in Internet Telephony", <draft-seth-sigtran-req-00.txt>, 
    November 1998, work in progress


Authors' Address

Greg Sidebottom
Nortel Networks
3685 Richmond Rd.
Nepean, Ontario
Canada   K1Y 4H7
gregside@nortelnetworks.com









sidebottom                    Informational                       [Page 9]
