
CCAMP Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                         Young Hwa Kim 
Document: draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt              byung Ho Yae 
Expires: August 2004                                     Jin Ho Hahm 
                                                          Avri Doria 
                                                                ETRI 
                                                       Jun Kyun Choi 
                                                                 ICU 
                                                      Jae Cheol Ryou 
                                                                 CNU 
                                                                                        
                                                       February 2004 
                   
                   
                   
      Requirements for the Resilience of Control Plane in GMPLS 
                   
                   
                   
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes requirements for providing the resilience 
   capability of control plane (in other words, control network) in 
   GMPLS. As known in generally, control plane consist of control 
   entities, control channels, and control nodes. This contribution, as 
   a document that proposes a framework to provide the resilience 
   capability of control plane, include terminologies, basic concepts of 
   control networks, possible configurations, necessities and 
 
 
Kim et al             Expires - August 2004                     [Page 1]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt       February 2004 
 
 
   requirements, additional considerations including the relationship 
   with other protocol such as LMP. 
    
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
    
   1. Summary for Sub-IP Area........................................2 
   2. Conventions Used in the Document...............................3 
   3. Introduction...................................................3 
   4. Control Networks...............................................5 
   5. Concepts for the Resilience of Control Networks................6 
   6. Necessities for the Resilience of Control Networks.............7 
   7. Requirements for the Resilience of Control Networks............8 
   8. Relation to LMP...............................................11 
   9. Functions for the Resilience of Control Networks..............11 
   Security Considerations..........................................14 
   References.......................................................14 
   Author's Addresses...............................................14 
    
    
1.  Summary for Sub-IP Area 
 
1.1.  Summary 
 
   See the Abstract above. 
 
 
1.2.  Related Documents 
    
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-07.txt, May 2003. 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-08.txt, March 2003.   
   draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-09.txt, August 2002. 
    
    
1.3.  Where Does it Fit in the Picture of the Sub-IP Work 
 
   This work fits in the CCAMP WG. 
 
 
1.4.  Why Is It Targeted at This WG 
 
   This draft is targeted at the CCAMP WG because this draft specifies 
   requirements for the resilience capability of control plane in GMPLS 
   and the CCAMP WG coordinates the work defining a common control plane. 
   In addition, the resultant specification from this document could may 
   be an extension to Link Management Protocol (LMP). 
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 2]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
    
1.5.  Justification of Work 
    
   The CCAMP WG should consider this document as it addresses 
   requirements for the resilience capability of control plane. Until 
   now, the work of protection and restoration has been focused to 
   handle LSPs over transport plane (in other words, data plane). Then 
   the future work of protection and restoration should be focused on 
   control plane for which the CCAMP WG play a leading role. 
    
    
2. Comments to readers 
    
   Although this contribution starts with the *oo.txt of a new name, 
   this document is based on "draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt". The 
   previous document had been focused on control channels themselves. 
   But, from this document, we∆d like to focus on the resilience 
   capability of control plane comprising of control channels, control 
   nodes, and control entities. In this view-point, we think the current 
   document could be updated in order to include more various 
   requirements about the resilience capability of control plane. 
   Compared to the previous document, the following contents have been 
   modified and added. Especially, functions for the resilience of 
   control Networks have been handled in more detail. 
    
   - Update of editing errors. 
   - Modification of the document title 
   - Expansion of the resilience concept to control plane 
   - Review and update of the overall contents 
   - Update of the section, "Priorities in Control Channels"
   - Update of the section, "Reverting and Non-reverting Modes"
   - Update of the section, "Relation to LMP"
   - Update of the section, "Functions for Resilience of Control 
   Channels"
    
3. Conventions Used in the Document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.  
    
   Terms such as ASTN, UNI, and NNI used in this document refer to 
   [G.807]. 
    
    
4.  Introduction 
    
   The term, "control plane",  may represent conceptual aspects of control 
   networks comprising those control channels, control entities, and 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                        [Page 3]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt         February 2004 
 
 
   control nodes used to transport control packets for signaling, link 
   management, and routing. As described in [LMP], a control channel is 
   a pair of mutually reachable interfaces that are used to carry 
   control packets for routing, signaling and link management between 
   nodes. The control channels are used for the transport of control 
   packets between neighboring nodes within a network, they may be also 
   used to exchange control packets between neighboring networks over 
   their control channels. Control packets transferred over control 
   channels are generated by control entities, which as functional 
   entities perform the interoperability functions such as signaling, 
   link management, or routing functions. A control node means a 
   physical node including control channels, control entities, OAM 
   functions, and so on. 
    
   Here, the survivability of control plane refers to the ability of a 
   control network to maintain an acceptable level of control services 
   during failures of control channels, control entities, and control 
   nodes. In this document, only the survivability part of control 
   channels is covered, the survivability parts of control entities and 
   control nodes are currently out of the scope of this document. 
    
   In traditional IP-based or ATM-based MPLS, there is an static 
   association between control and transport channels within a physical 
   link. Under the static association, the switchover of control 
   channels may be implicitly resolved using the well-known switchover 
   schemes such as 1+1 and 1:1 protection. In other words, where control 
   channels are not separated from the transport channels, there may be 
   no need to consider the specific resilience capability for control 
   networks.  
    
   However, as indicated in [GMPLS-ARCH], a control channel can be 
   separated from the transport channel. To allow for the control 
   channels between adjacent nodes to be separated from the associated 
   data-bearing links means that there is not a one-to-one association 
   between control and transport channels. Consequently, it means there 
   may be a need for considering the survivability of these control 
   channels. If there is no switchover mechanism allowing automatic 
   configuration of control channels between adjacent nodes, these nodes 
   have to determine  alternative control channels based on the operator 
   intervention of the management plane or the existing control channel 
   management of LMP. This may result in the degradation of the service 
   provided by a control network. 
    
   In the end, to resolve these problems in GMPLS-based control networks, 
   GMPLS nodes have to keep the resilience capability of control 
   networks. For the purpose, to be begin, we have to define a framework 
   or guideline for protecting control channels. This document describes 
   basic concepts of control networks, related terminologies, 
   requirements, and functions to be provided. Then, detailed switchover 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 4]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   mechanisms of control channels will be covered in a new separate 
   specification, or in an extension of the LMP specification if 
   possible. 
    
    
5.  Control Networks 
    
   As indicated in [G.807], a control network(signaling network as a 
   narrow meaning) supports the control plane by the act of transferring 
   service-related information between the user and the network and also 
   between network entities. Generally, the control network is based 
   upon common control signaling, thereby allowing a network operator to 
   provide the capability of developing a separate control network. 
   Channels for common control signaling are associated with data (or 
   user) channels in the following modes (the following is based on the 
   description contained in [G.807]) :    
    
   - Associated mode in which control packets between network elements 
   are transferred over control channels that directly connect the 
   network elements such as transport channels;    
    
   - Quasi-associated mode in which control packets between nodes A and 
   B follow a predetermined routing path over several control channels 
   while the traffic channels are routed directly between A and B.    
    
   - Non-associated mode in which control packets between network 
   elements A and B are routed over several control channels, while 
   traffic signals are routed directly between A and B. The control 
   channels used may vary with time and network conditions;  
    
   But, the concept of this common control signaling seems to be not yet 
   reflected on IP-based control networks. In current, the OIF defines, 
   as a primitive scheme of control network, network configurations to 
   transport control packets as follows: 
    
   - In-fiber configuration in which control packets are carried over a 
   control channel such as DCC embedded in the data-carrying optical 
   link between network elements; 
    
   - Out-of-fiber configuration in which control packets are carried 
   over a dedicated control channel or an external IP transport network 
   between adjacent nodes, which is separated from the data-bearing 
   optical links.  
    
   As a variant to the case of out-of-fiber configuration, we can 
   consider another situation that one or more control channel within a 
   fiber that includes transport channels can  handle transport channels 
   in other fibers as well as the own fiber.  
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 5]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   A similar concept of a control network using various control channels 
   is found in the SCN(signaling communication network)-related contents 
   of the automated switched transport network (ASTN) in ITU-T. As 
   indicated in [G.7712], there may be several physical implementations 
   for the SCN. For example, embedded control channels (ECC) interfaces, 
   LAN interfaces, and WAN interfaces are possible.  
    
   Here, there is an important reason for the survivability function of 
   control plane: as described in the ITU-T recommendation, common to 
   each topology is that alternative diverse paths exist between the 
   communication entities (i.e., the ASTN capable network elements). 
   That is, network elements themselves of ASTN may keep alternative 
   control channels such as ECC interfaces, LAN interfaces, and WAN 
   interfaces. 
    
    
6.  Concepts for the Resilience of Control Networks 
    
   To provide the resilience capability of control networks, several 
   switchover concepts for a higher layer could be introduced. For 
   example, these include control packet type, active and standby 
   control channels, logical and physical control channels, protection 
   groups, etc. This section defines these terminologies. They are 
   subject to be modified and other concepts can be also added in the 
   future.  
    
   - Control packet type : It indicate a type among control packets for 
   routing, signaling, and link management to be carried over control 
   channels. In more detail, OSPF, IS-IS, and BGP variants are 
   candidates of control packets for routing, CR-LDP and RSVP-TE are 
   ones of control packets for signaling, and LMP are ones of control 
   packets for link management.  
    
   - Active control channels : These are physical control channels which 
   are currently carrying the control packets. An active control channel 
   becomes a standby control channel when it can not carry the control 
   packets due to a failure.  
    
   - Standby control channels : They are physical control channels which 
   are not carrying the control packets. Once any of standby control 
   channels is used to carry the control packets, the standby control 
   channel becomes an active control channel.  
    
   - Physical control channels : They are data communication channels 
   (DCCs) bytes of SONET/SDH, optical supervision channels (OSC), 
   Ethernet links, or dedicated channels including timeslots and lambdas 
   used to carry control packets for routing, signaling, and link 
   management. The physical control channel could not be used for 
   carrying data traffic. 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 6]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
    
   - Logical control channels : They are unique control channels within  
   control networks and have control channel identifiers of global 
   significance within relevant control networks, irrelevant to types of 
   physical control channels. However, adjacent nodes that want to 
   exchange control packets over control channels should use the same 
   type of physical control channels each other. 
    
   - Protection group : It is a group of control channels with the same 
   type among various physical control channels or with the same 
   protection aspects within the same type of physical control channels. 
    
    
7.  Necessities for the Resilience of Control Networks 
    
   As indicated in [LMP], a node could keep in-fiber and out-of-fiber 
   configurations simultaneously for control networks. However, there 
   may be several advantages of out-of-fiber over in-fiber such as the 
   followings:  
    
   - When using the overhead bytes of SONET/SDH as a control channel, 
   in-fiber configuration may require more resources such as HDLC 
   controllers whereas out-of-fiber could reduce the number of these 
   controllers;    
    
   - In the case of in-fiber configuration, it looks that there no need 
   to protect control channels because switchover schemes of the lower 
   levels such as Layer 1 or 2 would support the resilience of control 
   networks with an unit of the fiber. However, out-of-fiber 
   configuration could apply various software based switchover schemes 
   to provide more quality of service(QoS) in control networks;    
    
   - In the case of in-fiber configuration, it is difficult to separate 
   control plane from transport plane, but, in the case of out-of-fiber 
   configuration, it is easy to separate control plane from transport 
   plane and to add supplementary functions as needed;  
    
   - Because in-fiber configuration supports the connection control 
   function only within a single fiber, the configuration could not 
   support the connection control function beyond a single fiber, 
   whereas out-of-fiber configuration has no restriction about the 
   number of fibers for the connection control function.  
    
   When out-of-fiber configuration is used, control channels may be 
   shared to handle several fibers. If there is no switchover scheme of 
   control channels at this situation, a failure of the active control 
   channel may cause the problem such as temporary suspension of control 
   entities although they are running well. If the recovery of failed 
   control channel would take a long time and the identification of an 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 7]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   alternative control channel would be late, the failure will result in 
   the degradation of service of control plane. In the case of RSVP-
   variant protocols, if there is no self-refresh procedure, the failure 
   of control channels may result in side effects such as unwanted 
   connection teardown. In particular, as described in [G.7712], such a 
   failure may impact restoration when ASTN is used to provide 
   restoration of existing connections. It is therefore critical for the 
   control network to have the real-time resilience capability when 
   transporting restoration messages. Consequently, to provide the 
   resilience capability of control networks, it is reasonable to use 
   out-of-fiber configuration rather than in-fiber configuration in 
   GMPLS. 
    
   In addition, for the support of concepts such as link bundling, 
   explicit transport channel identification, and non-impact between 
   failures of control and transport channels, the separation between 
   control and transport planes has been introduced in MPLS and GMPLS, 
   see [GMPLS-ARCH] and [GMPLS-SIG]. This situation means that a failure 
   on control channels does not cause a failure on transport channels. 
   However, if there is no recovery of the failed control channel and no  
   identification of other alternative control channel even beyond a 
   certain time limit, it may result in the deletion of previously 
   established connections, or invoke operator intervention to manually 
   treat the failure of control channel. It may degrade the quality of 
   service(QoS) from the view-point of connection control. As indicated 
   in [LMP], there may not be any active control channels available 
   while the data links are still in use. most of applications could not 
   be unacceptable to tear down connections at this situation. And, the 
   data links under the condition of the failed control channel may not 
   be guaranteed the same level of service as before the failure occurs. 
   In [LMP], it is said that the TE link is in a degraded state. 
   Eventually, in order to provide the stable and reliable communication 
   environment between adjacent nodes, the explicit switchover mechanism 
   of control channels should be provided. 
    
    
8.  Requirements for the Resilience of Control Networks 
    
   To introduce the resilience capability of control networks into 
   control plane, several requirements have to be identified. These 
   include configuration of control networks, priorities in control 
   channels, decision about reverting and non-reverting modes, and so on. 
    
    
8.1.  Configuration of Control Networks 
    
   To begin with, in order to simplify the approach to the problem 
   domain for the resilience capability of control networks, we assume 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 8]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   that a single control channel carries all control packets such as 
   routing, signaling, and link management.  
    
   The support of the resilience capability of control networks requires 
   either that the number of control channels between adjacent nodes has 
   to be greater than one, and there has to be at least one active 
   control channel and more than one standby control channel. The 
   important thing is that adjacent nodes that want to exchange control 
   packets should in advance know their types which a physical control 
   channel carries in timeslots, supervision channels and Ethernet links, 
   and so on, regardless of control modes such as associated, non-
   associated, or quasi-associated. In addition, each node should also 
   identify adjacent nodes to control channels using an automatic method 
   if possible. 
    
   If a control network runs several active control channels between 
   adjacent nodes, at least two control channels among them could be 
   used to carry control packets with the same sequence number. Then, a 
   receiving node of control packets would ignore a control packet that 
   arrives late with the same sequence number. In this case, the 
   configuration of control network are sufficient at least with two 
   active control channels and should support in each node the 
   processing capability of sequence numbers in routing, signaling, and 
   link management protocols or in lower functions than these protocols. 
   However, in this case, we have to take into account unnecessary 
   processing overheads because at least twice as many control packets 
   should be generated and at least half of them should be ignored.  
    
   The more appropriate configuration of a control network is to keep a 
   single active control channel and several standby control channels at 
   any time. When a failure occurs at an active control channel, a node 
   would switch the failed control channel over to the one of standby 
   control channels using provisioning rules and negotiation results 
   between nodes. Then, the standby control channel turns into an active 
   control channel instead of the previous active control channel. 
    
   The distribution of control packet types into more than one control 
   channel may be possible, but, this case requires further study. For 
   this case, the switchover function of control channels should know 
   control packet types in advance that a control channel carries. 
    
    
8.2. Priorities in Control Channels 
    
   If there are more than one protection group(PG) or several control 
   channels within a PG between adjacent nodes, we have to assign 
   priorities of protection groups(for short, PPG) and priorities of 
   control channels within a PG(for short, PCC). For the PPG, we could 
   assign control channels of the associated mode to PPG-1, control 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                       [Page 9]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   channels of the quasi-associated mode to PPG-2, and finally control 
   channels of the non-associated mode to PPG-3. Of course, a lower 
   priority number would have higher priority than a higher priority 
   number. It would not be appropriate to negotiate the PPG because 
   there is a clear distinction from the viewpoint of physical aspects 
   such as number of relay nodes between adjacent nodes. For this static 
   priority assignment, the work of each node is to decide which control 
   modes could be supported between adjacent nodes. In addition, 
   different addressing scheme could be applied to control channels 
   among PGs. 
    
   Also, in the case of PCC, dynamic priority assignment is appropriate 
   for the support of several configurations of control channels. For a 
   example, in the case of using an external IP network, a node could 
   take the IP address of a control channel to be lower than the one 
   within other node or higher than the one within another node. In 
   addition, within a PG, the same addressing scheme of control channels 
   should be applied. 
    
   In any case of PPG or PCC, control channels within the same or 
   between protection groups should be switched via automatic operation 
   and operator intervention together based on provisioning rules. In 
   the end, under automatic operation, among several control channels 
   between adjacent nodes, a control channel with higher priority is to 
   be an active control channel. However, manual operation via operator 
   intervention have to override the automatic situation. And, 
   configuration consistency of control channels between adjacent nodes 
   has to be validated before the operation of switchover function. 
    
    
8.3. Reverting and Non-reverting Modes of Control Channels 
    
   Reverting mode within a protection group may cause unnecessary 
   switchover operation. Although the priority of an control channel is 
   lower than that of another control channel recovered from failure, it 
   is appropriate to keep the current status for more simple switchover 
   operation. That is, non-reverting mode would be more effective within 
   the same protection group. However, switchover between protection 
   groups is different from that within the same protection group. It is 
   preferable to apply reverting mode than non-reverting mode for the 
   usage of better physical aspect of control channels. However, on 
   forced switchover via operator intervention, two options of 
   "switchover enabled" and "switchover disabled" are needed for the 
   purpose of operation and maintenance. Automatic switchover should be 
   prohibited on a control channel incurring the forced switchover with 
   "switchover disabled".
    
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 10]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
9. Relation to LMP 
    
   As described in [LMP], LMP runs between adjacent nodes and is used to 
   manage TE links. Among several functions of LMP, one of the core 
   functions is the control channel management. This function bears a 
   relation to the resilience capability of control networks. In current, 
   parameter negotiation and hello protocol are performed within the 
   control channel management. A control channel is identified and 
   hello-related interval times such as HelloInterval(for an example, 
   150 ms) and HelloDeadInterval(at least, HelloInterval * 3 ms) are 
   negotiated using the parameter negotiation, and failures of active 
   control channels are detected using the hello protocol. If a node 
   does not want the fast keep-alive mechanism of LMP, the node have to 
   set the HelloInterval and HelloDeadInterval to zero. 
    
   In case of in-fiber type that may not require the resilience 
   capability of control networks, a control channel could be 
   automatically configured using the multicasting scheme. However, in 
   case of out-of-fiber type that would require the resilience 
   capability of control networks, there is still no automatic 
   configuration mechanism of control channels.  
    
   Under the current LMP, on the failure detection of a active control 
   channel, a node activates additional control channels using the 
   control channel management with the parameter negotiation and the 
   hello protocol. This could mean the implicit switchover of control 
   channels, and the control channel configuration is not appropriate 
   for the time-critical switchover. Especially, we think that this 
   method is not sufficient for the restoration of existing connections 
   in the ASTN environment, and for the avoidance of a TE link from the 
   degraded state. 
    
   In relation to LMP, an approach to be considering for the resilience 
   capability of control networks is that the resilience capability 
   includes the functions such as parameter negotiation and hello 
   protocol as they are defined in LMP. 
 
 
10.  Functions for the Resilience of Control Networks 
    
   Based on requirements described in the previous section, the possible 
   functions for the resilience of control networks are as follows, are 
   subject to modification, and not limited to only these: 
 
10.1. Identification of an Active Control Channel 
 
   At the zero-base status that dose not still identify an active 
   control channel between adjacent nodes, each node should first of all 
   identify its active control channel to exchange control packets.  
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 11]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
 
 
10.2. Negotiation of Switchover Attributes 
 
   After identifying an active control channel each other between 
   adjacent nodes, the negotiation of switchover attributes such as 
   control modes to be provided, their control channels and priorities 
   within a PG should be performed. Through this negotiation process, a 
   node could find out the switchover aspects of its peer node. 
    
10.3. Verification of Standby Control Channels 
    
   After performing the negotiation of switchover attributes, as a next 
   step, adjacent nodes should verify the connectivity of their standby 
   control channels. Stand control channels with unsuccessful 
   connectivity results should be deleted in the candidate list, and 
   only the ones with successful connectivity results should be handled 
   in the list. The successful result until this process would complete 
   the prior preparation against failures of control channels connected 
   each other. 
    
    
10.4. Automatic Switchover 
    
   Important conditions for automatic switchover include that the 
   priority principle is based on the PPG and PCC combination and that 
   control channels to be switched on and off have to be set to 
   "switchover enable". Then, if a failure over an active control 
   channel is detected, the switchover is automatically performed to one 
   of standby control channels within the own PG or within other PG with 
   the lower PPG without an operator intervention. In addition, if there 
   is a recovery from the failure occurred over the previous active 
   control channel and only under the situation that the current active 
   control channel has the lower priority than the previous active 
   control channel, the automatic switchover to previous active control 
   channel would be performed. As peer entities for the automatic 
   switchover, the requesting side and the requested side all are the 
   functional entities of control plane. 
    
    
10.5. Forced Switchover 
 
   Contrary to the automatic switchover above, the forced switchover is 
   performed manually through an operator intervention for the purpose 
   of operation and maintenance. As peer entities for the forced 
   switchover, the requesting side is the functional entity of 
   management plane and the requested side is the functional entity of 
   control plane. 
 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 12]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
 
10.6. Inquiry of Switchover Attributes 
 
   There may be a situation that an operation system of a node wants to 
   know switchover attributes such as PGs and priority of control 
   channels kept in its adjacent node. On the resultant notification to 
   the operation system, it is more appropriate to include the local 
   information corresponding to the switchover attributes of remote node 
   as well. 
 
 
10.7. Notification of Protocol Errors 
 
   A functional entity for the resilience of control networks should 
   check protocol error conditions as a general rule before acting upon 
   a message after receiving the message from the peer entity. If there 
   is no a protocol error within the received message, resultant 
   operations would be performed. However, if a protocol error occurs, 
   the receiving entity should notify the sending entity of the 
   situation. the possible error cases are as follows: 
 
   - Message type error 
   - Unexpected message 
   - Mandatory information missing 
   - Unrecognized information 
 
 
10.8. Parameter Negotiation 
 
   See [LMP]. 
 
 
10.9. Hello Protocol 
 
   See [LMP]. 
 
 
10.10.   Resultant Management Functions 
    
   To support the possible functions addressed above for the resilience 
   of control networks, the following management functions could be 
   considered: 
    
   - Initiation for forced switchover 
   - Inquiry of switchover attributes 
   - Addition and deletion of control channels 
   - Treatment of provisioning rules 
   - Notification of protocol errors 
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 13]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
    
Security Considerations 
    
   Security issues are not considered in this proposal. However, It  
   looks that the security considerations mentioned in [LMP] could be  
   applied to this protocol as well. 
    
    
References 
    
    
   [G.807] ITU-T Recommendation G.807, "Requirements for Automatic  
   Switched Transport Networks (ASTN)", July 2001.  
    
   [G.7712] ITU-T Recommendation G.7712, "Architecture and Specification 
   of Data Communications Network", March 2003. 
    
   [G.8080] ITU-T Recommendation G. 8080, " Architecture for the 
   automatically switched optical network (ASON)", March 2003. 
    
   [O-UNI] OIF, OIF2000.125.7, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0  
   Signaling Specification", October 2001.  
    
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Eric Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Architecture", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-
   architecture-07.txt, May 2003.  
    
   [LMP] J. Lang, et al, "Link Management Protocol", Internet Draft, 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-10.txt, October 2003.  
    
   [GMPLS-SIG] Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling Functional 
   Description", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
   09.txt, August 2002. 
    
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Young Hwa Kim  
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: yhwkim@etri.re.kr  
    
   Byung Ho Yae 
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: bhyae@etri.re.kr  
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 14]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-00.txt        February 2004 
 
 
   Jin Ho Hahm  
   ETRI  
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 6048  
   E-mail: jhhahm.etri.re.kr  
    
   Avri Doria   
   ETRI   
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350   
   Phone: +82 42 860 1019 
   E-mail: avri@etri.re.kr 
       
   Jun Kyun Choi   
   Information and Communications University (ICU) 
   58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-732   
   Phone: +82-42-866-6122   
   Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr   
 
   Jae Cheol Ryou  
   Dept. of Computer Science, Chungnam National University (CNU)  
   220 Gung-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-764  
   Phone: +82 42 821 7443  
   E-mail: jcryou@home.cnu.ac.kr 
 
      
 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 15]

