



TLS                                                             M. Shore
Internet-Draft                                      No Mountain Software
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Barnes
Expires: December 28, 2015                                       Mozilla
                                                                S. Huque
                                                           Verisign Labs
                                                           June 26, 2015


    A DANE Record and DNSSEC Authentication Chain Extension for TLS
               draft-shore-tls-dnssec-chain-extension-00

Abstract

   This draft describes a new TLS extension for transport of a DNS
   record serialized with the DNSSEC signatures needed to authenticate
   that record.  The intent of this proposal is to allow TLS clients to
   perform DANE authentication of a TLS server certificate without
   needing to perform additional DNS record lookups.  It will typically
   not be used for general DNSSEC validation of TLS endpoint names.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 28, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  DNSSEC Authentication Chain Extension . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  DNSSEC Authentication Chain Data  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Construction of Serialized Authentication Chains  . . . . . .   5
   5.  Caching and Regeneration of the Authentication Chain  . . . .   6
   6.  Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Trust Anchor Maintenance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   10. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   11. Test Vectors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Appendix A.  Pseudocode example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Appendix B.  Test vector  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.  Introduction

   This draft describes a new TLS [RFC5246] extension for transport of a
   DNS record serialized with the DNSSEC signatures [RFC4034] needed to
   authenticate that record.  The intent of this proposal is to allow
   TLS clients to perform DANE authentication [RFC6698] of a TLS server
   certificate without performing perform additional DNS record lookups
   and incurring the associated latency penalty.  It also provides the
   ability to avoid potential problems with TLS clients being unable to
   look up DANE records because of an interfering or broken middlebox on
   the path between the endpoint and a DNS server.  And lastly, it
   allows a TLS client to validate DANE records itself without needing
   access to a validating DNS resolver to which it has a secure
   connection.  It will typically not be used for general DNSSEC




Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   validation of endpoint names, but is more appropriate for validation
   of DANE records such as TLSA, SMIMEA, etc.

   This mechanism is useful for TLS applications that need to address
   the problems described above, typically web browsers or VoIP and XMPP
   services.  It may not be relevant for many other applications.  For
   example, SMTP MTAs are usually located in data centers, may tolerate
   extra DNS lookup latency, are on servers where it is easier to
   provision a validating resolver, and are less likely to experience
   traffic interference from misconfigured middleboxes.  Hence DANE
   authentication of SMTP MTAs [DANESMTP] is not likely to gain much
   advantage from this mechanism.

   The extension described here allows a TLS client to request in the
   client hello message that the DNS validation chain be returned in the
   (extended) server hello message.  If the server is configured for
   DANE authentication, then it performs the appropriate DNS queries,
   builds the validation chain, and returns it to the client.  The
   server will usually use a previously cached authentication chain, but
   it will need to rebuild it periodically as described in Section 5.
   The client then authenticates the chain using a pre-configured trust
   anchor.

   This specification is based on Adam Langley's original proposal for
   serializing DNSSEC authentication chains [AGL] and it incorporates
   his ideas and some of his text.  It modifies his approach by using
   DNS wire formats and assumes that in implementation, the serialized
   DNSSEC object will be prepared by a DNS-specific module and the
   validation actions on serialized DNSSEC will also be carried out by a
   DNS-specific module.  An appendix (empty in the 00 version) provides
   a Python code example of interfacing with a DNS-specific module.

3.  DNSSEC Authentication Chain Extension

3.1.  Protocol

   A client MAY include an extension of type "dnssec_chain" in the
   (extended) ClientHello.  The "extension_data" field of this extension
   MUST be empty.

   Servers receiving a "dnssec_chain" extension in the client hello
   SHOULD return a serialized authentication chain in the extended
   ServerHello message, using the format described below.  If a server
   is unable to return a authentication chain, or does not wish to
   return a authentication chain, it does not include a dnssec_chain
   extension.  As with all TLS extensions, if the server does not
   support this extension it will not return any authentication chain.




Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


3.2.  DNSSEC Authentication Chain Data

   The "extension_data" field of the "dnssec_chain" extension represents
   a sequence of DNS resource record sets, which provide a chain from
   the DANE record being provided to a trust anchor chosen by the
   server.  The "extension_data" field MUST contain a DNSSEC
   Authentication Chain encoded in the following form:


             struct {
               opaque rrset<0..2^16-1>;
               opaque rrsig<0..2^16-1>;
             } RRset

             RRset AuthenticationChain<0..2^16-1>;


   Each RRset in the authentication chain encodes an RRset along with a
   signature on that RRset.  The "rrsig" field contains the RDATA for
   the RRSIG record, defined in Section 3.1 of RFC 4034 [RFC4034].  The
   "rrset" field contains the covered resource records, in the format
   defined in Section 3.1.8.1 of RFC 4034 [RFC4034]:


             signature = sign(RRSIG_RDATA | RR(1) | RR(2)... )

             RR(i) = owner | type | class | TTL | RDATA length | RDATA


   The first RRset in the chain MUST contain the DANE records being
   presented.  The subsequent RRsets MUST be an sequence of DNSKEY and
   DS RRsets, starting with a DNSKEY RRset.  Each RRset MUST
   authenticate the preceding RRset:

      For a DNSKEY RRset, one of the covered DNSKEY RRs MUST be the
      public key used to verify the previous RRset.

      For a DS RRset, the set of key hashes MUST overlap with the
      preceding set of DNSKEY records.

   In addition, a DNSKEY RRset followed by a DS RRset MUST be self-
   signed, in the sense that its RRSIG MUST verify under one of the keys
   in the DNSKEY RRSET.

   The final RRset in the authentication chain, representing the trust
   anchor, SHOULD be omitted.  In this case, the client MUST verify that
   the key tag and owner name in the final RRSIG record correspond to a
   trust anchor.



Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   For example, for an HTTPS server at www.example.com, where there are
   zone cuts at "com." and "example.com.", we might get the following
   RRsets:

             . DNSKEY
             com. DS
             com. DNSKEY
             example.com. DS
             example.com. DNSKEY
             _443._tcp.www.example.com. TLSA

   Obviously, an authentication chain will be most compact and easiest
   to verify if each RRset has a single record, i.e., if there is a
   single DNSKEY RR and a single DS RR at each step.  In addition, as
   suggested above, keeping zone cuts to a minimum also reduces the
   length of the authentication chain.

4.  Construction of Serialized Authentication Chains

   This section describes a possible procedure for the server to use to
   build the serialized DNSSEC chain.

   When the goal is to perform DANE authentication [RFC6698] of the
   server's X.509 certificate, the DNS record to be serialized is a TLSA
   record corresponding to the server's domain name.

   The domain name of the server MUST be that included in the TLS Server
   Name Indication extension [RFC6066] when present.  If the Server Name
   Indication extension is not present, or if the server does not
   recognize the provided name and wishes to proceed with the handshake
   rather than aborting the connection, the server uses the domain name
   associated with the server IP address that the TLS connection arrives
   on.

   The TLSA record to be queried is constructed by prepending the _port
   and _transport labels to the domain name as described in [RFC6698],
   where port is the port number associated with the TLS server.  The
   transport is "tcp" for TLS servers, and "udp" for DTLS servers.

   The components of the authentication chain are built by starting at
   the trust anchor DNSKEY (usually expected to be the DNS root trust
   anchor) and its corresponding RRSIG signature record, and then for
   each intervening zone cut, adding the DS record and DNSKEY RRsets and
   their RRSIGs, and finally the target TLSA record and RRSIG.  (As
   required above, however, the serialized authentication chain will
   present the RRsets in the opposite order.)





Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   If the server acts as its own full iterative DNS resolver, it can
   just build the chain as it performs normal iterative resolution of
   the target record.  If the server uses a recursive resolver, it
   employs a slightly modified lookup algorithm, starting at the trust
   anchor, prepending additional labels, and looking for NS, DS, and
   DNSKEY records, until it reaches the target name.

   In order to meet the formatting requirements above, the server must
   perform some pre-processing on the resource records it receives.  It
   must first compute the uncompressed representation of the RRs,
   removing DNS name compression [RFC1035] if present.  It then extracts
   the relevant fields from the resource records and assembles them into
   an RRset.

5.  Caching and Regeneration of the Authentication Chain

   DNS records have Time To Live (TTL) parameters, and DNSSEC signatures
   have validity periods (specifically signature expiration times).
   After the TLS server constructs the serialized authentication chain,
   it can cache and reuse it in multiple TLS connection handshakes.
   However, it should keep track of the TTLs and signature validity
   periods and requery the records and rebuild the authentication chain
   as needed.  A server implementation could carefully track these
   parameters and requery the chain correspondingly.  Alternatively, it
   could be configured to rebuild the chain at some predefined periodic
   intervals.

6.  Verification

   A TLS client making use of this specification, and which receives a
   DNSSEC authentication chain extension from a server, SHOULD use this
   information to perform DANE authentication of the server certificate.
   In order to do this, it uses the mechanism specified by the DNSSEC
   protocol [RFC4035].  This mechanism is sometimes implemented in a
   DNSSEC validation engine or library.

   If the record is correctly authenticated, the client then performs
   DANE authentication according to the DANE TLS protocol [RFC6698].

7.  Trust Anchor Maintenance

   The trust anchor may change periodically, e.g. due to a key rollover
   event by the operator of the initial zone.  Managed key rollovers
   typically use a process that can be tracked by verifiers allowing
   them to automatically update their trust anchors, as described in
   [RFC5011].  TLS clients using this specification are also expected to
   use such a mechanism to keep their trust anchors updated.  Some
   operating systems may have a system-wide service to maintain and keep



Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   up-to-date the root trust anchor.  It may be possible for the TLS
   client application to simply reference that as its trust anchor,
   periodically checking whether it has changed.

8.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of the normatively referenced RFCs (1035,
   4034, 4035, 5246, 6066, 6698) all pertain to this extension.  As
   mentioned above, there are particular security pitfalls in creating
   and using this serialization because it has very different temporal
   qualities from the usual certificate that would be validated.  So the
   requirements in Section 6 (Section 5) for not caching and for
   maintaining very good clock synchronization on the client are quite
   important for avoiding risks of replay or of use of revoked
   certificates.  Other residual risks of this specification include
   locating the validation function in the server rather than in the
   client.  This might seem reasonable on the face of it, but because
   the DNSSEC serialization is sent in the clear in the client hello, it
   could be tampered with and the certificate fingerprint or full
   certificate (depending on the mode) should not be used without
   performing the DNSSEC validation (in the DNS-specific module.

   DNSSEC signatures have validity periods defined by an inception and
   expiration time.  TLS clients need roughly accurate time in order to
   properly authenticate these signatures.  This could be achieved by
   running a time synchronization protocol like NTP [RFC5905] or SNTP
   [RFC4330], which are already widely used today.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This extension requires the registration of a new value in the TLS
   ExtensionsType registry.  The value requested from IANA is 53.  If
   the draft is adopted by the WG, the authors expect to make an early
   allocation request as specified in [RFC7120].

10.  Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Adam Langley for laying the groundwork for this
   extension.  The original idea is his but our acknowledgment in no way
   implies his endorsement.  This document also benefited from
   discussions with and review from the following people: Allison
   Mankin, Duane Wessels, Willem Toorop, Jeff Hodges, and Gowri
   Visweswaran.








Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


11.  Test Vectors

   [TO BE ADDED LATER.  THE ORIGINAL CONTENT WAS OBSOLETE.]

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC6066]  Eastlake, D., "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions:
              Extension Definitions", RFC 6066, January 2011.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012.

12.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4330]  Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP) Version 4
              for IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 4330, January 2006.

   [RFC5011]  StJohns, M., "Automated Updates of DNS Security (DNSSEC)
              Trust Anchors", STD 74, RFC 5011, September 2007.

   [RFC5905]  Mills, D., Martin, J., Burbank, J., and W. Kasch, "Network
              Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and Algorithms
              Specification", RFC 5905, June 2010.

   [RFC7120]  Cotton, M., "Early IANA Allocation of Standards Track Code
              Points", BCP 100, RFC 7120, January 2014.





Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


   [AGL]      Langley, A., "Serializing DNS Records with DNSSEC
              Authentication", <https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-agl-
              dane-serializechain-01.txt>.

   [DANESMTP]
              Dukhovni, V. and W. Hardaker, "SMTP Security via
              opportunistic DANE TLS", <https://tools.ietf.org/html/
              draft-ietf-dane-smtp-with-dane-19>.











































Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         TLS DNSSEC Chain Extension              June 2015


Appendix A.  Pseudocode example

   [code goes here]

Appendix B.  Test vector

   [data go here]

Authors' Addresses

   Melinda Shore
   No Mountain Software

   EMail: melinda.shore@nomountain.net


   Richard Barnes
   Mozilla

   EMail: rlb@ipv.sx


   Shumon Huque
   Verisign Labs

   EMail: shuque@verisign.com

























Shore, et al.           Expires December 28, 2015              [Page 10]
