


Network Working Group                                    Pierre Francois
Internet-Draft                                            Camilo Cardona
Expires: August 11, 2014                        Institute IMDEA Networks
                                                            Adam Simpson
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                            Jeffrey Haas
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                        February 7, 2014


                       ADD-PATH for Route Servers
                   draft-francois-idr-rs-addpaths-00

Abstract

   BGP speakers in Internet Exchange Points exchange routes with a large
   number of peers.  To reduce the burden of maintaining many sessions,
   IXPs implement and administrate BGP route servers.  Route servers
   announce to their clients the paths of multiple peers by using a
   single eBGP session.  Route servers, however, are restricted to
   propagating a single path per NLRI per eBGP session.  This constraint
   affects the path diversity received by clients, which could use paths
   that they would not have chosen, had they known all possible paths.
   To overcome this limitation, we propose in this draft the extension
   of ADD-PATH to eBGP peers in the context of route servers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 11, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         ADD-PATH for Route Servers          February 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Operation of eBGP ADD-PATH capability for IXP route Server  . . 4
     3.1.  Operation of eBGP ADD-PATH in route servers with the
           limited paths capability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Error conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6




























Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         ADD-PATH for Route Servers          February 2014


1.  Introduction

   IXP route servers were designed to help network operators reduce the
   difficulties associated with maintaining a large number of sessions
   [IXPRouteServer].  Every route server client can receive paths from
   multiple ASes using the same eBGP session with the route server.  In
   some cases, usually when there are many members in the IXP, multiple
   clients might announce a path to the same NLRI.  Path diversity is an
   advantage for IXPs, as members can choose the path that better suits
   their policy.  However, as a normal eBGP speaker, route servers can
   only advertize a single path to its clients.  This limitation causes
   the route server to potentially hide paths that would be useful for
   their clients.

   ADD-PATH [AddPath] is a capability that allows BGP speakers to
   announce more than one path to their peers.  Works related to ADD-
   PATH have focused on applications for iBGP deployments.  We propose
   the use of ADD-PATH over eBGP sessions to overcome the problems
   associated to the limit in the number of paths that route servers can
   announce.  In this document, we define the operation and error
   conditions of ADD-PATH for these scenarios and describe additional
   benefits for the route servers that implement it.


2.  Motivation

   By collecting paths from all their clients, route servers potentially
   accumulate various paths for some destination prefix.  Multiple of
   these paths may be compliant with the policy of some client of the
   route server.  However, route servers typically maintain a single
   session with their clients, and hence advertise at most a single path
   towards each of them.  As a result, a route server client will
   typically know only one of these paths.

   We believe that this aspect of route serving is an unfortunate
   limitation, as it artificially hides paths from clients that may have
   wanted to use them.

   First, it prevents the member from performing a policy based decision
   that is finer than the one advertised to the route server platform.
   That is, the arbitrary best path picked among the policy-compliant
   ones by the route server may be actually different from the one that
   the client would have picked, had it known about all of them.

   Second, it prevents the member from doing temporary preference
   tweaking among the set of available paths in order to perform traffic
   engineering.  That is, a member may only receive a path for a
   destination through a peer that is saturated, while alternate paths



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         ADD-PATH for Route Servers          February 2014


   through non saturated nexthops are available and would have been used
   if the router (and the operator) were aware of their existence.

   ADD-PATH was designed to advertise more than one path towards a given
   NLRI.  Multiple paths installed in the forwarding planes, as well as
   alternate paths, can be advertised among speakers supporting ADD-
   PATH.  ADD-PATH can be used by a route server to announce all paths
   available for the same NLRI that still fulfill the policy of the
   route server client.


3.  Operation of eBGP ADD-PATH capability for IXP route Server

   A route server that supports the advertisement of multiple paths
   toward the same NLRI SHOULD announce the ADD-PATH capability to its
   clients.  Likewise, a client supporting the reception of multiple
   paths SHOULD announce the ADD-PATH capability to the route server.

   In an IXP context, only the route server should propagate multiple
   paths to the route server clients.  The advertisement of multiple
   paths in the other direction is currently out of the specification of
   this document.  Therefore, a route Server client should set the Send/
   Receive field for the Add-Path capability with a value of 1.  The
   route Server should set the same field in the capability with a 2.

   A route server supporting ADD-PATH can announce to its clients all
   paths that comply with their policy.  This operational mode is
   similar to the ADD-PATH ALL mode described in [AddPathGuidelines].

   A route server could also support other type of ADD-PATH modes that
   restrict the paths announced to the client.  In an Add-N mode, for
   instance, the route server would announce at most N paths to their
   clients.

3.1.  Operation of eBGP ADD-PATH in route servers with the limited paths
      capability

   The limited paths capability provides ADD-PATH speakers with a method
   to communicate the maximum number of paths towards the same NLRI that
   BGP speakers are willing to receive.  The use of this capability in
   IXP environments is recommended, as it provides the clients with the
   ability to control the resources used in their devices by limiting
   the total amount of paths received from the route Server.


4.  Error conditions

   In the specific context of route servers, third party nexthops are



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         ADD-PATH for Route Servers          February 2014


   being used so as to have the client actually be able to select the
   appropriate nexthop.  This is achieved by letting the route server
   leave the nexthop field of the propagated paths unchanged.

   Similarly, the propagation of multiple paths by the route server to
   one of its clients must be made in a way that allows the receiver to
   actually select one among those paths.  As a result, a route server
   advertising two different paths for the same destination, with equal
   nexthops, is out of specification.  If this situation occurs, the
   client SHOULD log the event and let the normal decision process
   decide the best path.

   A typical route server client will have only one usable path towards
   a given destination announced to the other clients of the route
   server.  As a result, a route server client advertising more than one
   path towards a given destination, to its route server, is out of
   specification.  If this situation occurs, the client SHOULD log the
   event and let the normal decision process decide the best path.


5.  IANA considerations

   None


6.  Security Considerations

   The use of eBGP ADD-PATH in the route server environment does not
   increase the number of destinations for which paths are being
   advertised.  However, the potential number of paths per destination
   is now larger than one, potentially increasing the memory load of the
   Adj-Rib-In.  Systems risking to be short on memory due to this
   increase should be configured to constrain the amount of paths being
   advertised to them by a value which ensures proper operations.


7.  References

   [AddPath]  D. Walton, E. Chen, A. Retana, and J. Scudder,
              "Advertisement of Multiple Paths in BGP",
              draft-ietf-idr-add-paths-06.txt (work in progress).

   [AddPathGuidelines]
              J. Uttaro, P. Francois, R. Fragassi, A. Simpson, and K.
              Patel, "Best Practices for Advertisement of Multiple Paths
              in IBGP", draft-ietf-idr-add-paths-guidelines-05.txt (work
              in progress).




Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         ADD-PATH for Route Servers          February 2014


   [IXPRouteServer]
              E. Jasinska, N. Hilliard, R. Raszuk, and N. Bakker, "Best
              Practices for Advertisement of Multiple Paths in IBGP",
              draft-ietf-idr-ix-bgp-route-server-03 (work in progress).


Authors' Addresses

   Pierre Francois
   Institute IMDEA Networks
   Avda. del Mar Mediterraneo, 22
   Leganes  28918
   ES

   Email: pierre.francois@imdea.org


   Camilo Cardona
   Institute IMDEA Networks
   Avda. del Mar Mediterraneo, 22
   Leganes  28918
   ES

   Email: juancamilo.cardona@imdea.org


   Adam Simpson
   Alcatel-Lucent
   600 March Road
   Ontario  K2K 2E6
   CA

   Email: adam.simpson@alcatel-lucent.com


   Jeffrey Haas
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale  94089
   USA

   Email: jhaas@juniper.net









Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires August 11, 2014                [Page 6]

