


Internet Engineering Task Force                                A. Durand
Internet-Draft                                                   Comcast
Intended status: Informational                              July 7, 2008
Expires: January 8, 2009


       Dual-stack lite broadband deployments post IPv4 exhaustion
                    draft-durand-dual-stack-lite-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009.

Abstract

   The common thinking for the last 10+ years has been that the
   transition to IPv6 will be based on the dual stack model and that
   most things would be converted this way before we ran out of IPv4.

   It has not happened.  The IANA free pool of IPv4 addresses will be
   depleted soon, way before any significant IPv6 deployment will have
   occurred.

   This document revisits the dual-stack model and introduces the dual-
   stack lite technology aimed at better aligning the cost and the
   benefits of deploying IPv6.  It will provide the necessary bridge
   between the two protocols, offering an evolution path of the Internet



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   post IANA IPv4 depletion.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  IPv4 exhaustion coming sooner than expected  . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Handling the legacy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Legacy edges of the Internet for broadband customers . . .  4
     2.2.  Content and Services available on the Internet . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Additional impact on new broadband deployment  . . . . . .  4
     2.4.  Burden on service providers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.5.  The dual-stack lite model: IPv4 address sharing on top
           of IPv6-only provisioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.6.  Domain of application  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Expectations for dual-stack lite deployment  . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Expectations for home gateway based scenarios  . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Expectations for devices directly connected to the
           broadband service provider network . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Application expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Service provider network expectations  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Dual-stack lite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Dual-stack lite interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Dual-stack lite device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Dual-stack lite home router  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  Discovery of the dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT
           device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.5.  Dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.6.  Carrier-grade NAT considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Multicast considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Comparison with an architecture with multiple-layers of NAT  .  8
   7.  Comparison with NAT-PT (or its potential replacements) . . . .  9
   8.  Comparison with DSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     12.1. Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     12.2. Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13








Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


1.  Introduction

   This memo will present views on deployments post IPv4 exhaustion and
   some of the necessary technologies to achieve it.  The views
   expressed are the author personal opinions and in no way imply that
   Comcast is going to deploy the technologies described here.

1.1.  Requirements language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.2.  Terminology

   This document makes a distinction between a dual-stack capable and a
   dual-stack provisioned device.  The former is a device that has code
   that implements both IPv4 and IPv6, from the network layer to the
   applications.  The later is a similar device that has been
   provisioned with both an IPv4 and an IPv6 address on its
   interface(s).  This document will also further refine this notion by
   distinguishing between interfaces provisioned directly by the service
   provider from those provisioned by the customer.

1.3.  IPv4 exhaustion coming sooner than expected

   Global public IPv4 addresses coming from the IANA free pool are
   running out faster than many predicted a few years ago.  The current
   model shows that exhaustion could happen as early as 2010 or 2011.
   See http://ipv4.potaroo.net for more details.  Those projection are
   based on the assumption that tomorrow is going to be very similar to
   today, ie looking at recent address consumption figures is a good
   indicator of future consumption patterns.  This of course, does not
   take into account any new large scale deployment of IP technology or
   any human reaction when facing an upcoming shortage.

   The prediction of the exact date of exhaustion of the IANA free pool
   is outside the scope of this document, however one conclusion must be
   drawn from that study: there will be in the near future a point where
   new global public IPv4 addresses will not be available in large
   enough quantity thus any new broadband deployment may have to
   consider the option of not provisioning any (global) IPv4 addresses
   to the WAN facing interface of edge devices.  However, the classic
   IPv6 deployment model known as "dual stack provisioning" can be a non
   starter in such environments.






Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


2.  Handling the legacy

2.1.  Legacy edges of the Internet for broadband customers

   Broadband home customers have a mix and match of IP enable devices.
   The most recent operating systems (eg Windows Vista or MacOS-X) can
   operate in an IPv6-only environment, however most of the legacy one
   can't.  It has been reported, for example, that windows XP cannot
   process DNS requests over IPv6 transport.  Expecting broadband
   customers to massively upgrade their software (and in most cases the
   corresponding hardware) to deploy IPv6 is a very tall order.

2.2.  Content and Services available on the Internet

   IPv6 deployment has been very long to take off, so the current
   situation is that almost none of the contents and services available
   on the Internet are accessible over IPv6.  This will probably change
   in the future, but for now, one has to make the assumption that most
   of the traffic generated by (and to) broadband customers will be sent
   to (and originated by) IPv4 nodes.

2.3.  Additional impact on new broadband deployment

   Even when considering new, green field, broadband deployments, such
   as always-on 4G, service providers have to face the same situation as
   described above, that is, contents and services available on the
   Internet are, today, generally accessible only over IPv4 and not
   IPv6.  This makes adoption of IPv6 for green field deployment
   difficult.  Solutions like NAT-PT, now deprecated, do not provide, as
   of today, a satisfying and scalable answer.

2.4.  Burden on service providers

   As a conclusion, broadband service providers may be faced with the
   situation where they have IPv4 customers willing to communicate with
   IPv4 servers on the Internet but may not have any IPv4 addresses left
   to assign to them...  However, without some form of backward
   compatibility with IPv4, the cost and the benefits of deploying IPv6
   are not a aligned, making incremental IPv6 deployment very difficult.

2.5.  The dual-stack lite model: IPv4 address sharing on top of IPv6-
      only provisioning

   The core idea behind dual-stack lite is to move from a deployment
   model where a globally unique IPv4 address is provisoned per customer
   and shared among several devices within that customer premise to a
   deployment model where that globally unique IPv4 address is shared
   among many customers.  Instead of relying on a cascade of NATs, the



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   dual-stack lite model is build on IPv4 over IPv6 tunnels to cross the
   network to reach a carrier-grade IPv4-IPv4 NAT.  As such, it simplify
   the management of the service provider network and provide the
   customer the benefit of having only one layer of NAT.  The additional
   benefit of this model is to gradually introduce IPv6 in the Internet
   by making it virtually backward compatible with IPv4.

2.6.  Domain of application

   The dual-stack lite deployment model has been designed with broadband
   networks in mind.  It is certainly applicable to other domains
   although the author does not make any specific claim of suitability.


3.  Expectations for dual-stack lite deployment

3.1.  Expectations for home gateway based scenarios

   This section mainly address home style networks characterized by the
   presence of a home gateway.

   Legacy, unmodified, IPv4-only devices inside the home network are
   expected to keep using RFC1918 address space, a-la 192.168.0.0/16 and
   should be able to access the IPv4 Internet in a similar way they do
   it today through a home gateway IPv4 NAT.

   Unmodified IPv6 capable devices are expected to be able to reach
   directly the IPv6 Internet, without going through any translation.
   It is expected that most IPv6 capable devices will also be IPv4
   capable and will simply be configured with an IPv4 RFC1918 style
   address within the home network and access the IPv4 Internet the same
   way as the legacy IPv4-only devices within the home.

   IPv6-only devices that do not include code for an IPv4 stack are
   outside of the scope of this document.

   It is expected that the home gateway is either software upgradable,
   replaceable or provided by the service provider as part of a new
   contract.  Outside of early IPv6 deployments done prior to IPv4
   exhaustion using some form of tunnel, this is pretty much a
   requirement to deploy any IPv6 service to the home.  It is expected
   that this home gateway will be a dual stack capable device that would
   only be provisioned with IPv6 on its WAN side.  IPv4 and IPv6 are
   expected to be locally provisonned on any LAN interfaces of such
   devices.  IPv4 addresses on such interfaces are expected to be
   RFC1918.  The key point here is that the service provider will not
   provision any IPv4 addresses for those home gateway devices.




Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


3.2.  Expectations for devices directly connected to the broadband
      service provider network

   Under this deployment model, devices directly connected to the
   broadband service provider network without the presence of a home
   gateway will have to be dual stack capable devices.  The service
   provider facing interface(s) of such device will only be provisioned
   with IPv6.  IPv4 may or may not be provisioned locally on other
   interfaces of such devices.  Similarly to the above section, the key
   point here is that the service provider will not provision any IPv4
   addresses for those directly connected devices.

   It is expected that directly connected devices will implement code to
   support the dual-stack lite functionality.  The minimum support
   required is an IPv4 over IPv6 tunnel.

   IPv4-only devices and IPv6-only devices are specifically left out of
   scope for this document.  It is expected that most modern device
   directly connected to the service provider network would not have
   memory constraints to implement both stack.

3.3.  Application expectations

   Most applications that today work transparently through an IPv4 home
   gateway NAT should keep working the same way.  However, it is not
   expected that applications that requires specific port assignment or
   port mapping from the NAT box will keep working.  Details and
   recommendations for application behavior are outside the scope of
   this document and should be discussed in the behave working group.

3.4.  Service provider network expectations

   The dual-stack lite deployment model is based on the notion that IPv4
   addresses will be shared by several customers.  This implies that the
   NAT functionality will move from the home gateway to a device hosted
   within the service provider network.  It is important to observe that
   this functionality does not have to be performed deep in the core of
   the network and that it might be better implemented close to the
   aggregation point of customer traffic.


4.  Dual-stack lite

4.1.  Dual-stack lite interface

   A dual-stack lite interface on a dual-stack capable device is modeled
   as a point to point IPv4 over IPv6 tunnel.  Its configuration
   requires that the device is provisioned with IPv6 but does not



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   require it to be provisioned with a global IPv4 by the service
   provider.

   Any locally unique IPv4 address can be configure on the local side of
   the dual-stack lite tunnel.  It is recommended that dual-stack lite
   implementations use simply 0.0.0.1.

   Note: A future version of this draft may request IANA to reserve an
   IPv4 address for this usage.

   The tunnel end point of a dual-stack lite interface is the IPv6
   address of a dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT within the service
   provider network.

   A dual-stack lite interface is not required to maintain any state
   beside the IPv6 address of the remote tunnel end point and the local
   IPv4 address assigned to the local tunnel end point.

4.2.  Dual-stack lite device

   A dual-stack lite device is a dual-stack capable device implementing
   a dual-stack lite interface.  In the absence of better routing
   information, a dual-stack lite device will configure a static IPv4
   default route over the dual-stack lite interface.

4.3.  Dual-stack lite home router

   A dual-stack lite home router is a dual-stack capable home router
   implementing a dual-stack lite interface layered on top of its WAN
   interface.  In the absence of better routing information, a dual-
   stack lite home router will configure a static IPv4 default route
   over the dual-stack lite interface.

   Note: a dual-stack lite home router SHOULD NOT perform any IPv4
   address translation.  It should simply act as a router and pass
   packets from the LAN to the dual-stack lite interface and back
   without changing any address.  The dual-stack lite router will have
   to take into account the lowered MTU of the tunnel and possibly
   perform IPv4 fragmentation.

4.4.  Discovery of the dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT device

   The IPv6 address of a dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT device can be
   configured on a dual-stack lite interface using a variety of way,
   ranging from out-of-band mechanism, manual configuration, a to-be-
   defined DHCPv6 option or a to-be-defined IPv6 router advertisement.
   It is expected that over time all the above methods and maybe more
   will be defined.  The requirements and specifications of such methods



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   are out of scope for this document.

4.5.  Dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT

   A dual-stack lite carrier grade NAT is a special IPv4 to IPv4 NAT
   deployed within the service provider network.  It is reachable by
   customers via a series of point to point IPv4 over IPv6 tunnels.

   A dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT uses a combination of the IPv6
   source address of the tunnel and the inner IPv4 source address to
   establish and maintain the IPv4 NAT mapping table.

   A dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT does not have to perform any
   IPv6-IPv6, IPv6-IPv4 or IPv4-IPv6 NAT.

   A dual-stack lite carrier-grade NAT should implement a full-cone NAT
   with hair-pinning (symmetric NAT may break applications using several
   simultaneous connections).  It will have to implement the ALGs to
   support the classic applications.  However, manual port forwarding or
   UPnP may or may not be supported.

4.6.  Carrier-grade NAT considerations

   Because IPv4 addresses will be share among customers and potentially
   a large address space reduction factor may be applied, in average,
   only a limited number of TCP or UDP port numbers will be available
   per customer.  This means that applications opening a very large
   number of TCP ports may have a harder time to work.  For example, it
   has been reported that a very well know web site was using AJAX
   techniques and was opening up to 69 TCP ports per web page...  If we
   make the hypothesis of an address space reduction of a factor 100
   (one IPv4 address per 100 customers), and 65k ports per IPv4
   addresses available, that makes a total of 650 ports available
   simultaneously to be shared among the various devices behind the
   dual-stack lite tunnel end-point.


5.  Multicast considerations

   This document only describes unicast IPv4 as IPv4 Multicast is not
   widely deployed in broadband networks.  Some multicast IPv4
   considerations might to be discussed as well in a future revision of
   this document.


6.  Comparison with an architecture with multiple-layers of NAT

   An alternative architecture could consist on layering multiple levels



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   of IPv4-IPv4 NAT toward the edges of the service provider network.
   Such architecture has a key advantage: it would work with any
   existing IPv4 home gateway.  However, it would have a number of
   drawbacks:

   o  Each NAT device in the path will have its own application level
      gateways, increasing the odds of failure or miss-configuration.

   o  The larger private IPv4 address space available today is Net
      10.0.0.0/8.  It can in theory accommodate for about 16 million
      addresses, in practice, with an 80% allocation efficiency, it can
      address about 13 million devices.  This may not be enough for
      existing and future large scale deployments, thus multiple
      overlapping copies of Net 10 might have to be used simultaneously.
      This in itself create more complexity:

      *  If multiple copies of Net 10 are in use, network
         troubleshooting gets more difficult.  One first need to figure
         out in which Net 10 realm the customer is before sending a ping
         to a home gateway to test it.  This means that provisioning
         systems need to be modified to include this information.

      *  Multiple overlapping copies of Net 10 often intersect in some
         places with routers and firewalls.  The configuration of such
         devices need to carefully take into accounts the overlapping
         address space.  Debugging problems created by miss-
         configuration can be time consuming.

   o  Both legacy customers with global IPv4 addresses and new customers
      with private IPv4 addresses may be connected to the same
      aggregation router.  That router will have to make the decision to
      send packets directly to the Internet or via a translator based on
      the source address of those packets, which is known as source-
      based routing.  Although not impossible to implement, this adds
      complexity to the management of the network.

   None of the issues described above are show stoppers, but put
   together, they seriously increase the complexity of the management of
   the network.


7.  Comparison with NAT-PT (or its potential replacements)

   NAT-PT [RFC2766] deals with the translation from IPv6 to IPv4 and
   vice versa.  As such, it would not help solving the problem of
   offering IPv4 service to legacy IPv4 hosts.  NAT-PT is targeted at
   green field IPv6 deployments, allowing them to access services and
   content on the IPv4 Internet.  In that sense, NAT-PT could be in



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   competition with dual-stack lite for green field deployment of new
   devices directly connected to the broadband service provider network.

   In this situation, NAT-PT has the advantage of enabling to remove
   entirely the IPv4 stack on edge devices.  This may be critical on
   sensor type devices with a very small memory footprint.  However, it
   is unclear if such devices really need to have access to the whole
   global IPv4 Internet in the first place or if they only need to
   communicate with servers that can be made IPv6 enable.

   In the more general case, dual-stack lite has several advantages over
   NAT-PT:

   o  Dual-stack lite does not require any hack to the DNS.  In other
      words, there is no need to synthesize fake AAAA records to
      represent IPv4 addresses.  This make DNSsec works more reliably.

   o  Because of the DNS ALG hack, NAT-PT places restriction on the
      topology, in most cases requiring that all exiting traffic go
      through a single point of contention.  Because there is no DNS ALG
      with dual-stack lite and because each dual-stack lite device can
      be directed independently to a different dual-stack lite NAT, the
      dual-stack lite architecture can scale better.

   o  ALG sometimes need to manipulate literal IP address in the payload
      of packets.  In the case of an IPv4-IPv4 NAT, this is a simple 32
      bit field replacement.  In the case of IPv6-IPv4 (or IPv4-IPv6)
      NAT, a 128 bit field need to be substituted by a 32 bit field (or
      vice versa).  This makes NAT-PT ALG more complex than dual-stack
      lite NAT ALG.

   For more detail on NAT-PT related issues, see [RFC4966].


8.  Comparison with DSTM

   DSTM [I-D.bound-dstm-exp] was adressing IPv6 backward compatibility
   with IPv4 by providing a temporary IPv4 address to dual-stack nodes.
   Connectivity was also provided by the way of IPv4 over IPv6 tunnels.
   However, DSTM was relying on nodes acquiring and releasing IPv4
   addresses on a need to have basis.  It is the author opinion that
   such mechanism may not provide the necessary savings in address space
   for large scale broadband deployments.


9.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to acknowledge the role of Mark Townsley for



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


   his input on the overall architecture of this technology by pointing
   this work in the direction of [I-D.droms-softwires-snat].  Also to be
   acknowledged are the many discussions with a number of people
   including Shin Miyakawa, Katsuyasu Toyama, Akihide Hiura, Takashi
   Uematsu, Tetsutaro Hara, Yasunori Matsubayashi, Ichiro Mizukoshi.
   The auhor would also like to thank David Ward, Jari Arkko, Thomas
   Narten and Geoff Huston for their constructive feedback.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This draft does not request any IANA action.


11.  Security Considerations

   Security issues associated with NAT have long been documented.  See
   [RFC2663] and [RFC2993].

   However, moving the NAT functionality from the home gateway to the
   core of the service provider network and sharing IPv4 addresses among
   customers create additional requirements when logging data for abuse
   treatment.  With any architecture including a carrier-grade NAT, IPv4
   addresses and a timestamps are no longer sufficient to identify a
   particular broadband customer.  Additional information like TCP port
   numbers will be be required for that purpose.


12.  References

12.1.  Normative references

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

12.2.  Informative references

   [I-D.bound-dstm-exp]
              Bound, J., "Dual Stack IPv6 Dominant Transition Mechanism
              (DSTM)", draft-bound-dstm-exp-04 (work in progress),
              October 2005.

   [I-D.droms-softwires-snat]
              Droms, R. and B. Haberman, "Softwires Network Address
              Translation (SNAT)", draft-droms-softwires-snat-00 (work
              in progress), February 2008.

   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address



Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC2766]  Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address
              Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC 2766,
              February 2000.

   [RFC2993]  Hain, T., "Architectural Implications of NAT", RFC 2993,
              November 2000.

   [RFC4966]  Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move the Network
              Address Translator - Protocol Translator (NAT-PT) to
              Historic Status", RFC 4966, July 2007.


Author's Address

   Alain Durand
   Comcast
   1500 Market st
   Philadelphia, PA  19102
   USA

   Email: alain_durand@cable.comcast.com



























Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Durand                   Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 13]


