




                                  INTERNET DRAFT

                              Criteria for Choosing
                               IP Version 7 (IPv7)


                                 14 December 1992


                                 Craig Partridge
                           BBN Systems and Technologies
                               craig@aland.bbn.com

                                 Frank Kastenholz
                                FTP Software, Inc
                                  2 High Street
                        North Andover, Mass 01845-2620 USA

                                  kasten@ftp.com






          Status of this Memo

          This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are
          working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
          (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that other
          groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
          Drafts.

          Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
          months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or
          obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is not
          appropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
          cite them other than as a ``working draft'' or ``work in
          progress.'' Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing
          contained in the internet-drafts Shadow Directories on
          nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net, nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or
          munnari.oz.au to learn the current status of any Internet











          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          Draft.



          This is a working document only, it should neither be cited
          nor quoted in any formal document.

          This document will expire before 19 June 1993.

          Distribution of this document is unlimited.

          Please send comments to criteria@ftp.com or the authors.





































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 1]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          1.  Introduction

          This note attempts to codify and organize the criteria to be
          used in evaluating the protocols being proposed for adoption
          as IP Version 7.

          The criteria presented are culled from several sources,
          including "IP Version 7" [1], "IESG Deliberations on Routing
          and Addressing" [2], "Towards the Future Internet
          Architecture" [3], and the ongoing discussions held on the
          Big-Internet mailing list and the mailing lists devoted to the
          individual IPv7 efforts.

          This document presumes that a new IP-layer protocol is
          actually desired. There is some discussion in the community as
          to whether we can extend the life of IPv4 for a significant
          amount of time by better engineering of, e.g., routing
          protocols, or we should develop IPv7 now.  This question is
          not addressed in this document.


          1.1.  Change Log

          At the Washington D.C. IETF meeting, a BOF was held during
          which this document was discussed. The following changes have
          been made to reflect that discussion.

          (1)  The list has been changed from an ordered list of
               criteria, where each criterion was considered "more
               important" than those that followed to a split into two
               groups: (A) those criteria which the new IP "must" have,
               where "must" is defined by agreeing that a new IPv7 will
               not be accepted or deployed unless it fullfills all the
               "must" requirements; and (B) those criteria which it
               would be desirable to have in the new IP but are not a
               pre-requisite for deployment.

               This change has engendered most of the editorial work on
               the document.  Most notably, references to "ordered
               lists" had to be reworded, and the document needed to be
               re-organized to have must and should subsections.

          (2)  A section called "General Principles" has been added to
               the beginning of the document. This section contains





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 2]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               those items discussed that are hard to quantify as
               criteria for the protocol, yet which we believe are
               essential to the future success of IPv7 and the Internet
               as a whole.

          (3)  Discussion at the BOF made it clear that it would be
               desirable to refine the criteria into questions that
               could be used to help distinguish proposals.  The goal of
               these questions is not to grade proposals, and determine
               which one becomes IPv7, but rather to help elucidate the
               various ways that the different proposals try to meet the
               criteria.  A beginning of this process, in the form of a
               section of detailed questions has been added to the end
               of the document.

          (4)  A MUST criterion for "documents being on-line and owned
               by the IETF" has been added per the BOF.

          (5)  Per the BOF, the section on accounting has been deleted.

          (6)  Several criteria were mentioned at the BOF but we could
               find no reasonable definition of them. Place-holders for
               these criteria are given, but no discussion of them is
               given. We hope that these place-holders will stimulate
               discussion on the mailing list. If not, they will be
               deleted.

          (7)  The IP Checksum was made a non-goal. There has been
               sufficient discussion on the big-i mailing list to
               suggest that it does not provide significant data
               protection.

          (8)  Some typos were fixed. Some additional explanatory text
               has been added.

          (9)  Additional parts added to the "Configuration,
               Administration, and Operation" section per the discussion
               at the BOF.

          (10) The "Scale" criterion has been expanded per the BOF to
               address 10**12 nodes and requesting a description of the
               performance as the limit is reached.







          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 3]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          (11) Robust Service includes a mention of Hostile attacks and
               Byzantine failures.















































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 4]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          2.  Goals

          We believe that by developing a list of criteria for
          evaluating proposals for IP version 7 (IPv7), the IETF will
          make it easier for developers of proposals to prioritize their
          work and efforts and make reasoned choices as to where they
          should spend relatively more and less time.

          This set of criteria originally began as an ordered list, with
          the goal of ranking the importance of various criteria.
          However, after discussion it became clear that the criteria
          list actually could be more simply characterized as falling
          into two groups: those criteria which had to be met by any
          proposed IPv7 before anyone felt that IPv7 should be deployed;
          and those criteria which it would be useful, but not
          essential, for an IPv7 to meet.  The current criteria are
          presented in this form.

          We have attempted to state the criteria in the form of goals
          or requirements and not demand specific engineering solutions.
          For example, there has been talk in the community of making
          route aggregation a requirement.  We believe that Route
          Aggregation is not, in and of itself, a requirement but rather
          one part of a solution to the real problem of scaling to some
          very large, complex topology. Therefore, Route Aggregation is
          NOT listed as a requirement.

          In determining the relative order of the various criteria, we
          have had two guiding principles.  First, IPv7 must offer an
          internetwork service akin to that of IPv4, but improved to
          handle the well-known and widely-understood problems of
          scaling the Internet architecture to more end-points and an
          ever increasing range of bandwidths.  Second, it must be
          desirable for users and network managers to upgrade their
          equipment to support IPv7.  At minimum, this second point
          implies that there must be a straightforward way to transition
          systems from IPv4 to IPv7.  But it also strongly suggests that
          IPv7 should offer features that IPv4 does not; new features
          provide a motivation to deploy IPv7 more quickly.










          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 5]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          3.  Note on Terminology

          The existing proposals tend distinguish between end-point
          identification of, e.g., individual hosts, and topological
          addresses of network attachment points.  In this memo we do
          not make that distinction. We use the term "Address" as it is
          currently used in IPv4; i.e., for both the identification of a
          particular endpoint or host AND as the topological address of
          a point on the network. We presume that if the endpoint/
          address split remains, the proposals will make the proper
          distinctions with respect to the criteria enumerated below.






































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 6]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          4.  General Principles

          4.1.  Architectural Simplicity

              In anything at all, perfection is finally attained not
              when  there  is  no  longer  anything to add, but when
              there is no longer anything to take away.

          Antoine de Saint-Exupery


          4.2.  One Protocol to Bind Them All

          One of the most important aspects of The Internet is that it
          provides global IP-layer connectivity. The IP-layer provides
          the point of commonality among all of the nodes on the
          Internet. In effect, the main goal of the Internet is to
          provide an IP Connectivity Service to all who wish it.

          This does NOT say that the Internet is a One-Protocol
          Internet. The Internet is today, and shall remain in the
          future, a Multi-Protocol Internet.  Multi-Protocol operations
          are required to allow for continued testing, experimentation,
          and development and because service providers' customers
          clearly want to be able to run protocols such as CLNP, DECNET,
          and Novell over their Internet connections.


          4.3.  Live Long

          It is very difficult to change a protocol as central to the
          workings of the Internet as IP. Even more problematic is
          changing such a protocol frequently.  This simply can not be
          done. We believe that it is impossible to expect the community
          to make significant, non-backward compatible changes to the IP
          layer more often than once every 10-15 years. In order to be
          conservative, we strongly urge protocol developers to consider
          what the Internet will look like in 20 years and design their
          protocols to fit that vision.

          As a data point, the SNMP community recently rebelled at
          changing from SNMPv1 to SNMPv1+Security with SNMPv2+Security
          on the horizon. The community chose to delay deployment of
          SNMPv1+Security until SNMPv2 is done.





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 7]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          Author's Note
               We believe that this section covers the "Long Life"
               criterion discussed in the Washington D.C. IETF BOF.


          4.4.  Live Long AND Prosper

          We believe that simply allowing for bigger addresses and more
          efficient routing is not enough of a benefit to encourage
          vendors, service providers, and users to switch to IPv7, with
          its attendant distruptions of service, etc.  These problems
          can be solved much more simply with more router-thrust,
          balkanization of the Internet, and so on.

          We believe that there must be positive, functional or
          operational, benefits to switching to IPv7.

          In other words, IPv7 must be able to live for a long time AND
          it must allow the Internet to prosper and to grow.






























          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 8]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          5.  Criteria

          This section enumerates the criteria against which the IP
          Version 7 proposals will be evaluated.

          Each criterion is presented in its own section. The first
          paragraph of each section is a short, one or two sentence
          statement of the criterion.  Additional paragraphs then
          explain the criterion in more detail, clarify what it does and
          does not say and provide some indication of its relative
          importance.


          5.1.  MUSTs

          The following criteria were deemed by an IETF BOF session to
          be absolutely essential. Any new IP protocol must meet all of
          these criteria before it is deployed.  The standard for making
          a criteria a must requirement was that we would refuse to
          deploy a candidate IPv7 that failed to meet just one must
          requirement, EVEN IF THE CURRENT IPV4 INTERNET IS COLLAPSING
          DUE TO ROUTING CONGESTION.


          5.1.1.  Scale

          CRITERION
               The IPv7 Protocol must scale to allow the identification
               and addressing of 10**12 end systems.  The IPv7 Protocol,
               and its associated routing protocols and architecture
               must allow for up to 10**9 individual networks.  The
               routing schemes must scale with the number of constituent
               networks at a rate that is much less than linear.

          DISCUSSION
               The whole purpose of the IPv7 effort is to allow the
               Internet to grow beyond the size constraints imposed by
               the current IPv4 addressing and routing technologies.

               Both aspects of scaling are important.  If we can't route
               then connecting all these hosts is worthless, but without
               connected hosts, there's no point in routing, so we must
               scale in both directions.






          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993               [Page 9]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               In any proposal, Particular attention should be paid to
               describing the routing hierarchy, how the routing and
               addressing will be organized, how different layers of the
               routing interact, and relationship between addressing and
               routing.

               Particular attention must be paid to describing what
               happens when the size of the network approaches these
               limits. How are network, forwarding, and routing
               performance affected? Does performance fall off or does
               the network simply stop as the limit is neared.

          Placement
               This criterion is the essential problem motivating the
               transition to IPv7.  If the proposed protocol does not
               satisfy this criteria, there is no point in considering
               it.


          5.1.2.  Topological Flexibility

          CRITERION
               The routing architecture and protocols of IPv7 must allow
               for many different network topologies.

          DISCUSSION
               As the Internet becomes ever more global and ubiquitous,
               it will develop new and different topologies. We already
               see cases where the network hierarchy is very "broad"
               with many subnetworks, each with only a few hosts and
               where it is very "narrow", with few subnetworks each with
               many hosts.  We can expect these and other topological
               forms. Furthermore, since we expect that IPv7 will allow
               for many more levels of hierarchy than are allowed under
               IPv4, we can expect very "tall" and very "short"
               topologies as well.


          5.1.3.  Robust Service

          CRITERION
               The network service and its associated routing and
               control protocols must be robust.






          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 10]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          DISCUSSION
               Murphy's Law applies to networking.  Any proposed IPv7
               protocol must be well-behaved in the face of malformed
               packets, mis-information, and occasional failures of
               links, routers and hosts.  IPv7 should perform gracefully
               in response to willful management and configuration
               mistakes (i.e. service outages should be minimized).

               Putting this requirement another way, IPv7 must make it
               possible to continue the Internet tradition of being
               conservative in what is sent, but liberal in what one is
               willing to receive.

               We note that IPv4 is reasonably robust and any proposed
               IPv7 must be at least as robust as IPv4.

               Hostile attacks on the network layer and Byzantine
               failure modes must be dealt with in a safe and graceful
               manner.

               We note that Robust Service is, in some form, a part of
               security and vice-versa.

          Placement
               Due to its size, complexity, decentralized
               administration, brain-dead users and administrators, and
               so on, The Internet is a very hostile environment. If a
               protocol can not be used in such a hostile environment
               then it is not suitable for use in the Internet.


          5.1.4.  Transition

          CRITERION
               The protocol must have a straightforward transition plan
               from the current IPv4.

          DISCUSSION
               A smooth, orderly, transition from IPv4 to IPv7 is
               needed.  If we can't transition to the new protocol, then
               no matter how wonderful it is, we'll never get to it.

               We believe that it is not possible to have a "flag-day"
               form of transition in which all hosts and routers must





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 11]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               change over at once. The size, complexity, and
               distributed administration of the Internet make such a
               cutover impossible.

               Rather IPv7 will need to co-exist with IPv4 for some
               period of time.  There are a number of ways to achieve
               this co-existence such as requiring hosts to support two
               stacks, converting between protocols, or using backward
               compatible extensions to IPv4.  Each scheme has its
               strengths and weaknesses, which have to be weighed.

               However, the absence of a rational and well-defined
               transition plan is not acceptable.  Indeed, the
               difficulty of running a network that is transitioning
               from IPv4 to IPv7 must be minimized.  (A good target is
               that running a mixed IPv4-IPv7 network should be no more
               and preferably less difficult than running IPv4 in
               parallel with existing non-IP protocols).

               Furthermore, a network in transition must still be
               robust.  IPv7 schemes which maximize stability and
               connectivity in mixed IPv4-IPv7 networks are preferred.

               Finally, it may be necessary that multiple IPv7 protocols
               coexist on the network during the testing and evaluation
               periods. Transition plans must address this issue.

               The transition plan must address the following general
               areas of the Internet's infrastructure:
               o Host Protocols and Software
               o Router Protocols and Software
               o Security and Authentication
               o Domain Name System
               o Network Management
               o Operations Tools (e.g., Ping and Traceroute)
               o Operations and Administration procedures

               The impact on protocols which use IP addresses as data
               (e.g. DNS, SNMP and FTP) must be specifically addressed.

               The transition plan should address the issue of cost
               distribution. That is, it should identify what tasks are
               required of the service providers, of the end users, of
               the backbones and so on.





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 12]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          Placement
               If the transition scheme is painful, no one will
               transition.  But we should only transition if the
               protocol we transition to solves the scaling problems and
               is useful to use.


          5.1.5.  Media

          CRITERION
               The protocol must work across an internetwork of many
               differnet LAN, MAN, and WAN media, with individual link
               speeds ranging from a ones-of-bits per second to hundreds
               of gigabits per second.  Multiple-access and point-to-
               point media must be supported, as must both media
               supporting switched and permanent circuits.

          DISCUSSION
               The joy of IP is that it works over just about anything.
               That ease of adding new technologies, and continuing to
               operate with old technologies must be maintained. We
               believe this range of speed is right for the next twenty
               years, though it may be we should require terabit
               performance at the high-end.

               By switched circuits we mean both "permanent" connections
               such as X.25 and Frame Relay services AND "temporary"
               types of dialup connections similar to today's SLIP and
               dialup PPP services.  The latter form of connection
               implies that dynamic network access (i.e., the ability to
               unplug a machine, move it to a different point on the
               network topology, and plug it back in, possibly with a
               changed IPv7 address) is required. We note that this is
               an aspect of mobility.

               By work, we mean we have hopes that a stream of IPv7
               datagrams (whether from one source, or many) can come
               close to filling the link at high speeds, but also scales
               gracefully to low speeds.

          Placement
               The protocol must be general. It must operate over all of
               the media that IPv4 operates over today. A general goal
               of the Internet is ubiquity.  Besides all of the common





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 13]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               media available today, there are all sorts of "legacy"
               systems which we would like to connect to IPv7 and these
               systems might have odd media.  Furthermore, there are all
               sorts of difficult corners of the world which ought to be
               connected to the Ubiquitous Internet but the medium to
               get into such corners is "odd" (one example mentioned at
               the Washington D.C.  IETF was to use ELF to connect to
               submerged submarines -- ELF has a "speed" on the order of
               <10 characters per second)


          5.1.6.  Unreliable Datagram Service

          CRITERION
               The protocol must support an unreliable datagram delivery
               service.

          DISCUSSION
               We like IP's datagram service and it seems to work very
               well.  So we must keep it.


          5.1.7.  Configuration, Administration, and Operation

          CRITERION
               The protocol must permit easy and largely distributed
               configuration and operation. Automatic configuration of
               hosts and routers is required.

          DISCUSSION
               People complain that IP is hard to manage.  We cannot
               plug and play.  We must fix that problem.

               We do note that fully automated configuration, especially
               for large, complex networks, is still a topic of
               research.  Our concern is mostly for small and medium
               sized, less complex, networks; places where the essential
               knowledge and skills would not be as readily available.

               In dealing with this criterion, address assignment and
               delegation procedures and restrictions should be
               addressed by the proposal.  Furthermore, "ownership" of
               addresses (e.g. user or service provider) has recently
               become a concern and the issue should be addressed.





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 14]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               Additional elements of this criterion are:

             -    Ease of address allocation.

             -    Ease of changing the topology of the network within a
                  particular routing domain.

             -    Ease of changing network provider.

             -    Ease of (re)configuring host/endpoint parameters such
                  as addressing and identification.

             -    Ease of (re)configuring router parameters such as
                  addressing and identification.

          Placement
               The placement of this criterion as a "must" is in
               response to the pressures of the user community, who are
               crying out for easier to use IP.


          5.1.8.  Allow Secure Operation

          CRITERION
               The protocol should not preclude secure operation.

          DISCUSSION
               We need to be sure that we have not created a network
               that is a cracker's playground.

               In order to meet the Robustness criterion, some elements
               of what is commonly shrugged off as "security" are
               needed; e.g. to prevent a villan from injecting bogus
               routing packets, and destroying the routing system within
               the network.  This criterion covers those aspects of
               security that are not needed to provide the Robustness
               criterion.  <FRANK -- I THINK ROUTING IS COVERED BY
               ROBUSTNESS? -- CRAIG>


          5.1.9.  Unique Naming

          CRITERION
               IPv7 must assign all IP-Layer objects in the global,





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 15]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               ubiquitous, Internet unique names.

          DISCUSSION
               We use the term "Name" in this criterion synonymously
               with the term "End Point Identifier" as used in the
               NIMROD proposal, or as IP Addresses uniquely identify
               interfaces/hosts in IPv4.

               The authors are not convinced that this ought to be a
               criterion of the protocol. We feel that it may in fact be
               a part of a solution to other criteria and as such, is
               not a criterion of its own. The BOF expressed a very
               strong desire to include this criterion and we are
               placing it here in the hope that it will stimulate
               discussion on the subject.


          5.1.10.  Access

          CRITERION
               The protocols that define IPv7, its associated protocols
               (similar to ARP and ICMP in IPv4) and the routing
               protocols (e.g. OSPF, BGP, and RIP in IPv4) must be
               freely available in the same fashion that RFCs are:
               namely in ASCII format, obtainable by anonymous FTP, and
               freely reproducible without copyright restrictions.

          DISCUSSION
               An essential aspect of the development of the Internet
               and its protocols has been the fact that the protocol
               specifications are freely available to anyone who wishes
               a copy.  Beyond simply minimizing the cost of learning
               about the technology, the free access to specifications
               has made it easy for researchers and developers to easily
               incorporate portions of old protocol specifications in
               the revised specifications.  This type of easy access to
               the standards documents is required for IPv7.


          5.2.  SHOULDs

          The following criteria were deemed by an IETF BOF session to
          be of lesser importance than the preceeding ones. Every
          attempt should be made by protocol designers to satisfy these





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 16]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          criteria, however, deployment would not be held up, waiting
          for one of these criteria to be met.

          Some of the criteria represent technologies which are only now
          starting to move from the research world to the engineering
          and development world.

          Other criteria were demoted to this level for reasons that are
          unclear to the authors.  In particular, the authors firmly
          believe that multicasting and extensibility are actually
          requirements that no IPv7 should be without.  To reflect the
          decisions at the DC meeting, these criteria have been demoted
          to this section, but the authors may, after further
          reflection, move them back into the must category in the
          future.


          5.2.1.  Addressing

          CRITERION
               The protocol must allow for both unicast and multicast
               addressing.  Part of the multicast capability is a
               requirement to be able to send to "all IP hosts on THIS
               network".

          DISCUSSION
               IPv4 has made heavy use of the ability to multicast
               requests to all IPv4 hosts on a subnet, especially for
               autoconfiguration.  This ability must be retained in
               IPv7.

               Unfortunately, IPv4 currently uses the local media
               broadcast address to multicast to all IP hosts.  This
               behavior is anti-social in mixed-protocol networks and
               should be fixed in IPv7.  There's no good reason for IPv7
               to send to all hosts on a subnet when it only wishes to
               send to all IPv7 hosts.  The protocol must make
               allowances for media that do not support true
               multicasting.

               In the past few years, we have begun to deploy support
               for wide-area multicast addressing in the Internet, and
               it has proved valuable.  This capability should not be
               lost in the transition to IPv7.





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 17]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               The ability to restrict the range of a broadcast or
               multicast to specific networks is also important.

               It should be noted that addressing -- specifically the
               syntax and semantics of addresses -- has a great impact
               on the scalability of the architecture.

          Placement
               We believe that Multicast Addressing is vital to support
               future applications such as remote conferencing. It is
               also used quite heavily in the current Internet for
               things like service location and routing.

          Author's Note
               The Washington D.C. BOF did not come down firmly that
               multicast should be a MUST, however the authors believe
               it to be essential.


          5.2.2.  Extensibility

          CRITERION
               The protocol must be extensible; it must be able to
               evolve to meet the future service needs of the Internet.
               This evolution must be achievable without requiring
               network-wide software upgrades.

          DISCUSSION
               We do not today know all of the things that we will want
               the Internet to be able to do 10 years from now.  At the
               same time, it is not reasonable to ask users to
               transition to a new protocol with each passing decade.
               Thus, we believe that it must be possible to extend IPv7
               to support new services and facilities.  Furthermore, it
               is essential that any extensions can be incrementally
               deployed to only those systems which desire to use them.
               Systems upgraded in this fashion must still be able to
               communicate with systems which have not been so upgraded.

          Placement
               We believe that this criterion should be a "MUST" simply
               because we can not predict very well what the future will
               bring so the protocol must be able to deal with the
               future -- whatever it is.





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 18]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          Author's Note
               The Washington D.C. BOF did not come down firmly that
               extensibility should be a MUST, however the authors
               believe it to be essential.


          5.2.3.  Support for Guaranteed Flows

          CRITERION
               The protocol should support guaranteed flows.

          DISCUSSION
               Multimedia is now on our desktop and will be an essential
               part of future networking.  So we have to find ways to
               support it; and a failure to support it may mean users
               choose to use protocols other than IPv7.

               The IETF multicasts have shown that we can currently
               support multimedia over internetworks with some hitches.
               If we can achieve the needed support for guaranteed flows
               in IPv7, we will dramatically increase its success.


          5.2.4.  Support for Mobility

          CRITERION
               The protocol should support mobile hosts.

          DISCUSSION
               Again, mobility is becoming increasingly important.  Look
               at the portables that everyone is carrying.  Note the
               strength of the Apple commercial showing someone
               automatically connecting up her Powerbook to her computer
               back in the office.  There have been a number of pilot
               projects showing ways to support mobility in IPv4.  All
               have some drawbacks.  But like guaranteed flows, if we
               can support mobility, IPv7 will have features that will
               encourage transition.

               We use a vague definition of "mobility" here. To some
               people, this means hosts that physically move and remain
               connected (via some wireless datalink), to others it
               means disconnecting a host from one spot in the network,
               connecting it back in another arbitrary spot and





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 19]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               continuing to work. At this point we expect that the
               proposals will discuss their own abilities in this
               general area.


          5.2.5.  Cost Distribution

          This is a place-holder from the BOF.


          5.2.6.  Risk and Maturity

          This is a place-holder from the BOF.


          5.2.7.  Performance

          This is a place-holder from the BOF.


          5.3.  Explicit Non-Goals

          This section contains some explicit non-goals of IPv7.  A
          non-goal does not mean that a protocol MUST NOT do something.
          It means that the authors do not believe that it matters
          whether the non-goal is in the protocol or not. If a protocol
          includes one of the non-goals; well, that's cool. If it
          doesn't; that's cool too. A non-goal might be necessary in
          order to meet some other criterion, however this is irrelevant
          to including the non-goal merely for its own sake.

          Fragmentation
               The technology exists for path MTU discovery. Presumably,
               IPv7 will continue to provide this technology.
               Therefore, we believe that IPv7 Fragmentation and
               Reassembly, as provided in IPv4, is not necessary.

          IPv4/IPv7 Communication
               It is not necessary that IPv4-only and IPv7-only hosts be
               able to communicate directly with each other.

          IP Checksum
               There has been discussion indicating that the IP Checksum
               does not provide enough error protection to warrant its





          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 20]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


               performance impact.  The argument states that there is
               almost always a stronger datalink level CRC, and that
               end-to-end protection is provided by the TCP checksum.
               Therefore we believe that an IPv7 checksum is not
               required per-se.












































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 21]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          6.  Detailed Questions

               This section is an initial draft of a list of detailed
               questions designed to start to help refine our
               understanding of how each proposal meets the criteria.
               The questions are written such that there are no right or
               wrong answers, but rather, that by reading answers to the
               questions one can develop a better understanding of the
               tradeoffs chosen by the protocol designers.  The
               questions are grouped according to the criteria they are
               intended to help readers better understand.






































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 22]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          7.  References

          [1]  Internet Architecture Board, IP Version 7, Draft 8,
               Internet Draft, July, 1992.

          [2]  Gross, P. and P. Almquist, IESG Deliberations on Routing
               and Addressing, Internet Draft, September 1992.

          [3]  Clark, D., et al, Towards the Future Internet
               Architecture Network Working Group Request For Comments
               1287, December 1991.

          [4]  Dave Clark's paper at SIGCOMM '88 where he pointed out
               that the design of TCP/IP was guided, in large part, by
               an ordered list of requirements.


































          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page 23]





          Internet Draft          IPv7 Criteria            December 1992


          Table of Contents


           Status of this Memo ....................................    1
          1 Introduction ..........................................    2
          1.1 Change Log ..........................................    2
          2 Goals .................................................    5
          3 Note on Terminology ...................................    6
          4 General Principles ....................................    7
          4.1 Architectural Simplicity ............................    7
          4.2 One Protocol to Bind Them All .......................    7
          4.3 Live Long ...........................................    7
          4.4 Live Long AND Prosper ...............................    8
          5 Criteria ..............................................    9
          5.1 MUSTs ...............................................    9
          5.1.1 Scale .............................................    9
          5.1.2 Topological Flexibility ...........................   10
          5.1.3 Robust Service ....................................   10
          5.1.4 Transition ........................................   11
          5.1.5 Media .............................................   13
          5.1.6 Unreliable Datagram Service .......................   14
          5.1.7 Configuration, Administration, and Operation ......   14
          5.1.8 Allow Secure Operation ............................   15
          5.1.9 Unique Naming .....................................   15
          5.1.10 Access ...........................................   16
          5.2 SHOULDs .............................................   16
          5.2.1 Addressing ........................................   17
          5.2.2 Extensibility .....................................   18
          5.2.3 Support for Guaranteed Flows ......................   19
          5.2.4 Support for Mobility ..............................   19
          5.2.5 Cost Distribution .................................   20
          5.2.6 Risk and Maturity .................................   20
          5.2.7 Performance .......................................   20
          5.3 Explicit Non-Goals ..................................   20
          6 Detailed Questions ....................................   22
          7 References ............................................   23













          Partridge & KastenholzExp. 19 June 1993              [Page ii]


