





Network Working Group                                        Tom Worster
Internet Draft
Expiration Date: September 2004
                                                           Yakov Rekhter
                                                  Juniper Networks, Inc.

                                                   Eric C. Rosen, editor
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                              March 2004


    Encapsulating MPLS in IP or Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)


                  draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   Various applications of MPLS make use of label stacks with multiple
   entries.  In some cases, it is possible to replace the top label of
   the stack with an IP-based encapsulation, thereby enabling the
   application to run over networks which do not have MPLS enabled in
   their core routers.  This draft specifies two IP-based
   encapsulations, MPLS-in-IP, and MPLS-in-GRE (Generic Routing
   Encapsulation).  Each of these is applicable in some circumstances.





Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 1]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004




Table of Contents

    1      Specification of Requirements  ..........................   2
    2      Motivation  .............................................   2
    3      Encapsulation in IP  ....................................   3
    4      Encapsulation in GRE  ...................................   5
    5      Common Procedures  ......................................   6
    5.1    Preventing Fragmentation and Reassembly  ................   6
    5.2    TTL or Hop Limit  .......................................   7
    5.3    Differentiated Services  ................................   8
    6      Applicability  ..........................................   8
    7      IANA Considerations  ....................................   9
    8      Security Considerations  ................................   9
    8.1    Securing the Tunnel Using IPsec  ........................   9
    8.2    In the Absence of IPsec  ................................  11
    9      Acknowledgments  ........................................  12
   10      Normative References  ...................................  12
   11      Informative References  .................................  13
   12      Author Information  .....................................  13
   13      Intellectual Property Notice  ...........................  14
   14      Copyright Notice  .......................................  14






1. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


2. Motivation

   In many applications of MPLS, packets traversing an MPLS backbone
   carry label stacks with more than one label.  As described in section
   3.15 of [RFC3031], each label represents a Label Switched Path (LSP).
   For each such LSP, there is a Label Switching Router (LSR) which is
   the "LSP Ingress", and an LSR which is the "LSP Egress".  If LSRs A
   and B are the Ingress and Egress, respectively, of the LSP
   corresponding to a packet's top label, then A and B are adjacent LSRs
   on the LSP corresponding to the packet's second label (i.e., the
   label immediately beneath the top label)




Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 2]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


   The purpose (or one of the purposes) of the top label is to get the
   packet delivered from A to B, so that B can further process the
   packet based on the second label.  In this sense, the top label
   serves as an encapsulation header for the rest of the packet.  In
   some cases the top label can be replaced, without loss of
   functionality, by other sorts of encapsulation headers.  For example,
   the top label could be replaced by an IP header or a Generic Routing
   Encapsulation (GRE) header.  As the encapsulated packet would still
   be an MPLS packet, the result is an MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE
   encapsulation.

   With these encapsulations, it is possible for two LSRs that are
   adjacent on an LSP to be separated by an IP network, even if that IP
   network does not provide MPLS.

   In order to use either of these encapsulations, the encapsulating LSR
   must know:

     - the IP address of the decapsulating LSR, and

     - that the decapsulating LSR actually supports the particular
       encapsulation.

   This knowledge may be conveyed to the encapsulating LSR by manual
   configuration, or by means of some discovery protocol.  In
   particular, if the tunnel is being used to support a particular
   application, and that application has a setup or discovery protocol,
   then this knowledge may be conveyed by the application's protocol.
   The means of conveying this knowledge is outside the scope of the
   current document.


3. Encapsulation in IP

   MPLS-in-IP messages have the following format:
















Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 3]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                                     |
              |             IP Header               |
              |                                     |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                                     |
              |          MPLS Label Stack           |
              |                                     |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                                     |
              |            Message Body             |
              |                                     |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

          IP Header
                This field contains an IPv4 or an IPv6 datagram header
                as defined in [RFC791] or [RFC2460] respectively. The
                source and destination addresses are set to addresses
                of the encapsulating and decapsulating LSRs respectively.

          MPLS Label Stack
                This field contains an MPLS Label Stack as defined in
                [RFC3032].

          Message Body
                This field contains one MPLS message body.



   The IPv4 Protocol Number field or the IPv6 Next Header field is set
   to [value to be assigned by IANA], indicating an MPLS unicast packet.
   (The use of the MPLS-in-IP encapsulation for MPLS multicast packets
   is not supported by this specification.)

   Following the IP header is an MPLS packet, as specified in [RFC3032].
   This encapsulation causes MPLS packets to be sent through "IP
   tunnels".  When a packet is received by the tunnel's receive
   endpoint, the receive endpoint decapsulates the MPLS packet by
   removing the IP header.  The packet is then processed as a received
   MPLS packet whose "incoming label" [RFC3031] is the topmost label of
   the decapsulated packet.










Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 4]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


4. Encapsulation in GRE

   The MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation encapsulates an MPLS packet in GRE
   [RFC2784].  The packet then consists of an IP header (either IPv4 or
   IPv6) followed by a GRE header followed by an MPLS label stack as
   specified in [RFC3032].  The protocol type field in the GRE header
   MUST be set to the Ethertype value for MPLS Unicast (0x8847) or
   Multicast (0x8848).

   This encapsulation causes MPLS packets to be sent through "GRE
   tunnels". When a packet is received by the tunnel's receive endpoint,
   the receive endpoint decapsulates the MPLS packet by removing the IP
   header and the GRE header.  The packet is then processed as a
   received MPLS packet whose "incoming label" [RFC3031] is the topmost
   label of the decapsulated packet.

   [RFC2784] specifies an optional GRE checksum, and [RFC2890] specifies
   optional GRE key, and sequence number fields.  These optional fields
   are not very useful for the MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation.  The sequence
   number and checksum fields are not needed, as there are no
   corresponding fields in the native MPLS packets that are being
   tunneled.  The GRE key field is not needed for demultiplexing, as the
   top MPLS label of the encapsulated packet is used for that purpose.
   The GRE key field is sometimes considered to be a security feature,
   functioning as a 32-bit cleartext password, but this is an extremely
   weak form of security.  In order to (a) facilitate high speed
   implementations of the encapsulation/decapsulation procedures, and
   (b) ensure interoperability, we require that all implementations be
   able to operate correctly without these optional fields.

   More precisely, an implementation of an MPLS-in-GRE decapsulator MUST
   be able to correctly process packets without these optional fields.
   It MAY be able to correctly process packets with these optional
   fields.

   An implementation of an MPLS-in-GRE encapsulator MUST be able to
   generate packets without these optional fields. It MAY have the
   capability to generate packets with these fields, but the default
   state MUST be that packets are generated without these fields.  The
   encapsulator MUST NOT include any of these optional fields unless it
   is known that the decapsulator can process them correctly.  Methods
   for conveying this knowledge are outside the scope of this
   specification.








Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 5]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


5. Common Procedures

   Certain procedures are common to both the MPLS-in-IP and the MPLS-
   in-GRE encapsulations.  In the following, the encapsulator, whose
   address appears in the IP source address field of the encapsulating
   IP header,  is known as the "tunnel head".  The decapsulator, whose
   address appears in the IP destination address field of the
   decapsulating IP header, is known as the "tunnel tail".

   In the case where IPv6 is being used (for either MPLS-in-IPv6 or
   MPLS-in-GRE-in-IPv6), the procedures of [RFC2473] are generally
   applicable.



5.1. Preventing Fragmentation and Reassembly

   If an MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE packet were to get fragmented (due to
   "ordinary" IP fragmentation), it would have to be be reassembled by
   the tunnel tail before the contained MPLS packet could be
   decapsulated.  When the tunnel tail is a router, this is likely to be
   undesirable; the tunnel tail may not have the ability or the
   resources to perform reassembly at the necessary level of
   performance.

   Whether fragmentation of the tunneled packets is allowed MUST be
   configurable at the tunnel head. The default value MUST be that
   packets are not to be fragmented.  The default value would only be
   changed if it were known that the tunnel tail could perform the
   reassembly function adequately.

   THE PROCEDURES SPECIFIED IN THE REMAINDER OF THIS SECTION ONLY APPLY
   IN THE CASE WHERE PACKETS ARE NOT TO BE FRAGMENTED.

   Obviously, if packets are not to be fragmented, the tunnel head MUST
   NOT fragment a packet before encapsulating it.

   If IPv4 is being used, then the tunnel MUST set the DF bit.  This
   prevents intermediate nodes in the tunnel from performing
   fragmentation.  (If IPv6 is being used, intermediate nodes do not
   perform fragmentation in any event.)

   The tunnel head SHOULD perform Path MTU Discovery ([RFC1191] for
   IPv4, or [RFC1981] for IPv6).

   The tunnel head MUST maintain a "Tunnel MTU" for each tunnel; this is
   the minimum of (a) an administratively configured value, and, if
   known, (b) the discovered Path MTU value minus the encapsulation



Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 6]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


   overhead.

   If the tunnel head receives, for encapsulation, an MPLS packet whose
   size exceeds the Tunnel MTU, that packet MUST be discarded.  However,
   silently dropping such packets may cause significant operational
   problems; the originator of the packets will notice that his data is
   not getting through, but he may not realize that it is large packets
   that are the cause of packet loss.  He may therefore continue sending
   packets that are discarded. Path MTU discovery can help (if the
   tunnel head sends back ICMP errors), but frequently there is
   insufficient information available at the tunnel head to properly
   identify the originating sender. To minimize problems, it is advised
   that MTUs be engineered to be large enough in practice to avoid
   fragmentation.

   In some cases, the tunnel head receives, for encapsulation, an IP
   packet, which it first encapsulates in MPLS and then encapsulates in
   MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE.  If the source of the IP packet is
   reachable from the tunnel head, and if the result of encapsulating
   the packet in MPLS would be a packet whose size exceeds the Tunnel
   MTU, then the value which the tunnel head SHOULD use for the purposes
   of fragmentation and PMTU discovery outside the tunnel is the Tunnel
   MTU value minus the size of the MPLS encapsulation.  (That is, the
   Tunnel MTU value minus the size of the MPLS encapsulation is the MTU
   that needs to get reported in ICMP messages.)  The packet will have
   to be discarded but the tunnel head should send the IP source of the
   discarded packet the proper ICMP error message as specified in
   [RFC1191] or [RFC1981].


5.2. TTL or Hop Limit

   The tunnel head MAY place the TTL from the MPLS label stack into the
   TTL field of the encapsulating IPv4 header or the Hop Limit field of
   the encapsulating IPv6 header.  The tunnel tail MAY place the TTL
   from the encapsulating IPv4 header or the Hop Limit form the
   encapsulating IPv6 header into the TTL field of the MPLS header, but
   only if that does not cause the TTL value in the MPLS header to
   become larger.

   Whether such modifications are made, and the details of how they are
   made, will depend on the configuration of the tunnel tail and the
   tunnel head.








Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 7]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


5.3. Differentiated Services

   The procedures specified in this document enable an LSP to be sent
   through an IP or GRE tunnel.  [RFC2983] details a number of
   considerations and procedures which need to be applied to properly
   support the Differentiated Services Architecture in the presence of
   IP-in-IP tunnels.  These considerations and procedures also apply in
   the presence of MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE tunnels.

   Accordingly, when a tunnel head is about to send an MPLS packet into
   an MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE tunnel, the setting of the DS field of
   the encapsulating IPv4 or IPv6 header MAY be determined (at least
   partially) by the "Behavior Aggregate" of the MPLS packet. Procedures
   for determining the Behavior Aggregate of an MPLS packet are
   specified in [RFC3270].

   Similarly, at the tunnel tail, the DS field of the encapsulating IPv4
   or IPv6 header MAY be used to determine the Behavior Aggregate of the
   encapsulated MPLS packet. [RFC3270] specifies the relation between
   the Behavior Aggregate and the subsequent disposition of the packet.


6. Applicability

   The MPLS-in-IP encapsulation is the more efficient, and would
   generally be regarded as preferable, other things being equal.  There
   are however some situations in which the MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation
   may be used:

     - Two routers are "adjacent" over a GRE tunnel that exists for some
       reason that is outside the scope of this document, and those two
       routers need to send MPLS packets over that adjacency.  As all
       packets sent over this adjacency must have a GRE encapsulation,
       the MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation is more efficient than the
       alternative, which would be an MPLS-in-IP encapsulation which is
       then encapsulated in GRE.

     - Implementation considerations may dictate the use of MPLS-in-GRE.
       For example, some hardware device might only be able to handle
       GRE encapsulations in its fastpath.











Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 8]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


7. IANA Considerations

   The MPLS-in-IP encapsulation requires that IANA allocate an IP
   Protocol Number, as described in section 3.  No future IANA actions
   will be required.  The MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation does not require any
   IANA action.



8. Security Considerations

   The main security problem faced when using IP or GRE tunnels is the
   possibility that the tunnel's receive endpoint will get a packet
   which appears to be from the tunnel, but which was not actually put
   into the tunnel by the tunnel's transmit endpoint.  (I.e., the
   specified encapsulations do not by themselves enable the decapsulator
   to authenticate the encapsulator.)  A second problem is the
   possibility that the packet will be altered between the time it
   enters the tunnel and the time it leaves the tunnel. (I.e., the
   specified encapsulations do not by themselves assure the decapsulator
   of the packet's integrity.)  A third problem is the possibility that
   the packet's contents will be seen while the packet is in transit
   through the tunnel. (I.e., the specification encapsulations do not
   ensure privacy.) How significant these issues are in practice depends
   on the security requirements of the applications whose traffic is
   being sent through the tunnel.  E.g., lack of privacy for tunneled
   packets is not a significant issue if the applications generating the
   packets do not require privacy.


8.1. Securing the Tunnel Using IPsec

   All of these security issues can be avoided if the MPLS-in-IP or
   MPLS-in-GRE tunnels are secured using IPsec.

   When using IPsec, the tunnel head and the tunnel tail should be
   treated as the endpoints of a Security Association.  For this
   purpose, a single IP address of the tunnel head will be used as the
   source IP address, and a single IP address of the tunnel tail will be
   used as the destination IP address.  The means by which each node
   knows the proper address of the other is outside the scope of this
   document.  If a control protocol is used to set up the tunnels (e.g.,
   to inform one tunnel endpoint of the IP address of the other), the
   control protocol MUST have an authentication mechanism, and this MUST
   be used when setting up the tunnel.  If the tunnel is set up
   automatically as the result, e.g., of information distributed by BGP,
   then the use of BGP's MD5-based authentication mechanism is
   satisfactory.



Worster, et al.                                                 [Page 9]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


   The MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE encapsulated packets should be
   considered as originating at the tunnel head and as being destined
   for the tunnel tail; IPsec transport mode SHOULD thus be used.

   The IP header of the MPLS-in-IP packet becomes the outer IP header of
   the resulting packet when IPsec transport mode is used by the tunnel
   head to secure the MPLS-in-IP packet. This is followed by an IPsec
   header followed by the MPLS label stack. The IPsec header needs to
   set the payload type to MPLS by using the IP protocol number
   specified in section 3.  If IPsec transport mode is applied on a
   MPLS-in-GRE packet, the GRE header follows the IPsec header.

   At the tunnel tail, IPsec outbound processing recovers the contained
   MPLS-in-IP/GRE packet. The tunnel tail then strips off the
   encapsulating IP/GRE header to recover the MPLS packet, which is then
   forwarded according to its label stack.

   Recall that the tunnel tail and the tunnel head are LSP adjacencies,
   which means that the topmost label of any packet sent through the
   tunnel must be one which was distributed by the tunnel tail to the
   tunnel head.  The tunnel tail MUST know precisely which labels it has
   distributed to the tunnel heads of IPsec-secured tunnels.  Labels in
   this set MUST NOT be distributed by the tunnel tail to any LSP
   adjacencies other than those which are tunnel heads of IPsec-secured
   tunnels.  If an MPLS packet is received without an IPsec
   encapsulation, and if its topmost label is in this set, then the
   packet MUST be discarded.

   An IPsec-secured MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE tunnel MUST provide
   authentication and integrity.  (Note that the authentication and
   integrity will apply to the entire MPLS packet, including the MPLS
   label stack.)  Whether additional security, i.e., confidentiality
   and/or replay protection, is required will depend upon the needs of
   the applications whose data is being sent through the tunnel.  If
   confidentiality is not needed, then either the AH or the ESP
   protocols MAY be used.  If confidentiality is needed, the ESP
   protocol MUST be used, and the payload must be encrypted.  If ESP is
   used, the tunnel tail MUST check that the source IP address of any
   packet that is received on a given SA is the one that is expected.

   Key distribution may be done either manually, or automatically by
   means of IKE [RFC2409].  Manual key distribution is much simpler, but
   also less scalable, than automatic key distribution.  Which method of
   key distribution is appropriate for a particular tunnel thus needs to
   be carefully considered by the administrator (or pair of
   administrators) responsible for the tunnel endpoints.  If replay
   protection is regarded as necessary for a particular tunnel,
   automatic key distribution MUST be used.



Worster, et al.                                                [Page 10]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


   If the MPLS-in-IP encapsulation is being used, the selectors
   associated with the SA would be the source and destination addresses
   mentioned above, plus the IP protocol number specified in section 3.
   If it is desired to separately secure multiple MPLS-in-IP tunnels
   between a given pair of nodes, each tunnel must have unique pair of
   IP addresses.

   If the MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation is being used, the selectors
   associated with the SA would be the the source and destination
   addresses mentioned above, and the IP protocol number representing
   GRE (47).  If it is desired to separately secure multiple MPLS-in-GRE
   tunnels between a given pair of nodes, each tunnel must have unique
   pair of IP addresses.


8.2. In the Absence of IPsec

   If the tunnels are not secured using IPsec, then some other method
   should be used to ensure that packets are decapsulated and forwarded
   by the tunnel tail only if those packets were encapsulated by the
   tunnel head.  If the tunnel lies entirely within a single
   administrative domain, address filtering at the boundaries can be
   used to ensure that no packet with the IP source address of a tunnel
   endpoint or with the IP destination address of a tunnel endpoint can
   enter the domain from outside.

   However, when the tunnel head and the tunnel tail are not in the same
   administrative domain, this may become difficult, and filtering based
   on the destination address can even become impossible if the packets
   must traverse the public Internet.

   Sometimes only source address filtering (but not destination address
   filtering) is done at the boundaries of an administrative domain. If
   this is the case, the filtering does not provide effective protection
   at all unless the decapsulator of an MPLS-in-IP or MPLS-in-GRE
   validates the IP source address of the packet. This document does not
   require that the decapsulator validate the IP source address of the
   tunneled packets, but it should be understood that failure to do so
   presupposes that there is effective destination-based (or combination
   of source-based and destination-based) filtering at the boundaries.











Worster, et al.                                                [Page 11]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


9. Acknowledgments

   This specification combines prior work  on encapsulating MPLS in IP,
   by Tom Worster, Paul Doolan, Yasuhiro Katsube, Tom K. Johnson, Andrew
   G. Malis, and Rick Wilder, with prior work  on encapsulating MPLS in
   GRE, by Yakov Rekhter, Daniel Tappan, and Eric Rosen.  The current
   authors wish to thank all these authors for their contribution.

   Many people have made valuable comments and corrections, including
   Rahul Aggarwal, Scott Bradner, Alex Conta, Mark Duffy, Francois Le
   Feucheur, Allison Mankin, Thomas Narten, and Pekka Savola.


10. Normative References

   [RFC791] "Internet Protocol," J. Postel, Sep 1981

   [RFC792] "Internet Control Message Protocol", J. Postel, Sept 1981

   [RFC1191] "Path MTU Discovery", J.C. Mogul, S.E. Deering, November
   1990

   [RFC1981] "Path MTU Discovery for IP version 6", J. McCann, S.
   Deering, J. Mogul, August 1996

   [RFC2460]"Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification," S.
   Deering and R. Hinden, RFC 2460,Dec 1998

   [RFC2463] "Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the
   Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", A. Conta, S.
   Deering, December 1998

   [RFC2473] "Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6 Specification", A. Conta,
   S.  Deering, December 1998

   [RFC2784] "Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)", D. Farinacci, T. Li,
   S. Hanks, D. Meyer, P. Traina, March 2000

   [RFC3031] "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", E. Rosen, A.
   Viswanathan, R. Callon, January 2001

   [RFC3032] "MPLS Label Stack Encoding",  E. Rosen, D. Tappan, G.
   Fedorkow, Y. Rekhter, D. Farinacci, T. Li, A. Conta. January 2001








Worster, et al.                                                [Page 12]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


11. Informative References

   [RFC2401] "Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol", S. Kent,
   R. Atkinson, November 1998

   [RFC2402] "IP Authentication Header", S. Kent, R. Atkinson, November
   1998

   [RFC2406] "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)", S. Kent
   R.Atkinson, November 1998

   [RFC2409] "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)", D. Harkins, D. Carrel,
   November 1998

   [RFC2475] "An Architecture for Differentiated Service", S. Blake, D.
   Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, W. Weiss. December 1998

   [RFC2890] "Key and Sequence Number Extensions to GRE", G. Dommety,
   August 2000

   [RFC2983] "Differentiated Services and Tunnels", D. Black. October
   2000

   [RFC3260] "New Terminology and Clarifications for Diffserv", D.
   Grossman, April 2002

   [RFC3270] "Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Support of
   Differentiated Services", F. Le Faucheur, L. Wu, B. Davie, S. Davari,
   P. Vaananen, R. Krishnan, P. Cheval, J. Heinanen. May 2002


12. Author Information


      Tom Worster
      Email: fsb@thefsb.org



      Yakov Rekhter
      Juniper Networks, Inc.
      1194 N. Mathilda Ave.
      Sunnyvale, CA 94089
      Email: yakov@juniper.net







Worster, et al.                                                [Page 13]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004



      Eric Rosen
      Cisco Systems, Inc.
      1414 Massachusetts Avenue
      Boxborough, MA 01719
      Email: erosen@cisco.com



13. Intellectual Property Notice

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


14. Copyright Notice

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than



Worster, et al.                                                [Page 14]


Internet Draft    draft-ietf-mpls-in-ip-or-gre-07.txt         March 2004


   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."








































Worster, et al.                                                [Page 15]

