



ALTO Working Group                                       U. Rauschenbach
Internet-Draft                                            Nokia Networks
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 27, 2014
Expires: April 30, 2015


                    ALTO in wireless access networks
               draft-rauschenbach-alto-wireless-access-00

Abstract

   The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) specification
   defines the concept of Provider-defined Identifiers (PIDs) as the
   aggregation of network endpoints for network nodes.  Each PID can be
   associated with a set of endpoint addresses, e.g. aggregating
   endpoints that use the same network access point.

   This document focuses on mobile networks and introduces proposes the
   toidea of using use cells of cellular access networks as an
   aggregation points.  This allows applications to make decisions based
   on the path cost of using the current cell as a network attachment
   point, or to even choose which network access points network
   attachment point to select.  Use cases are described which can
   benefit from this.  The draft elaborates on possible ALTO
   modifications enabling such use cases.  The intent of the draft is to
   start discussion on the topic.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Problem statement
   3.  Use cases
     3.1.  Cell as aggregation point
     3.2.  Passive reaction to handovers
       3.2.1.  Cost calendar to extend battery life for background
               tasks
       3.2.2.  Cost calendar to optimize application sessions
     3.3.  Connection management and traffic offload
   4.  Requirements and solution ideas
   5.  References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) [RFC7285]
   specification allows providing information about a network to support
   applications in making decisions regarding the most optimal use of
   the network.  Originally geared towards supporting peer-to-peer
   applications in IP networks, the ALTO WG has recently broadened its
   scope.

   ALTO defines the concept of Provider-defined Identifiers (PIDs) to
   aggregate network endpoints.  Each PID can be associated with a set
   of endpoint addresses.  The concept of PIDs is generic and
   potentially allows many types of endpoint addresses - the ALTO
   specification mentions IP addresses, overlay IDs and MAC addresses.
   However, RFC 7285 only defines address types for IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses and leaves it to additional documents to define additional
   types.

   This document introduces a number of use cases occurring in wireless
   networks which benefit from associating a cell or access point with a
   PID.  In such scenarios, the cell or access point through which
   network attachment occurs or may occur in the future needs to be
   identifiable by the ALTO client.  Wireless access points provide
   information such as cell ID to identify them.  However, currently
   ALTO provides only IP addresses for endpoints, and arbitrary strings
   as PID values.  Allowing an ALTO map to provide information about an
   actual cell or access point can benefit use cases when the terminal
   needs metrics describing the path cost of using a particular cell or
   access point before the terminal attaches to the network via that
   cell or access point, as well as for using a cell ID to aggregate
   information about all endpoints attached to that cell or access
   point.

2.  Problem statement

   ALTO defines the concept of PIDs which can be used to aggregate
   network nodes.  A PID can aggregate e.g. cover all nodes connected to
   the network via a particular POP.  It is assumed that in fixed
   networks, the actual POP via which an endpoint is connected to the
   network rarely changes.  In cellular wireless networks, the situation
   is different.  Network access happens through cells.  Nodes
   frequently change cells when they move.  Traffic conditions and other
   costs may vary widely from cell to cell.  Therefore, it makes sense
   to include information about actual cells through which network
   attachment happens in the ALTO maps.  However, currently this is not
   possible in the ALTO data entities.  Similarly, access to WiFi
   networks happens through wireless access points which are currently
   also not considered in ALTO.

3.  Use cases

3.1.  Cell as aggregation point

   Wireless terminals connect to a cellular network through different
   cells, and to Wi-Fi networks through different wireless access
   points.  The quality of network access may vary greatly from
   connection point to connection point, e.g. due to congestion or the
   differing capacity of backhaul (connection point is used to refer to
   both cells and access points from now on).  In particular in cellular
   networks, the connection point actually used frequently changes.

   If the ALTO information model would be able to identify the
   connection point with a PID, then different costs could be provided
   for different map paths to the connection points.  Also, there may
   potentially be a large number of cellular subscribers connected to a
   typical cell.  It may not matter which endpoint addresses they use,
   but only via which connection point they are attached to the network.
   Exploiting this may greatly reduce map size as numerous endpoints
   under a connection point can be aggregated into a PID, and also
   reduce the number of map updates as endpoints move so that they can
   be attached via different connection points due to endpoint movement
   or handovers.

3.2.  Passive reaction to handovers

   Applications can benefit from knowledge or assumption about the cells
   a terminal is connected to or will with some probability be connected
   to in the near future.

   Applications may know which cells a terminal typically connects
   throughout a day e.g. from observing daily commute patterns.  They
   may also be provided candidate cells with favorable conditions by
   including in the ALTO response a set of non-congested cells in the
   vicinity of a queried cell.  Once the terminal connects to such a
   cell while moving, the application can execute tasks which require
   e.g. higher throughput.

   Also, if non-congested and congested cells overlap (such as e.g. a
   non-congested small cell or WiFi hotspot and a congested macro cell)
   and the terminal is in motion, an application can make assumptions
   about future congestion and prepare / react accordingly.

   Finally, applications may obtain candidate cells by accessing
   information about neighboring cells through the APIs provided by
   modern smartphones.

   Based on such knowledge, the following two classes of use cases can
   be distinguished.

3.2.1.  Cost calendar to extend battery life for background tasks

   Large fractions of Internet traffic today occur over wireless
   systems.  Not all traffic is real-time and many tasks can be
   performed in the background.  In particular, clients that download
   large volumes of data (e.g., mail applications or social network
   clients) can choose the time when they will actually download large
   items such as attachments or video clips.

   If a cost calendar does include information that a client can use to
   compute the achievable throughput of a service via different cells
   (e.g. based on information about available bandwidth or congestion
   information per cell), it can initiate or schedule large downloads to
   take place when it can connect to a cell that currently allows high
   throughput.

   If a high throughput cell is used for background downloads, the
   battery life can be extended as the terminal spends less time in
   battery-consuming states with the processor busy and the radio on and
   instead spends more time in battery-conserving idle modes.

3.2.2.  Cost calendar to optimize application sessions

   Cost and other metrics usually fluctuate over time e.g. based on the
   day of week.  Such knowledge can be used to provide hints to
   applications how to adapt proactively.  For instance, during (or
   prior to) user mobility (e.g. a commute), an application may make use
   of such heuristic information to prefetch farther in advance (beyond
   just in time) more items within an ongoing streaming session at times
   of low congestion, prior to it entering time intervals or cells with
   higher congestion etc.  Such knowledge can also contribute to picking
   a suitable video rate in progressive streaming.  In a video telephony
   session, applications may proactively switch to audio-only calls in
   congested areas.  This use case is somewhat related to the previous
   one; however, it focuses on optimizing the user experience of
   foreground tasks, rather than on scheduling background tasks.

3.3.  Connection management and traffic offload

   The previouis use cases have focussed on the application reacting on
   a change in network access point.  However, often various connection
   points of different wireless networks are available to which an
   endpoint may actively attach.  As mobile endpoints get more
   intelligent, functions for connection management and traffic offload
   can consider not only the quality of the radio connection when doing
   access selection and traffic offload, but also other properties such
   as cost parameters and additional metrics provided by ALTO.  Also,
   when multiple different wireless access options are available,
   traffic may be distributed between these options based on ALTO cost
   maps so the network can be used more optimally.  However, this
   requires that the wireless terminal can associate ALTO map entries
   with actual cell identifiers in the wireless networks.

4.  Requirements and solution ideas

   This section elaborates solution ideas as a starting point for the
   technical discussion.

   Aggregation in ALTO is modeled by a PID which represents a group of
   nodes.  A PID is identified by a provider-defined string with no
   general meaning, and an endpoint is identified by its IP address.

   Cellular networks use a cell identifier (cell ID) to identify the
   cells through which network attachment happens.  In Public Land
   Mobile Networks (PLMNs) based on E-UTRAN [TS36.311], the Cell ID is
   composed of the PLMN ID and the ECI, which in turn are composite
   identifiers.  The PLMN ID (Public Land Mobile Network IDentifier)
   identifies a wireless communications system.  It consists of the 3
   digit Mobile Country Code (MCC) and the 3 digit Mobile Network Code
   (MNC).  ECI is the E-UTRAN Cell Identifier which identifies a Cell
   within a PLMN.  An ECI is composed of eNB ID and Cell ID.  The eNB ID
   (20 bits) is the eNodeB IDentifier which identifies an eNB within a
   PLMN.  The Cell ID (8 bits) identifies a (sub)cell within a
   particular eNodeB.

   WiFi-based wireless networks provide data such as SSID, access point
   MAC address and other values that allow to identify the network
   access point.  Note that the Hotspot 2.0 specification [HS2.0] allows
   a terminal querying a number of parameters prior to connecting to an
   access point (such as Venue Name, Roaming Consortium, IP Address Type
   Availability, 3GPP Cellular Network, Domain Name, Hotspot Query List,
   Hotspot Capability List and others).  The terminal searching for a
   particular network access can retrieve the information elements
   through the IEEE 802.11 ANQP from the access point prior to
   connection establishment.  However, once connected to an access
   point, the terminal has to retrieve the information of other access
   points in the area by virtually detaching from the access point and
   running access network discovery over the air to the other access
   points.  It would be beneficial when the terminal would be able to
   retrieve the information of adjacent access points and access
   networks by way of e.g. an ALTO query over the existing connection.

   In order to enable the use cases defined above in ALTO, the IDs which
   identify the wireless connection point would have to be added to the
   ALTO data model.

   To support the use cases above, two things are required:

   1.  To enable querying properties of a certain cell such as bandwidth
       or degree of congestion.  Such queries could be supported through
       the mechanism of endpoint property queries (RFC7285 section
       11.4).  Possible solutions are:

       *  Solution A: The cellular access point would need to be defined
          as an additional endpoint inside the group aggregated by a
          PID, i.e. a new address type that represents a cell ID would
          be required.

       *  Solution B: A property query would be needed for the PID, plus
          a property that represents the cell identifier.

   2.  To enable cells as identifiable aggregation points, the notion of
       a PID (which is now just a string) would need to be extended by
       including cell identification.  Assigning different PIDs to
       different cells would then allow to create different cost map
       sections for paths of access through different cells (e.g., costs
       would be higher for access through congested cells than for
       access through non-congested cells).

       *  Solution: A PID would need to be extended by a cell identifier
          (related to Solution B above)

5.  References

   [HS2.0]    The WiFi Alliance, "Hotspot 2.0 (Release 2) Technical
              Specification, Version 1.0.0", August 2014.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC7285]  Alimi, R., Penno, R., Yang, Y., Kiesel, S., Previdi, S.,
              Roome, W., Shalunov, S., and R. Woundy, "Application-Layer
              Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Protocol", RFC 7285, September
              2014.

   [TS36.311]
              Third Generation Partnership Project, "3GPP TS 36.331 V12:
              Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network;
              Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Radio
              Resource Control (RRC); Protocol specification (Release
              12)", September 2014.

Author's Address

   Uwe Rauschenbach
   Nokia Networks

   Email: uwe.rauschenbach@nsn.com

