

Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                            March 16, 2004
Expires: September 14, 2004


            Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivivy
                 draft-klensin-ip-service-terms-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3667.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 14, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   As the Internet has evolved, many types of arrangements have been
   advertised and sold as "Internet connectivity".  Because these may
   differ significantly in the capabilities they offer, the range of
   options, and the lack of any standard terminology, has cause
   considerable consumer confusion.  This document provides a list of
   terms and definitions that may be helpful to providers, consumers,
   and, potentially, regulators in clarifying the type and character of
   services being offered.






Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                  March 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 The Problem and the Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2 Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology  . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3 Next Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  6








































Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                  March 2004


1. Introduction

1.1 The Problem and the Requirement

   Different ISPs and other providers offer a wide variety of products
   that are identified as "Internet" or "Internet access".   These
   products offer different types of functionality and, as a result,
   some may be appropriate for certain users and uses and not others.
   For example, a service that offers only access to the Web, but that
   does not support any other type of Internet services, may be entirely
   appropriate for someone who is exclusively interested in browsing and
   in web-based email servcies, but not for someone who who requires
   access to download files or make more intense use of email.  And it
   is likely to be even less appropriate for someone who requires the
   ability to operate servers for other users, who needs virtual private
   network (VPN) capabilities or other secured access to a remote
   office, or who needs to synchronize mail for offline use.

   This document is a first attempt at establishing some definitions for
   these various services.  It is hoped that the definitions will evolve
   into ones that can be standardized and and adopted widely enough to
   be useful to users and consumers.

1.2 Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology

   The definitions proposed here are clearly of little value if service
   providers and vendors are not willing to adopt them. Consequently,
   the terms proposed are intended to not be pejorative, despite the
   belief of some members of the IETF community that some of these
   connectively models are simply "broken" or "not really an Internet
   service".

1.3 Next Steps

   This document is a first cut.  For these definitions to be useful,
   considerable input from the IETF community, suggestions for
   additional terms, and better definitions will be required.  The
   document assumes that a single set of terms will be adequate and that
   a more complex arrangement --e.g., a matrix or array that contrasts a
   service type with address availability, presence or absence of NATs,
   etc.-- is not needed.  If something more complex _is_ needed, someone
   should propose it, although this author is very skeptical about the
   possibility of getting acceptance for a complex, multidimensional
   scheme.

   This version of the document ignores the availability of IPv6
   connectivity, both to avoid additional complexity and because IPv6 is
   not significant today in the markets for which the document is most



Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                  March 2004


   relevant.

2. Terminology

   Terms are listed below more or less in order of ascending (to "full
   Internet") capability.

   Web connectivity. This service provides connectivity to the web only.
      Other services are generally not supported.  In particular, there
      may be no access to POP3 or IMAP email, encrypted tunnels or other
      VPN mechanisms, etc. The addresses used are generally dynamic, and
      may not be public. The provider may impose a filtering web proxy
      on the connections; that proxy may change and redirect URLs to
      other sites than the one originally specified by the user or
      embedded link.

   Client only, non-public address. This service provides access to the
      Internet without support for server or peer to peer functions.
      The IP address assigned to the customer will almost always be
      dynamic and will not represent public address space.  Filtering
      web proxies are common with this type of service, but the provider
      should indicate whether or not one is present.

   Client only, public address. This service provides access to the
      Internet without support for server or peer to peer functions.
      The IP address assigned to the customer will often be dynamic but
      is in public address space. Most VPN and similar connections will
      work with this service, although the provider may prohibit the use
      of server functions by either legal (contractual) restrictions or
      by filtering of incoming connection attempts.  Filtering web
      proxies are uncommon with this type of service, and the provider
      should indicate if one is present. Similarly, while filters on,
      e.g., use of remote mail servers are uncommon with this type of
      service, they do occur and their presence should be identified to
      the user.

   Full Internet Connectivity. This service provides the user full
      Internet connectivity, with one or more static (or long-lived
      dynamic) public addresses assigned to the user.  Filtering web
      proxies and other restrictions on inbound or outbound ports and
      traffic are usually considered incompatible with this type of
      service and servers on a connected customer LAN are typically
      considered normal.

3. Security Considerations

   This document is about terminology, not protocols, and does not raise
   any particular security issues.  However, if the type of terminology



Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                  March 2004


   that is proposed is widely adopted, it may become easier to identify
   security-related expectations of particular hosts, LANs, and types of
   connections

4. Acknowledgements

   This document was inspired by an email conversation with Vernon
   Schryver, Paul Vixie, and Nathaniel Bornstein.  While there have been
   proposals to produce definitions like the ones above for many years,
   that conversation convinced the author that it was finally time to
   get a strawman on the table to see if the IETF could actually carry
   it forward.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com




























Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                  March 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                Expires September 14, 2004               [Page 6]


