


Network Working Group                                        N. Williams
Internet-Draft                                              Cryptonector
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 24, 2014
Expires: April 27, 2015


  Public Key-Based Kerberos Cross Realm Path Traversal Protocol Using
        Kerberized Certification Authorities (kx509) and PKINIT
                 draft-williams-kitten-krb5-pkcross-03

Abstract

   This document specifies a protocol for obtaining cross-realm Kerberos
   tickets using existing, related protocols: kerberized certification
   authorities (kx509) and public key cryptography initial
   authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT).  The resulting protocol has a
   number of desirable properties, primarily that it allows Kerberos to
   scale to large numbers of realms.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 27, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.      Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1.    Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.      The PKCROSS Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.    Client-Driven PKCROSS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2.    TGS-Driven PKCROSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2.1.  Issuing cross-realm TGTs issued for PKCROSS-keyed
           cross-realm TGS principals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2.2.  Handling impatient clients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.3.    Stapled DANE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.4.    Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.5.    Transit Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.5.1.  Transit path representation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.6.    Exchange of Long-Term Cross-Realm Symmetric Keys . . . . .  7
   3.      Security Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.1.    Automatic Cross-Realm Keying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.2.    Scalability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.3.    Privacy Protection relative to home realm  . . . . . . . .  9
   3.4.    Leap-of-Faith (LoF) / Trust-On-First-Use (TOFU)  . . . . .  9
   3.4.1.  Requirements and Recommendations for LoF/TOFU
           Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.      Application Programming Interface Considerations . . . . . 11
   4.1.    API Considerations for LoF/TOFU Authentication . . . . . . 11
   4.2.    GSS-API Naming Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.3.    Representation of LoF/TOFU Principal and Realm Names . . . 11
   4.4.    GSS-API Name-Type for Pseudonymous Principals  . . . . . . 12
   4.4.1.  Kerberos Name-Type for Pseudonymous Principals . . . . . . 13
   5.      Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.1.    Loss of Cross-Realm Principal Trust Establishment
           Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.2.    Security Considerations for LoF/TOFU . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.3.    On the Need for a Common Transit Path Policy Language  . . 15
   6.      IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   7.      Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.1.    Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.2.    Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
           Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20








Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


1.  Introduction

   Kerberos [RFC4120] supports meshes of many realms.  The individual
   relationships between realms must be manually keyed, usually with
   keys derived from passwords.  A full mesh wouldn't scale, therefore
   the protocol calls for hierarchical trust hierarchies.  In practice
   non-hierarchical but also non-fully-meshed relationships are used.

   These manually-exchanged keys are very difficult to rollover safely,
   and when they are changed the result is often outages -- controlled
   outages where foreseen, but outages nonetheless.

   Manual cross-realm keying does not scale, and has very poor security
   properties.  We seek to remediate this using public key cryptography,
   building on existing Kerberos specifications.

   Many years ago there was a proposal for exchanging cross-realm keys
   using a public key infrastructure (PKI) [RFC5280]; that proposal went
   by the name "PKCROSS".  We appropriate that long-dead proposal's
   name, but the protocol specified here is very different from the
   original proposal.

1.1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
























Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


2.  The PKCROSS Protocol

   We provide two variants of the PKCROSS protocol: one that is client-
   driven, and another that is driven by a Ticket Granting Service (TGS)
   on behalf of its clients.  The latter is based on the former, with
   the TGS acting as a client.  We begin with the client-driven case.
   DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) [RFC6698] can and
   should be used for realm CA certificate validation.

2.1.  Client-Driven PKCROSS

   A Kerberos client in with a ticket-granting ticket (TGT) for any one
   source realm (usually but not necessarily the client's own realm)
   wishing to acquire a TGT for a destination realm may use this
   protocol instead of the traditional cross-realm ticket-granting
   service (TGS) exchanges as follows:

   1.  Generate private key to a public key cryptosystem;

   2.  Request a certificate from the kx509 [RFC6717] service run by the
       source realm;

   3.  Request a TGT from the destination realm using PKINIT [RFC4556]
       and the client certificate obtained in step #2.

   If the destination realm issues the requested Ticket then it SHOULD
   include the client's certificate in an AD-CLIENT-CERTIFICATE
   authorization-data element, and it MUST do so if it does not validate
   the client's certificate to an acceptable trust anchor.  The AD-
   CLIENT-CERTIFICATE authorization-data MUST be in a KDC-signed
   authorization-data container [XXX add reference to CAMMAC].

   [[anchor1: QUESTION: Should the PKINIT request in step #3 be a TGS-
   REQ with PKINIT pre-auth data?]]

   [[anchor2: QUESTION: Should the PKINIT request in step #3 be required
   to be used within a FAST tunnel?]]

2.2.  TGS-Driven PKCROSS

   A TGS can bootstrap ephemeral cross-realm trust principals on behalf
   of its clients.  This allows the cost of PKCROSS to be amortized over
   many clients, and it allows participation by clients that do not
   support client-driven PKCROSS (or whose PKCROSS requests are rejected
   by the target).

   In this mode the TGS uses the client-driven PKCROSS protocol,
   modified as follows:



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   o  the TGS's client certificate MUST have an id-pkinit-san Subject
      Alternative Name (SAN) identifying the source TGS as krbtgt/
      SOURCE@SOURCE

   o  the TGS's client certificate MUST have an Extended Key Usage (EKU)
      of id-pkcross-issuer (TBD)

   The resulting TGT -which we shall term an "issuer TGT" (ITGT)- and
   its session key can then be used by the source TGS to create cross-
   realm TGTs for the source-to-target trust principal ("krbtgt/
   TARGET@SOURCE").

   This ITGT will be used to mint tickets as described below.

2.2.1.  Issuing cross-realm TGTs issued for PKCROSS-keyed cross-realm
        TGS principals

   Cross-realm TGTs issued by a source TGS using an ITGT will not be
   quite like normal Kerberos Tickets: their encrypted part contains an
   AP-REQ using the ITGT acquired by the source TGS, and this AP-REQ is
   "encrypted" with the null enctype, The AP-REQ's Authenitcator MUST
   contain an authorization-data element that carries a) the name of the
   client principal, b) the session key that the client should be using
   with the cross-realm TGTs issued.

    AD-PKCROSS-TGT-INFO ::= SEQUENCE {
        cname [0] Principal,    -- the client's realm is the
                                -- crealm from the ITGT's EncTicketPart
        key   [1] EncryptionKey
    }

                       Figure 1: AD-PKCROSS-TGT-INFO

2.2.2.  Handling impatient clients

   Because the process of acquiring an ITGT might be slow, a TGS doing
   so on behalf of a client could use a mechanism for instructing the
   client to be patient.  Existing clients would not handler a new error
   code by waiting, therefore there is not much that can be done to keep
   an impatient client from retrying at another KDC.

   The existing KDC_ERR_SVC_UNAVAILABLE error code cannot be used as
   often this causes the client to immediately retry the request at
   another KDC.  A new error code for indicating estimated time to
   completion of request would be handy, but out of scope for this
   document.

   Note that there is a denial of service (DoS) attack by clients on



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   willing source KDCs: the clients can ask the KDCs to acquire cross-
   realm ITGTs for many target realms.  Ideally the quality of service
   for the Kerberos authentication service (AS) with PKINIT (and/or
   other slow pre-authentication mechanisms) should be separate from
   that of the Kerberos TGS co-located with it, and the PKCROSS-capable
   TGS as well, so as to be able to throttle low-priority requests when
   under load.

2.3.  Stapled DANE

   [[anchor3: TBD.  We should use Google's serialization of DNS RRsets
   needed for DANE validation.  We will need a label for the TLSA RRs
   for kx509 issuers.]]

2.4.  Validation

   KDCs processing PKINIT requests crossing realms MUST apply either or
   both of:

   o  PKIX certificate validation

   o  DANE certificate validation

   KDCs MUST reject PKINIT requests from clients of foreign realms whose
   certificates cannot be validated, unless the client request the
   anonymous principal name in the target's realm.

2.5.  Transit Path

   The combined Kerberos/PKIX/DNSSEC transit path MUST be represented in
   any tickets issued using PKCROSS (see below).  As usual, each realm's
   KDCs in the mix can set the transit policy checked flag if a client's
   transit path is acceptable per the realm's KDCs' local policy.

   Two validation mechanisms are available: all PKIX [RFC5280]
   validation methods, and DANE [RFC6698].  DANE validation records
   SHOULD be stapled onto the client certificates by the issuing kx509
   CA; alternatively clients can staple DANE validation records onto
   their PKINIT requests using an authorization-data element, AD-PKINIT-
   CLIENT-DANE.

   Additionally, when PKIX certificate validation is used, the trust
   path should be encoded in an AD-INITIAL-VERIFIED-CAS authorization
   data element, per-PKINIT.







Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


2.5.1.  Transit path representation

   The notional transit path for a ticket issued by a target realm's
   KDCs includes:

   o  the source realm (never expressed in the 'transited' field of
      Kerberos Tickets)

   o  all realms in the ITGT's transited field (in the TGS-driven
      PKCROSS case)

   o  all issuers in the validation path for the kx509-issued
      certificate, which are

      *  all issuers in the certificate's PKIX validation path when PKIX
         validation is used

      *  all DNS zone domainnames transited from the source realm's
         domainname to the root zone

   o  the target realm (also never expressed in the 'transited' field)

   When using DANE for validation of the issuer's certificate the target
   SHOULD represent the transit path as hierarchical from the source
   realm's domain to the root domain, then direct from there to the
   target's realm.

   The notional transit path for a given client principal MUST be
   encoded as usual, using the Kerberos X.500 and domain-style
   representations of PKIX issuer names and DNS domainnames as
   faithfully to the original as possible.

   [[anchor4: QUESTION: Do we need a 100% faithful representation of the
   transit path?]]

2.6.  Exchange of Long-Term Cross-Realm Symmetric Keys

   A KDC can acquire a TGT using PKCROSS whose session key then becomes
   the long-lived, persistent symmetric key for a cross-realm principal
   from the source realm to the target realm ("krbtgt/TARGET@SOURCE").

   To do this the KDC MUST set the USE-SESSION-KEY-AS-REALM-KEY
   KDCOptions flag (TBD) in its request for an ITGT from the target
   realm.  As usual, the target realm's KDC MUST validate the client
   principal's certificate.  The target realm's KDC MUST NOT return a
   TGS-REP until the new principal is committed to its principal
   database, and MUST set the endtime of the ITGT to the time at which
   the source realm may begin using the new symmetrically-keyed



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   principal.

   The source realm's KDC MUST commit the new principal to its principal
   database and MUST NOT begin using the new principal's long-term keys
   until the new principal is available to all KDCs for the source realm
   and the endtime of the ITGT passes.

   Target KDCs SHOULD require manual pre-approval of such new cross-
   realm principals.  In small, isolated environments a KDC MAY be
   configured to pre-approve all such new principals.

   By default, source KDCs SHOULD NOT automatically request long-term
   keying of cross-realm principals.






































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


3.  Security Properties

   The proposed PKCROSS protocol has several useful properties described
   below.

3.1.  Automatic Cross-Realm Keying

   No more manual keying of cross-realm principals via exchanging
   passwords in-person on a telephone call (or similar).

3.2.  Scalability

   Kerberos with commonplace symmetrically-keyed hierarchical cross-real
   trusts can scale to a large universe of realms, but only if there are
   top-level realms that are willing to pair-wise trust and "child"
   realms.  Such top-level realms do not exist in practice, leading to
   an O(N^2) scaling problem for most two-label realms.

   Leveraging a PKI, such as a PKIX PKI [RFC5280] or a DNSSEC PKI
   [RFC4033] removes the need for either top-level realms (which are not
   likely to ever be operated as commercial or even non-profit entities)
   or O(N^2) pair-wise cross-realm symmetric keying.

   The cost of this is having to add PKI trust paths to Kerberos trust
   paths (though the resulting trust path length need not be much
   different than before).

3.3.  Privacy Protection relative to home realm

   This protocol protects the privacy of client principals vis-a-vis
   their home realms, when the clients use the client-driven PKCROSS
   protocol.

   This feature is generally and naturally available in PKI, and as this
   protocol is based on a kerberized certification authority, this
   protocol inherits this privacy feature from PKI.

   The realms visited by the client may, of course, inform the client's
   home realm, but in the event that they don't, the client does gain
   this small measure of privacy.  Of course, the privacy-conscious
   client SHOULD attach an OCSP Response [RFC6960] to its PKINIT
   request, per [RFC4557].

3.4.  Leap-of-Faith (LoF) / Trust-On-First-Use (TOFU)

   Clients need not validate the certificate trust path of destination
   realms.  When they do not, the services used through those
   destination realms are as good as anonymous authentication.  If the



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   client saves the root or intermediate or end entity certificates of
   the destination realms that it cannot or does not validate, then the
   client can check that on future occasions the destination realm's
   certificate has not changed, and it may warn the user if it has.
   This quite similar to how clients using the secure shell (SSH)
   protocol [RFC4251] handle server authentication, and is commonly
   known as "leap-of-faith" (LoF) or trust-on-first-use (TOFU).  The
   result is pseudonymous authentication.

   Destination services too may apply LoF/TOFU: by using the
   subjectPublicKey of the certificate in the ticket's AD-CLIENT-
   CERTIFICATE KDC-issued authorization-data as the client's name
   instead of validating the transit path of the client.

3.4.1.  Requirements and Recommendations for LoF/TOFU Authentication

   o  Implementations MUST NOT use LoF/TOFU to authenticate a target
      service's realm without the approval of the user or without making
      it clear that the realm is not fully authenticated (perhaps by
      replacing the realm's name with a fingerprint of its public key /
      certificate).

   o  Implementations MAY allow users and/or service administrators to
      establish user-friendly aliases for peer principal names that
      include public key fingerprint material.


























Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


4.  Application Programming Interface Considerations

   For non-LoF/TOFU uses the main security consideration for
   applications is that improved scalability for Kerberos realm
   traversal implies larger Kerberos universes, and the larger a
   universe of trust the more important it is to have useful and
   expressive local policy for evaluating the trustworthiness of any
   given transit path.  Because in most applications local policy should
   be a component external to the application, there is no impact on
   APIs here.  However, an implementation may wish to provide
   applications with interfaces for specifying policies, either named or
   by value.

4.1.  API Considerations for LoF/TOFU Authentication

   For LoF/TOFU uses there is a critical requirement that APIs not
   permit accidental aliasing of principal names as a result of LoF/TOFU
   being used.  The simplest way to do this is to use a fingerprint of
   the peer principal's public key as their principal, and/or a
   fingerprint of the peer principal's realm's public key as their
   realm.

   [[anchor5: For interoperability and compatibility we might want to
   specify what fingerprint algorithm to use, perhaps one of the SSHv2
   fingerprint algorithms, such as in RFC4255, but those use weaker
   hashes...]]

4.2.  GSS-API Naming Considerations

   There are no GSS-API-specific considerations.  The naming
   considerations described in Section 4.1 and the naming attributes
   defined in [I-D.williams-kitten-generic-naming-attributes] are
   sufficient.  Note however that information about how PKCROSS was used
   to establish symmetrically-keyed cross-realm principals is lost and
   will not appear in the transit path in tickets issued by KDCs reached
   via such cross-realm principals.

   [[anchor6: Actually, we may need to specify some interfaces by which
   to indicate that the user wishes to alias a pseudonymous name.
   Perhaps we can do so by applying GSS_Set_name_attribute() to a peer
   MN obtained from GSS_Inquire_context()?]]

4.3.  Representation of LoF/TOFU Principal and Realm Names

   If there is no acceptable or verifiable trust path for validating a
   peer's principal's and/or realm's certificate, then the local end-
   point MUST locally output the peer's principal (or realm) name as a
   fingerprint of one of:



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   1.  peer's EE certificate's subject public key;

   2.  a subject Name or GeneralName from the peer's EE certificate and
       the peer's certificate issuer's subjectPublicKey.

   The choice of which of the above to fingerprint is a local choice.
   The default SHOULD be (1). (2) allows for key rollover.

   The fingerprints MUST be computed as follows:

   o  First format a byte string as follows:

      *  for (1) take the subjectPublicKey's DER [add ref to x.690]
         encoding (this is a BIT STRING), with no additional tagging

      *  for (2) take the DER encoding of the ASN.1 type
         "nameAndIssuerFPInput ::= SEQUENCE { subjectName GeneralName,
         issuerPublicKey BIT STRING}"

   o  Then apply SHA-256 to the octet string from the first step, then
      take the most significant 192 bits of that hash and base64-encode
      using the "URL- and filename-safe alphabet" [RFC4648].

   o  Prefix ":spk:" if using (1) or ":nai:" if using (2).  This is the
      fingerprint to use as either the principal name's single
      component, or as the principal's realm name.  If the name is a
      realm name then the colons (':') in the prefix are to be removed
      so as to produce valid Kerberos realm names.

   For example, ":spk:MjNhNjM0YTM4NDFiZDdhNjVkODQ5YTdi"@FOO.EXAMPLE or
   "HTTP/someserver.foo.example@spkMmE1M2RiMjc1Nzk5ODFjNWQwYjk0OTAw".
   Note that all such realm names have no period character ('.') in them
   and will too long to match top-level domainnames in use in the DNS,
   and no such principal names have a forward slash ('/') character in
   them.  Note also that interpretation of such principal names as
   usernames on POSIX systems will either produce an empty string (due
   to implementation issues regarding the use of colons (':' as
   separators in POSIX user databases) or the full string, either way
   not likely ti collide with valid usernames.

4.4.  GSS-API Name-Type for Pseudonymous Principals

   We add a new GSS-API name-type: GSS_C_NT_PSEUDONYMOUS.  This
   represents principals whose names are pseudonymous.







Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


4.4.1.  Kerberos Name-Type for Pseudonymous Principals

   At this time pseudonymous principal names should not appear in
   Kerberos PDUs, thus no name-type need be assigned.  If a pseudonymous
   name must be appear in a Kerberos PDU for any reason then the NT-
   UNKNOWN name-type should be used.













































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


5.  Security Considerations

   [[anchor7: All the security considerations of Kerberos and PKI apply.
   Security considerations are discussed throughout this document.]]

   Scaling up the universe of realms reachable via any trust path
   necessarily dilutes trust overall, but not for specific paths.  On
   the other hand, by shortening transit path lengths trust can be
   improved, though some short transit paths will have been
   symmetrically keyed using this PKCROSS protocol and therefore will be
   longer than they appear to be.  These are subjective notions of
   trust, of course.

5.1.  Loss of Cross-Realm Principal Trust Establishment Information

   Once a cross-realm principal is symmetrically keyed the transit path
   used to automatically key that principal will no longer appear in
   subsequent cross-realm tickets issued by the target.

   The Kerberos transit path encodes only realm names (including X.500-
   style names, thus PKIX certificate subject and issuer names), and
   lacks any public key information that might be useful for pinning.
   However, the certificate validation path for each realm in a transit
   path SHOULD be included in the transit path.

5.2.  Security Considerations for LoF/TOFU

   LoF/TOFU has additional security considerations.  To start there is
   the obvious susceptibility to peer impersonation / man-in-the-middle
   (MITM) attacks on initial contact, which is mitigated by the
   attacker's need to always remain in the middle in order to avoid
   detection.

   LoF/TOFU require the ability to remember peers' pseudonymous
   identities -- their public keys (or certificates), otherwise one
   remains vulnerable to peer impersonation / MITM attacks at all times.
   This requires synchronization of peer pseudonym databases across
   multiple devices (where users have multiple devices), which may not
   always be possible or performed.

   It is critical that existing applications not be broken by the
   ability to use LoF/TOFU in new Kerberos implementations when those
   applications are re-linked with newer Kerberos implementations.  To
   ensure this we require the use of public key fingerprints as
   principal and/or realm names; local mappings of learned pseudonym
   mappings onto semantically meaningful names are permitted where the
   user can validate the mapping.  But keep in mind that most users
   never actually do much to verify peers' public keys in any



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   application/protocol that provides LoF/TOFU [references for this
   would be nice -Nico].

   See Section 3.4.1 for additional requirements for LoF/TOFU
   authentication.

5.3.  On the Need for a Common Transit Path Policy Language

   There are no standard ways to express authorization policies for
   trust transit paths for either Kerberos nor PKI.  A standard language
   for this would be extremely useful.  Such a language should allow for
   the expression of policies for both, clients and services.  Such a
   language should allow for the expression of complex realm/domain/
   other naming, and should allow for HSTS-style pinning [add references
   -Nico].  Such a language should allow for multiple paths where
   desired, and should allow for more than path rejection: it should
   also allow for reducing the entitlements assigned to a peer/realm for
   authorization purposes.

   The need for a standard transit path policy expression language is
   not new, and such a language is broadly and generally needed.
   Therefore such a language is outside this document's scope.





























Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


6.  IANA Considerations

   [[anchor8: Allocate the new KDCOptions flag (USE-SESSION-KEY-AS-
   REALM-KEY) and authorization-data element (AD-CLIENT-CERTIFICATE), as
   well as the new EKU id-pkcross-issuer.]]














































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


7.  Acknowledgements

   Although the author arrived at this "kx509 + PKINIT == PKCROSS" idea
   independently, it is not an original idea.  Henry Hotz and Jeffrey
   Altman each conceived the same idea years earlier.  It is a
   relatively obvious idea when taking into account efforts to bridge
   disparate security mechanisms and credentials infrastructures.












































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              July 2005.

   [RFC4556]  Zhu, L. and B. Tung, "Public Key Cryptography for Initial
              Authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT)", RFC 4556, June 2006.

   [RFC4557]  Zhu, L., Jaganathan, K., and N. Williams, "Online
              Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) Support for Public Key
              Cryptography for Initial Authentication in Kerberos
              (PKINIT)", RFC 4557, June 2006.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, October 2006.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012.

   [RFC6717]  Hotz, H. and R. Allbery, "kx509 Kerberized Certificate
              Issuance Protocol in Use in 2012", RFC 6717, August 2012.

   [I-D.williams-kitten-generic-naming-attributes]
              Williams, N., "Generic Naming Attributes for the Generic
              Security Services Application Programming Interface (GSS-
              API)", draft-williams-kitten-generic-naming-attributes-01
              (work in progress), August 2013.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4251]  Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, "The Secure Shell (SSH)
              Protocol Architecture", RFC 4251, January 2006.



Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


   [RFC6960]  Santesson, S., Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A.,
              Galperin, S., and C. Adams, "X.509 Internet Public Key
              Infrastructure Online Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP",
              RFC 6960, June 2013.















































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                   PKCROSS                    October 2014


Author's Address

   Nicolas Williams
   Cryptonector, LLC

   Email: nico@cryptonector.com













































Williams                 Expires April 27, 2015                [Page 20]

