

Network Working Group                                     H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                               Columbia U.
Expires: August 8, 2004                                         B. Rosen
                                                                 Marconi
                                                        February 8, 2004


           Emergency Services for Internet Telephony Systems
                draft-schulzrinne-sipping-emergency-arch

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 8, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Summoning emergency help is a core feature of telephone networks.
   This document describes how the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) can
   be used to provide advanced emergency services for voice-over-IP
   (VoIP). The architecture employs standard SIP features and requires
   no new protocol mechanisms. DNS is used to map civil and geospatial
   locations to the appropriate emergency call center.








Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


Table of Contents

   1.   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.   Identifying an Emergency Call  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   Location and Its Role in an Emergency Call . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.2  Types of Location Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.3  Sources of Location Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.4  Using Location Information for Call Routing  . . . . . . . .  10
   6.   Routing the Call to the ECC  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.1  Routing the First Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.2  Updating Location Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.   Preventing Call Misdirection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.   Requirements for SIP Proxy Servers . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9.   Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   10.  Requirements for SIP User Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10.1 Emergency call taker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10.2 Calling users  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11.  Example Call Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   12.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12.1 ECC Impersonation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12.2 Call Content Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
        Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
        Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  21























Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


1. Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


2. Overview

   Summoning police, the fire department or an ambulance in emergencies
   is one of the fundamental and most-valued functions of the telephone.
   As telephone functionality moves from circuit-switched telephony to
   Internet telephony, its users rightfully expect that this core
   functionality works at least as well as for the older technology.
   However, many of the technical advantages of Internet telephony
   require re-thinking of the traditional emergency calling
   architecture.  This challenge also offers an opportunity to improve
   the working of emergency calling technology, while potentially
   lowering its cost and complexity.

   It is beyond the scope of this document to enumerate and discuss all
   the differences between traditional (PSTN) and Internet telephony,
   but the core differences can be summarized as separation of signaling
   and media data, the emergence of application-independent carriers,
   and the potential mobility of all end systems, including landline
   systems and not just those using radio access technology.

   This document focuses on how ECCs can natively handle Internet
   telephony emergency calls, rather than Describing how
   circuit-switched ECCs can handle VoIP calls.  However, in many cases,
   ECCs making the transition from circuit-switched interfaces to
   packet-switched interfaces may be able to use some of the mechanisms
   described here, in combination with gateways that translate
   packet-switched calls into legacy interfaces, e.g., to continue to be
   able to use existing call taker equipment.

   Existing emergency call systems are organized nationally; there are
   currently no international standards.  However, Internet telephony
   does not respect national boundaries, and thus an international
   standard is required.

   Furthermore, VoIP endpoints can be connected through tunneling
   mechanisms such as virtual private networks (VPNs).  This
   significantly complicates emergency calling, because the location of
   the caller and the first element that routes emergency calls can be
   on different continents, with different conventions and processes for
   handling of emergency calls.  The IETF has historically refused to
   create national variants of its standards.  Thus, this document
   attempts to take into account best practices that have evolved for
   circuit switched ECCs, but makes no assumptions on particular
   operating practices currently in use, numbering schemes or
   organizational structures.

   This document assumes that ECC interface is using the Session
   Initation Protocol (SIP).  Use of a single protocol greatly



Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


   simplifies the design and operation of the emergency calling
   infrastructure.  Only peer-to-peer protocols such as H.323, ISUP and
   SIP are suitable for inter-domain communications, ruling out
   master-slave protocols such as MGCP or H.248/Megaco.  The latter
   protocols can natually be used by the enterprise or carrier placing
   the call, but any such call would reach the ECC through a media
   gateway controller, similar to how interdomain VoIP calls would be
   placed.  Other signaling protocols may also use protocol translation
   to communicate with a SIP-enabled ECC.

   Existing emergency services rely exclusively on voice, and
   conventional TDD text media streams.  However, more choices of media
   offer additional ways to communicate, evaluate and assist callers and
   call takers to handle emergency calls.  For example, instant
   messaging and video could improve the ability to evaluate the
   situation and provide appropriate instruction prior to arrival of
   emergency crews. Thus, the architecture described here supports the
   creation of sessions of any media type, negotiated between the caller
   and ECC using existing SIP protocol mechanisms [RFC3264].

   While traditionally, emergency services have been summoned by voice
   calls only, this document does not rule out the use of additional
   media during an emergency call, both to support callers with
   disabilities (e.g., through interactive text or video communications)
   and to provide additional information to the call taker and caller.
   For example, video from the caller to the ECC may allow the call
   taker to better assess the emergency situation; a video session from
   the ECC to the emergency caller may allow the call taker to provide
   instructions for first aid.

   The choice of media and encodings is negotiated on a call-by-call
   basis using standard SIP mechanisms [RFC3265].  To ensure that at
   least one common means of communications, this document recommends
   certain minimal capabilities in Section Section 10 that call taker
   user agents and ECC-operated proxies should possess.

   This document does not prescribe the detailed network architecture
   for ECCs or collection of ECCs.  For example, it does not describe
   where ECCs may place firewalls or how many SIP proxies they should
   use.

   This document does not introduce any new SIP header fields, request
   methods, status codes, message bodies, or events. User agents unaware
   of the recommendations in this draft can place emergency calls, but
   may not be able to provide the same user interface functionality. The
   document suggests behavior for proxy servers, in particular outbound
   proxy servers.




Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


3. Terminology

   (emergency) call taker Person that answers an emergency call;
      typically located in an emergency call center.

   ECC (emergency call center) Call center that receives emergency calls
      and dispatches polic, fire and rescue services. An ECC serves a
      limited geographic area. In the United States, PSAPs are ECCs.

   ESRP (emergency service routing proxy) SIP proxy that routes incoming
      emergency calls to the appropriate ECC.

   PSAP (public safety answering point) The United States and Canadian
      term for ECC.

   SIP proxy see [RFC3261]

   SIP UA (user agent) see [RFC3261]

































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


4. Identifying an Emergency Call

   Using the PSTN, emergency help can often be summoned at a designated,
   widely known number, regardless of where the telephone was purchased.
   However, this number differs between localities, even though it is
   often the same for a country or region (such as many countries in the
   European Union).  For end systems based on the Session Initiation
   Protocol (SIP), it is desirable to have a universal identifier,
   independent of location, to simplify the user experience, allow the
   automated inclusion of location information and to allow the device
   and other entities in the call path to perform appropriate
   processing.

   As part of the overall emergency calling architecture, we define a
   common user identifier, "sos" and "sos" with an emergency service
   designation, as the contact mechanism for emergency assistance.  In
   addition, two tel URIs, tel:112 and tel:911, are permissible as
   emergency call identifiers issued by a user agent.  We refer to this
   URI as the "emergency calling URI".  The calling user agent sets both
   the "To" header and the request-URI to the emergency URI, so that
   entities after the ESRP can still readily determine that this is an
   emergency call.  Details are described in
   [draft-schulzrinne-sipping-sos].

   In addition, user agents SHOULD detect emergency calls following
   local emergency calling conventions.  There are two local
   conventions, namely those local to the user's SIP domain, e.g., a
   user's network at work, and those at the caller's current geographic
   location, e.g., while traveling.  The former can be obtained using
   SIP configuration mechanisms (Section Section 9).  Obtaining
   geographically local emergency numbers is more difficult,
   particularly if the outbound proxy or DHCP server may be in a
   different country than the caller.  There are several, complementary
   solutions.  First, DHCP can be extended with a pointer to a local SIP
   configuration, including the dial plan specifying emergency numbers.
   In addition, we define a new DNS resource record that identifies the
   country-specific emergency number.

   Location information can be provided by the user agent or a proxy. If
   the user agent provides this information, the user agent needs to be
   able to determine that a call is indeed an emergency call as it is
   unlikely to include location information in each call.









Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


5. Location and Its Role in an Emergency Call

5.1 Introduction

   Caller location plays a central role in routing emergency calls.  For
   practical reasons, each ECC generally handles only calls for a
   certain geographic area.  Other calls that reach it by accident must
   be manually re-routed (transferred) to the appropriate ECC,
   increasing call handling delay and the chance for errors.  The area
   covered by each ECC differs by jurisdiction, where some countries
   have only a small number of ECCs, while others devolve ECC
   responsibilities down to the community level.

   In most cases, ECCs cover at least a city or town, but there are some
   areas where ECC coverage areas follow old telephone rate center
   boundaries and may straddle more than one city.

5.2 Types of Location Information

   There are four primary types of location information:  civil, postal,
   geospatial, and cellular cell tower and sector.

   Civil: Civil information describes the location of a person or object
      by a floor and street address that corresponds to a building or
      other structure.

   Postal: Postal addresses are similar to civil addresses, but the may
      contain post office boxes or street addresses that do not
      correspond to an actual building.  Postal addresses are generally
      unsuitable for emergency call routing, but may be the only address
      available to a service provider, derived from billing records.

   Geospatial: Geospatial addresses contain longitude, latitude and
      altitude information.

   Cell tower/sector: Cell tower and sectors identify the cell tower and
      the antenna sector that the mobile device is currently using.
      (Cell/sector information could also be transmitted as an
      irregularly shaped polygon of geospatial coordinates reflecting
      the likely geospatial location of the mobile device, but since
      these boundaries are not sharp, transmitting the raw information
      is probaby preferable.)


5.3 Sources of Location Information

   There are two principal contributors of location information.  In
   some cases, the calling end system knows its current civil and/or



Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


   geospatial location, in others the outbound proxy or other network
   entity.  In some cases, both such entities may have location
   information, possibly partially contradictory.  This document
   provides no recommendation on how to reconcile conflicting location
   information or which one is to be used by routing elements.
   Conflicting location information is particularly harmful if it points
   to multiple distinct ECCs.  If there is no other basis for choice,
   the ESRP SHOULD determine the appropriate ECC for all location
   objects and, if there is a conflict, route based on the most accurate
   one.

   To facilitate such policy decisions, location information SHOULD
   contain information about the source of data, such as GPS, manually
   entered or based on subscriber address information.  In addition, the
   author of the location information SHOULD be included.  TBD:  need to
   add this to (e.g.) PIDF-LO!

   End systems and network elements can derive location information from
   a variety of sources.  It is not the goal of this document to
   exhaustively enumerate them, but we provide a few common examples
   below:

   GPS: Global Positioning System (GPS) information is generally only
      available where there is a clear view of a large swath of the sky.
      It is accurate to tens of feet.

   Wireless triangulation: Either cell towers or 802.11 access points
      triangulate based on signal strength or time of arrival.

   DHCP: The device obtains location information provided by its DHCP
      server, derived through one of the other methods enumerated here.

   Location beacons: A short range wireless beacon, e.g., using
      BlueTooth or infrared, announces its location to mobile devices in
      the vicinity.

   Subscriber information: A carrier has address information reflecting
      the service location for its subscribers.

   Manual configuration: A user manually enters civil or geospatial
      information into a mobile or stationary device.

   TBD:  there is a need to indicate which location information has been
   used to avoid possible routing loops, where two proxies pick
   different location information from the call request, each pointing
   to the other one.





Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


5.4 Using Location Information for Call Routing

   Note that emergency calls may not be routed to the geographically
   closest ECC, but rather to the most jurisdictionally appropriate one,
   which may well be further away.

   Location information may not be available at call setup time. For
   example, if a GPS-enabled cell phone is turned on and then
   immediately places an emergency call, it can take an additional 20-25
   seconds before the cell phone acquires a GPS fix and its location.
   Thus, while it is necessary and expedient to include caller location
   information in the call setup message, this is not sufficient in all
   circumstances. In some cases, the initial call setup will proceed
   based on, for example, cell and sector information and then add
   location information during the call, rather than delaying the
   initial call setup by an unacceptable amount of time.

   In addition, the location of a mobile caller, e.g., in a vehicle or
   aircraft, can change significantly during the emergency call.
































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


6. Routing the Call to the ECC

6.1 Routing the First Request

   Emergency calls are routed based on location information contained
   within the call setup request (INVITE).  If there is no or imprecise
   (e.g., cell tower/sector) information, an on-going emergency call may
   also be transferred to another ECC based on location information.

   Each proxy receiving an emergency call request, identified as
   described in Section Section 4, attempts to route the call to the
   most appropriate ECC.  Similarly, a user agent can also directly
   route emergency calls if it has location information, either obtained
   locally or from a redirect response provided by the outbound proxy.
   There are three types of routing actions:  default routing, DNS-based
   routing and local routing.

   ESRPs and user agents using default routing forward all emergency
   call requests to one designated ESRP, regardless of the location of
   the caller.

   ESRPs and user agents using DNS-based routing employ the mechanism in
   [-dns-] to route calls to another ESRP that is qualified to handle
   the emergency call.  Thus, DNS acts here as a location service for
   the proxy.

   Finally, an ESRP MAY use a local database to perform location-based
   call routing.  The details of such a database are beyond the scope of
   this document.

   If an emergency call INVITE request does not contain location
   information and no other location hints (such as subscriber identity)
   are available, the first ESRP in the call path SHOULD route it to an
   ECC that is geographically local to that proxy, since no other call
   routing can be performed.

   Jurisdictions organizing ECCs may choose to implement multiple levels
   of routing based on location.  For example, a state or province might
   deploy an ESRP in front of a collection of ECCs.  The information
   available to a VoIP carrier or enterprise ESRP may be coarse, so that
   any location within the state or province gets routed to the state/
   province ESRP, with that ESRP doing the detailed routing to a
   specific ECC.  Thus, each ESRP MUST inspect the INVITE request and
   determine if more precise request routing is called for.

6.2 Updating Location Information

   Location information is needed both for routing the initial INVITE



Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


   message in a call as well as possibly later during a call since
   location information may change or only become available later, after
   the call has reached an ECC.

   This document considers three mechanisms for conveying updated
   location during a call:  UPDATE or re-INVITE, INFO or dialog events.

   In the first approach, the caller sends UDPATE [RFC3311], prior to
   completion of the initial INVITE transaction, or re-INVITE requests
   to the destination.  Care must be taken that these requests are
   routed to the same destination as the original call-initiating
   request.  This is unlikely to be a problem for a re-INVITE if the
   Contact header field in the 200 OK indicates the ECC address.

   In the second approach, the ECC subscribes to the location of the
   caller, using the SIP event mechanism and PIDF-LO
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pidf-lo]. This approach has the advantage that
   authorized third parties can easily get access to call-related
   location information.  This also works better if a network entity has
   location information, rather than the user agent.  With the re-INVITE
   approach, the user agent would have to obtain this information via
   redirection.

   A third alternative is to use the SIP INFO method, as the location
   update does not require an offer-answer exchange and does not change
   call state.

























Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


7. Preventing Call Misdirection

   We need to prevent that an emergency call reaches a destination other
   than an ECC. For example, a rogue UA able to intercept SIP requests
   might be able to impersonate an ECC.

   In the absence of a globally recognized certificate that ensures that
   the owner is a legitimate PSAP, we rely on a chain of trust enforced
   by the 'sips' URI schema.  The 'sips' URI schema forces each SIP hop
   to route the call only to destinations supporting TLS transport.
   Each ESRP MUST verify that the next-hop destination chosen as
   described in Section Section 6 corresponds to the server certificate
   offered by that destination.






































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


8. Requirements for SIP Proxy Servers

   All ESRP SHOULD support RFC 3261 [RFC3261] with UDP, TCP, TLS
   transports.

   For robustness, ESRPs SHOULD NOT use RFC 1918 [RFC1918] addresses,
   i.e., should not be behind network address translators.












































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


9. Configuration

   SIP devices do not require any additional configuration to place
   emergency calls. They SHOULD use the local outbound proxy, discovered
   via [RFC3361] or [RFC3319].

   However, to acquire local dial plan numbers, the SIP configuration
   framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-config-framework] can be used.  The
   format for dial plans remains to be defined.  A device may retrieve
   dial plan information for emergency calls from two locations, namely
   the user's home domain and the local outbound proxy, as described in
   Section 3.13 of [I-D.ietf-sipping-config-framework].

   Since a traveling user cannot rely on a DHCP server in the visited
   location to have accurate local emergency number information, we also
   propose a new DNS resource record, EN.  Typically, this resource
   record will be associated with a country-level 'sos.arpa' zone, as
   most countries either have or are developing country-wide emergency
   numbers. These number strings are treated as dial strings, not "tel"
   URIs.  TBD: It might be possible to use NAPTR [RFC2915] records to
   include translations such that 110 becomes sos.police for
   de.sos.arpa. NAPTR translations are not limited to hostnames or URIs.

   In the example below, the German emergency number for police is
   translated into an 'sos' URI. This only works if there is a
   designated SIP proxy that can route all emergency calls originating
   in Germany. There does not appear to be a way to substitute the
   caller's current home AOR domain, although one could conceivably
   adopt a convention for including this information. Note that this
   mechanism would also allow direct routing based on finer-grained
   location information, e.g., at the city level.

   de.sos.arpa.
   ;;       order pre flags service        regexp     replacement
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "SOS" "/110/sips:sos.police@notfall.de/i" .

   bonn.nrw.de.sos.arpa.
   ;;       order pre flags service        regexp      replacement
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "SOS" "/110/sips:sos.police@pol.bonn.de/i" .

   Example NAPTR records to map dial strings to 'sos' URIs

                                Figure 1








Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


10. Requirements for SIP User Agents

10.1 Emergency call taker

   To increase the likelihood that diverse user equipment can
   successfully communicate with the ECC, it is recommended that call
   taker equipment has the following minimal capabilites:

   signaling: RFC 3261, with UDP, TCP and TLS (sips) support RFC 3262

   audio: RTP and RTCP according to ..., G.711, GSM 06.10, FEC, SRTP

   Interactive text

   SIP-based instant messaging

10.2 Calling users

   A user agent placing an emergency call SHOULD use the "sips" URI
   schema for all such calls, forcing these calls to use TLS as secure
   hop-by-hop transport. If a call cannot be established using TLS
   transport, the user agent SHOULD attempt a call using the "sip" URI.

   If a user agent receives a redirect (3xx) response for an emergency
   call, it MUST include the location information contained in that
   response in the outgoing call. This differs from regular behavior for
   redirects, where the message body is not copied into the new call.

   A user agent MUST check the Contact URI in redirect responses to see
   if it is an emergency call, as described in Section X. If so, the
   behavior in the previous paragraph applies.

   End systems that allow human users to initiate an emergency call with
   a single button press or other similar stimulus SHOULD require
   callers to confirm their call.
















Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


11. Example Call Flows

   TBD
















































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


12. Security Considerations

12.1 ECC Impersonation

   See Section Section 7.

   With DNS-based call routing (Section Section 6), an attacker could
   modify the DNS entries for one or more ECCs, re-routing calls
   destined for them.  Thus, the use of secure DNS is RECOMMENDED.

12.2 Call Content Integrity








































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pidf-lo]
              Peterson, J., "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object
              Format", draft-ietf-geopriv-pidf-lo-01 (work in progress),
              February 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-config-framework]
              Petrie, D., "A Framework for SIP User Agent
              Configuration", draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-01
              (work in progress), October 2003.

   [I-D.schulzrinne-geopriv-dhcp-civil]
              Schulzrinne, H., "DHCP Option for Civil Location",
              draft-schulzrinne-geopriv-dhcp-civil-01 (work in
              progress), February 2003.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2915]  Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer
              (NAPTR) DNS Resource Record", RFC 2915, September 2000.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler,
              "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, June
              2002.

   [RFC3265]  Roach, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific
              Event Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002.

   [RFC3311]  Rosenberg, J., "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
              UPDATE Method", RFC 3311, October 2002.

   [RFC3319]  Schulzrinne, H. and B. Volz, "Dynamic Host Configuration
              Protocol (DHCPv6) Options for Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Servers", RFC 3319, July 2003.

   [RFC3361]  Schulzrinne, H., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
              (DHCP-for-IPv4) Option for Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Servers", RFC 3361, August 2002.







Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


Informative References

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G. and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP
              5, RFC 1918, February 1996.


Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7042
   EMail: hgs@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu


   Brian Rosen
   Marconi
   2000 Marconi Drive
   Warrendale, PA  15086
   US

   EMail: brian.rosen@marconi.com























Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft               Emergency Arch                February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Schulzrinne & Rosen      Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 22]

