


Network Working Group                                   M. Garcia-Martin
Internet-Draft                                                  A. Niemi
Expires: September 28, 2005                                        Nokia
                                                          March 27, 2005


      Requirements for private messaging in centralized conference
                             environements
              draft-garcia-xcon-private-messaging-reqs-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 28, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) defines a mechanism for
   sending session-based instant messages.  The session is negotiated
   using the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Session
   Description Protocol (SDP).  MSRP can be used in a centralized
   conference just as any other media type.  This document provides



Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


   requirements in support for MSRP in centralized conferences,
   including requirements to provide private instant messages within a
   conference.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1   General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2   Private Messaging Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8




































Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [I-D.ietf-simple-message-
   sessions] defines a mechanism for sending a series of instant
   messages within a session.  The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
   [RFC3261] allows for two peers to set up such a session.

   In another application of SIP, a user agent can join in a multi-party
   session or centralized conference that is hosted by a specialized
   user agent called a conference focus [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-
   framework].  Such a conference can naturally involve MSRP as well as
   other media types.  The conference focus is responsible for relaying
   session-based instant messages received from one participant to all
   the other participants.

   A session-based instant messaging conference is sometimes also
   referred to as a chat room, and the conference focus is sometimes
   referred to as the chat room server.  Several of these types of
   systems already exist in the Internet.  Participants in a chat room
   can use a rich set of features, such as the ability of sending
   private instant messages to one or more participants, or to establish
   sub-conferences within the existing conference.

   The aim of this document is provide requirements in support for
   conferences of session-based instant messages, private messaging, and
   sidebars.  The aim of this document is to trigger the discussion and
   create solutions according to these requirements.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.

   This memo deals with a particular case of tightly coupled SIP
   conferences where the media exchanged consist of session-based
   instant messaging.  Unless otherwise noted, we use the terminology
   defined in the SIP Conferencing Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-
   conferencing-framework] applied to the scope of this document.  In
   addition to that terminology, we introduce some new terms:

   Nickname:  a descriptive name associated to a participant.  A
      nickname is non-routable pseudonym that the participant chooses
      for the purpose of additional identification towards the rest of
      the participants.





Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


   Session-based instant messaging conference:  a particular case of a
      tightly coupled conference (as defined by the SIP Conferencing
      Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]) where the
      media exchanged between the participants consist of session based
      instant messages transported with MSRP [I-D.ietf-simple-message-
      sessions].  Typically a session based message conference is
      referred to as a chat room>.

   Chat room:  a synonym of a session-based instant messaging
      conference.

   Creator or message creator:  the user that originally created a
      message and sent it to the chat room for further distribution.
      The creator can be identified by a SIP URI or a nickname.

   MSRP switch:  an MSRP endpoint that receives MSRP messages and
      redistributes them to each conference participant as appropriate.
      An MSRP switch has a similar role as a mixer (as defined by the
      SIP Conferencing Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-
      framework]), however an MSRP switch does not combine different
      input media streams; it merely distributes incoming MSRP messages
      to the conference participants.

   Private instant message:  a session based instant message whose
      intended list of destinations is explicitly signaled and is a
      subset of the conference participants, rather than all the
      participants of the conference.


3.  Motivation

   Although conference frameworks describing many types of conferencing
   applications already exist, such as the Framework and Data Model for
   Centralized Conferencing [I-D.barnes-xcon-framework] and the SIP
   Conferencing Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework],
   conferences of session-based messaging do not seem to be covered in
   detail.  It seems beneficial to provide a set of requirements that
   can lead to the creation of features that enhance conferences for
   session-based messages in order to compete in functionality with
   existing session-based instant messaging conference systems.

4.  Requirements

   We are assuming an centralized conference architecture composed of a
   focus and an MSRP switch.  Assuming so, we define the following
   requirements:





Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


4.1  General Requirements

   REQ-GEN-1:  There must be a general mechanism where by a participant
               of a conference sends session based instant messages to
               the rest of the participants of the conference.
   REQ-GEN-2:  The session based instant message media in a conference
               must not interfere with other potential media in the same
               conference: the conference can host other medias than
               session based messaging.
   REQ-GEN-3:  Mechanisms developed to support these requirements should
               also be feasible, if applicable, to other media types.
   REQ-GEN-4:  It must be possible that participants join or leave a
               particular session-based instant messaging conference.
   REQ-GEN-5:  It must be possible to inform the creator of a session
               based messaging about the acceptance of the message for
               distribution.
   REQ-GEN-6:  It must be possible to get the time-stamp at which the
               MSRP switch dispatched a message.
   REQ-GEN-7:  The message sequence witnessed by different endpoints
               must be identical across all the participants.
   REQ-GEN-8:  It must be possible that a participant uses the
               conference service in conjunction with an anonymizing
               function, in particular, it must be possible that a
               participant of the conference only reveals a non-routable
               identity (e.g., nickname) to the rest of the conference
               participants, but it does not reveal a routable identity
               (e.g., SIP-AOR).
   REQ-GEN-9:  On sending a session based message to the conference it
               must be possible that a message creator discloses their
               non-routable identity (such as a nickname) to the rest of
               the participants.
   REQ-GEN-10: Providing that the creator of a message is willing to
               disclose their routable identity, a conference
               participant that receives a session based instant message
               must be able to determine the identity of the creator of
               the message.
   REQ-GEN-11: Providing that the creator of a message is willing to
               disclose their nickname, a conference participant that
               receives a session based instant message must be able to
               determine the nickname of the creator of the message.
   REQ-GEN-12: It must be possible to set up a sidebar conference with
               one or more participants of the conference.
   REQ-GEN-13: Mechanisms should optimize the efficiency of the MSRP
               switch when it manipulates a session based instant
               message.






Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


4.2  Private Messaging Requirements

   REQ-PRIV-1: It must be possible that the creator of a message sends a
               message to one or more conference participants (a subset
               of the conference roster), as opposed to the whole
               conference roster (aka private instant message).
   REQ-PRIV-2: In order to preserve the "instant" experience of the
               user, the mechanism developed to send private instant
               messages should not impose an extra delay in the delivery
               of the message in comparison with messages addressed to
               the whole conference roster.
   REQ-PRIV-3: A conference participant must be able to determine the
               target of the received message.  For instance, a
               conference participant that receives a session based
               message must be able to determine whether the message was
               addressed to the whole conference roster, a sidebar
               conference or just a subset of the roaster (private
               messages).
   REQ-PRIV-4: On sending private messages, it might be possible that
               the creator sends private messages to participants who
               have only revealed their nickname, but not their routable
               identity.
   REQ-PRIV-5: It must be possible that the MSRP switch is a contributor
               that sends messages to the participants (e.g., message of
               the day, welcome message, server is shutting down, etc.)
   REQ-PRIV-6: A session based instant messaging conference or sidebar
               conference can be characterized with a topic whose
               purpose is to identify the subject of conversation.
   REQ-PRIV-7: A user with the appropriate privileges must be able to
               set and modify the topic of the conference or sidebar
               conference.

5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]
              Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the
              Session Initiation Protocol",
              draft-ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework-03 (work in
              progress), October 2004.




Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


   [I-D.barnes-xcon-framework]
              Barnes, M. and C. Boulton, "A Framework and Data Model for
              Centralized Conferencingg", draft-barnes-xcon-framework-01
              (work in progress), December 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions]
              Campbell, B., "The Message Session Relay Protocol",
              draft-ietf-simple-message-sessions-09 (work in progress),
              October 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Miguel A. Garcia-Martin
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 407
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN  00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 480 4586
   Email: miguel.an.garcia@nokia.com


   Aki Niemi
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 407
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN  00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 389 1644
   Email: aki.niemi@nokia.com




















Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Multiparty MSRP                  March 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Garcia-Martin & Niemi    Expires September 28, 2005             [Page 8]

