





CCAMP Working Group                            Katsuhiro Shimano (NTT)
Internet Draft                                    Kohei Shiomoto (NTT)
Expiration Date: December 2003                 Yoshihiko Suemura (NEC)

                                                           June 2003

  Extra class LSP service using protecting resources in GMPLS networks
                draft-shimano-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract




This document provides the problem statement on a extra class LSP ser-
vice and addresses the issues.  The extra class LSP uses the resource
reserved but not allocated for the protecting LSPs in the pre-planned
LSP re-routing without extra-traffic (including shared mesh) recovery
method.  Network utilization is improved because the resource reserved
for the protecting LSPs are used for the extra class LSPs.  The extra
class LSP is preempted less frequently than the conventional priority
mechanism using setup and holding priorities because the resource
reserved for the protecting LSPs is allocated only if the working LSP



PIL                                                                     [Page 1]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


fails, which is usually expected to rarely occur.  This document pro-
poses the extra class LSP service using the resource reserved but not
allocated for the protecting LSP at the provisioning phase.  This docu-
ment addresses the issues on the extra class LSP: (1) advertisement of
available resource, (2) extra class LSP indication in signaling message
(3) extra class LSP preemption signaling, and (4) preventing unintended
connections.




1.  Author information


This document is the product of the following authors collaboration.


Katsuhiro Shimano (NTT)
NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
Hikari-no-oka 1-1
Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847, Japan
Email: shimano@exa.onlab.ntt.co.jp

Kohei Shiomoto (NTT)
NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
3-9-11 Midori,
Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan
Email: shiomoto.kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp

Yoshihiko Suemura (NEC)
4-1-1, Miyazaki, Miyamae-ku,
Kawasaki 216-8555, Japan
E-mail:  y-suemura@bp.jp.nec.com

Itaru Nishioka (NEC)
4-1-1, Miyazaki, Miyamae-ku,
Kawasaki 216-8555, Japan
E-mail:  i-nishioka@cb.jp.nec.com

Eiichi Horiuchi (Mitsubishi Electric Corp.)
5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura
Kanagawa, Japan 247-8501
E-mail:  eiichi@isl.melco.co.jp

Shoichiro Seno (Mitsubishi Electric Corp.)
5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura
Kanagawa, Japan 247-8501
Email: senos@isl.melco.co.jp



PIL                                                                     [Page 2]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


Toshio Soumiya
Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
1-1, Kamikodanaka 4-Chome
Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki
211-8588, Japan
Phone: +81-44-754-2765
Email: soumiya.toshio@jp.fujitsu.com

Shinya Kanoh
Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
1-1, Kamikodanaka 4-Chome
Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki
211-8588, Japan
Phone: +81-44-754-2765
Email: kanoh@jp.fujitsu.com

Dai Muto (The Furukawa electric corporation)
5-1-9 Higashi-yawata,
Hiratsuka 254-0016, Japan
E-mail:  dai@inf.furukawa.co.jp

Kazumasa Morita (The Furukawa electric corporation)
5-1-9 Hiratsuka, Kamakura
Kanagawa, Japan 254-0016
Email: k_morita@inf.furukawa.co.jp

Kenji Kataoka (Hitachi Ltd.)
1099 Ohzenji, Asao, Kawasaki 215-0013, Japan
E-mail: kataoka@sdl.hitachi.co.jp

Yoshio Nogi (Hitachi Communication Technologies, Ltd.)
216 Totsuka-cho, Totsuka-ku, Yokohama-shi 244-8567, Japan
E-mail: yoshio_nogi@hitachi-com.co.jp




2.  Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.


3.  Introduction






PIL                                                                     [Page 3]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


A functional description of GMPLS-based recovery is provided in [FUNCT]
and end-to-end LSP recovery signaling is specified in  [e2e].  In GMPLS-
based recovery, the working LSP is protected by the protecting LSPs.
There are several ways as to how to allocate and/or reserve the link
resource for the protecting LSPs.  [e2e] addresses four types of end-to-
end LSP recovery: 1+1 unidirectional/1+1 bi-directional protection, LSP
protection with extra-traffic (including 1:1 protection with extra-traf-
fic), pre-planned LSP re-routing without extra-traffic (including shared
mesh) and full LSP re-routing.  In  LSP protection with extra-traffic
(including 1:1 protection with extra-traffic), the protecting LSP is
instantiated at the provisioning phase but it is used to carry extra
traffic on condition that the resource is preempted when the working LSP
fails.  In pre-planned LSP re-routing without extra-traffic (including
shared mesh) method, the protecting LSP is not instantiated and the
resource for the protecting LSP is reserved but not allocated at the
provisioning phase.  The unallocated protecting resource could be used
to set up extra class LSP on condition that the resource is preempted
when the working LSP fails.


This document proposes the extra class LSP service using the resource
reserved but not allocated for the protecting LSP at the provisioning
phase.  This document addresses the issues on the extra class LSP: (1)
advertisement of available resource, (2) extra class LSP indication in
signaling message (3) extra class LSP preemption signaling, and (4) pre-
venting unintended connections.


4.  Problem statement


[e2e] addresses LSP protection with extra-traffic (including 1:1 protec-
tion with extra-traffic) and pre-planned LSP re-routing without extra-
traffic (including shared mesh).  These two LSP recovery methods make
the resource of the protecting LSPs available to other extra traffic.
[e2e] claims that the resource reserved for the protecting LSPs is used
for extra traffic in case of the LSP protection with extra-traffic
(including 1:1 protection with extra-traffic) recovery method.  However
it does not address how to use the resource reserved for the protecting
LSPs for extra traffic in case of the pre-planned LSP re-routing without
extra-traffic (including shared mesh) recovery method.


The resource reserved for the protecting LSPs is used for extra traffic
in case of the LSP protection with extra-traffic (including 1:1 protec-
tion with extra-traffic) recovery method as claimed in [e2e].  Although
the resources are pre-allocated for the protecting LSP , lower priority
traffic may use these resources.  The lower priority traffic will be



PIL                                                                     [Page 4]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


preempted if the working fails.  This method improves the network uti-
lization by allowing the extra traffic to use the resource of the pro-
tecting LSPs.  However the resource sharing is limited to the LSPs
between the same source-destination node pair.


It is not addressed how to use the resource reserved for the protecting
LSPs for extra traffic in case of the pre-planned LSP re-routing without
extra-traffic (including shared mesh) recovery method in [e2e].  In 1:1
re-routing without Extra-Traffic, only the working LSP is fully instan-
tiated during the provisioning phase and resources are reserved but not
allocated for the protecting LSPs.  The protecting LSP can not carry any
extra-traffic because it is not instantiated.


In the following example using network topology shown in in Fig.1, the
working LSP0, which is routed along with the path [A,B,C,D], is pro-
tected by the protecting LSP1, which is routed along with the path
[A,E,F,G,D].  Bandwidth resources are allocated for only working LSP0.
The protecting LSP1 is not instantiated (resources are not allocated for
the protecting LSP1).  Therefore, the protecting LSP can not carry any
extra-traffic.  However the resource reserved for LSP1 along with the
path [A,E,F,G,D] could be used to instantiate extra class LSPs.

                                  A---B---C---D
                                   \         /
                                    E---F---G
                                   /   /\    \
                                  H   I  J   K

                                     Figure 1


For example the resource along with the path [A,E,F,G,D] could be used
to instantiate the new extra class LSP along with the path [A,E,F,G,D].
In this case, resource sharing is allowed to the LSPs between the same
source-destination node pair.  Resource sharing between the different
source-destination node pair is allowed as well.  For example the
resource along with the path [E,F] could be used to instantiate the LSP
along with the path [H,E,F,J].  Similarly the resource along with the
path [F,G] could be used to instantiate the LSP along with the path
[I,F,G,K].  In this way, the resources reserved for the protecting LSPs
could be allocated to extra class LSP with less constraint on the rout-
ing in end-to-end 1:1 re-routing without extra-traffic (including shared
mesh) recovery method.  Here we mean by "less constraint on the routing"
that the resource sharing is allowed between the different source-desti-
nation node pair.




PIL                                                                     [Page 5]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


5.  Extra class LSP service


We define an  extra class LSP.  Extra class LSP makes use of the
resources reserved but not allocated to the protecting LSPs in 1:1 re-
routing without extra traffic (including shared mesh).  By allowing
resource sharing between the protecting LSPs and the extra class LSPs,
the network utilization is improved with less routing constraint, i.e.,
the resource sharing is allowed for both between the different source-
destination node pair and between the same source-destination node pair.
Network utilization is therefore improved.


We should note that resource reserved for the protecting LSP is used in
this method while the conventional priority mechanism using setup and
holding priorities uses the working resource.  Lower priority traffic
may be preempted if new higher priority traffic is set up.  The proba-
bility that the lower priority traffic is preempted depends on the traf-
fic load of the higher priority traffic.  On the other hand, the
resource reserved for the protecting LSPs is preempted only if the work-
ing LSP fails, which is usually expected to rarely happen.  By using
this resource, the extra class LSP is defined , which is less likely to
be preempted than the conventional priority mechanism when the higher
priority traffic load is high.


6.  Issues on extra class LSP


6.1.  Advertisement of available resource


The extra class LSP service uses the protecting resource.  In order to
route the extra class LSP, we need a mechanism to advertise the avail-
able resource for the extra class LSP.  The available resource for the
extra class LSP is the resource , which is reserved but not allocated to
the protecting LSPs.


6.2.  Extra class LSP indication in signaling message


The protecting resource is allocated to the extra class LSP.  When the
extra class LSP is set up, it should be indicated as extra class LSP in
signaling message.  We need a mechanism to indicate the extra class LSP
in singaling message.





PIL                                                                     [Page 6]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


6.3.  Extra class LSP preemption signaling


When a working LSP fails, resources allocated to an extra class LSP may
be preempted.  Transit node detects the preemption of extra class LSP
resource.  The extra class LSP teardown procedure should be initiated by
the transit node.  We need to define the signaling method to tear down
the extra class LSP , which is initiated by the transit node.


In the conventional priority mechanism using setup and holding priori-
ties, the packet oriented MPLS TE Soft Preemption mechanism could be
used to re-route the preempted LSP [soft-preemption].  The MPLS TE Soft
Preemption mechanism reduces disruption by allowing resource to be over-
booked until the preempted LSP can be rerouted [soft-preemption].  This
mechanism can be applied to the case where the resource can be shared
between cross-connected LSPs like packet-based MPLS network with diff-
serv model.  In GMPLS networks, the resource may not be shared between
cross-connected LSPs (for example, the resource can not be shared
between cross-connected LSPs in TDM, LSC, and FSC networks).


6.4.  Preventing Unintended Connections


In 1:1 rerouting, switchover from a working LSP to a protecting LSP may
cause an unintended connection to be established and traffic from the
failed working path to be delivered to an extra class LSP instead of the
protecting LSP.  In Figure 2, for example, it is possible to have a
working LSP, A-B-C-D, and a protecting LSP, A-E-F-D.  Having an extra
class LSP, G-E-F-H is also possible.  This extra class LSP uses label X
on link E-F.  If the protecting LSP is established from node A to node F
and label X is allocated to this LSP, the protecting LSP is unintention-
ally connected to the extra class LSP for a short time until node F sets
up a cross-connect for the protecting LSP.  This can be prevented if the
extra class LSP is released before the switchover occurs.

                                B----C
                               /      \
                              A        D
                               \      /
                                E----F
                               /      \
                              G        H

                                Figure 2





PIL                                                                     [Page 7]

shimano             draft-pil-ccamp-extra-lsp-00.txt        June 23 2003


7.  Conclusions


This document proposes the extra class LSP service using the resource
reserved but not allocated for the protecting LSP at the provisioning
phase in case of the pre-planned LSP re-routing without extra-traffic
(including shared mesh) recovery method.  Network utilization is
improved because the resource reserved for the protecting LSPs are used
for the extra class LSPs.  The extra class LSP is preempted less fre-
quently than the conventional priority mechanism using setup and holding
priorities because the resource reserved for the protecting LSPs is
allocated only if the working LSP fails, which is usually expected to
rarely occur.


This document addresses the issues on the extra class LSP: (1) adver-
tisement of available resource, (2) extra class LSP indication in sig-
naling message (3) extra class LSP preemption signaling, and (4) pre-
venting unintended connections.  The solution for the issues will be
developed and addressed in the future version of the document.



8.  Security considerations


Security issues are not discussed in this draft.


9.  Reference


[FUNCT] J. P. Lang and B. Rajagopalan (Editors), "Generalized MPLS
recovery functional specification," Internet draft, Work in progress,
draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-functional-00.txt, January 2002.

[e2e] J. P. Lang and Y. Rekhter (Editors), "RSVP-TE extensions in sup-
port of end-to-end GMPLS-based recovery," Internet draft, Work in
progress, draft-lang-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-e2e-signaling-01.txt, May
2003.

[soft-preemption] M. R. Meyer, D. Maddux, and J.-P. Vasseur, "MPLS Traf-
fic Engineering Soft preemption," Internet draft, Work in progress,
draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-00.txt, February, 2003.







PIL                                                                     [Page 8]

