           

     POISSON                                                    Todd Glassey 
     Internet Draft                                                      TGC 
     Document: <draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt>                   07-2003 
     Category: Informational                                                 
      
      
                     The definitions of 'fair and open'  
                            and their implication  
           as used in IETF Standards Process defined in RFC2026 v3 
      
      
     Status of this Memo 
      
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
     six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress."  
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
      
     1. Abstract 
      
     This document tracks the use of the terms Fair and Open as used in 
     RFC2026, and their impact on the processes of the IETF Operations. 
     It also summarizes a set of requirements for other changes to the 
     governance models so stay in concert with the concept that the 
     IETFÆs processes be fair and open. 
      
     2. Intended Audience 
      
     This document is intended for all members of the IETF and those 
     concerned with the ISOCÆs Internet Standards process 
      
     3. Conventions used in this document 
      
     In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
     server respectively. 
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and 
     "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
     RFC-2119 [2]. 
      
                                          
          Glassey           Informational û 12/2003                      1 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     The following Terms are taking from the current efforts within the 
     IPR working Group. 
      
      
     3.1 assumed ideas 
      
     One key thought that needs to be stated here is that the IETF was 
     originally created so that anyone, anywhere, and as a part of any 
     effort could participate. That the process that they were 
     participating in was both open in that it allowed them to 
     participate, and that it was also fair, in that it accords all 
     initiatives and participants the same facilities and capabilities. 
      
      
     4. Setting the stage - Fair and Open 
      
     RFC2026 has the instances of the terms Fair and Open, or forms 
     thereof in no less than 8 separate instances. We see these terms 
     constraining the global and high level format and process for all 
     IETF operations. 
      
     Section three then encompasses a review of all of the uses of the 
     terms fair and open in RFC2026 and its meaning and effect in these 
     sections of the Standards Track BCP that RFC2026 is. 
      
     4.1  RFC2026 - SS 1.2 the Internet Standards Process 
      
     In RFC2026 SS1.2 we find: 
      
     The goals of the Internet Standards Process are: 
        o  technical excellence; 
        o  prior implementation and testing; 
        o  clear, concise, and easily understood documentation; 
        o  openness and fairness;  and 
        o  timeliness. 
      
     The procedures described in this document are designed to be fair, 
     open, and objective;  to reflect existing (proven) practice;  and 
     to  be flexible. 
      
        o  These procedures are intended to provide a fair, open, and 
     objective basis for developing, evaluating, and adopting Internet 
     Standards. They provide ample opportunity for participation and 
     comment by all interested parties.  At each stage of the 
     standardization process, a specification is repeatedly discussed 
     and its merits debated in open meetings and/or public electronic 
     mailing lists, and it is made available for review via world-wide 
     on-line directories. 
      
     In the opening of SS 1.2 which describes the standards process at 
     the highest levels, the use of the terms ôopen and fairö in 
     describing the IETFÆs Standards Process and organizational 
     platform.  
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      2 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
      
     Notice that in the context stated these terms are clearly meant to 
     set a paradigm where all of the components of the process are 
     known and available to all, and that all are accorded the same 
     access and capabilities within the IETFÆs organization, WGÆs and 
     before the IESG with regard as to whether their initiatives have 
     completed the stepwise milestones necessary for advancement to 
     their next stage. 
      
     4.2  RFC2026 - SS 6.5 Conflict Resolution and Appeals 
     In Section 6.5 we find also statements on the requirements in 
     dispute resolution for open and fair processes as demonstrated by 
     the following excerpt 
      
     Disputes are possible at various stages during the IETF process. 
     As much as possible the process is designed so that compromises 
     can be made, and genuine consensus achieved, however there are 
     times when  even the most reasonable and knowledgeable people are 
     unable to  agree. To achieve the goals of openness and fairness, 
     such conflicts must be resolved by a process of open review and 
     discussion. This section specifies the procedures that shall be 
     followed to deal with Internet standards issues that cannot be 
     resolved through the normal processes whereby IETF Working Groups 
     and other Internet Standards Process participants ordinarily reach 
     consensus. 
      
     Part of the high level problem these words create is that the IETF 
     has here a mandate to create a process where conflicts arise in as 
     few instances as possible. What this means is that ultimately 
     since todayÆs WGÆs only support the ôconstituencyö of one standard 
     initiative per type, there must be a formal method of an incumbent 
     protocolÆs being replaced, not just revised. Otherwise this 
     mandate eliminates any possible operating models where only a 
     single discipline or initiative is accepted in a WG. 
      
      
     4.2.1   SS 6.5.2 û Process failures 
     While the process Failures section means well, it has a couple of 
     fundamental paradoxes which render it almost non-functional.  
      
     6.5.2 Process Failures 
      
        This document sets forward procedures required to be followed 
     to ensure openness and fairness of the Internet Standards Process, 
     and the technical viability of the standards created. The IESG is 
     the principal agent of the IETF for this purpose, and it is the 
     IESG that is charged with ensuring that the required procedures 
     have been followed, and that any necessary prerequisites to a 
     standards action have been met. 
      
     This first paragraph of SS 6.5.2 defines the totality of the 
     IESGÆs responsibility and the breadth of its reasonable actions. 
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      3 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     The IESG is constrained like the IETF in producing a set of 
     reports on the status of any initiative as to whether they have 
     met all the standards requirements as defined herein and if so the 
     issuance of the standard will proceed. If not, when those issues 
     that have not been addressed are, the IESG will then escalate the 
     initiative to the next step of the standards process. 
      
        If an individual should disagree with an action taken by the 
     IESG in this process, that person should first discuss the issue 
     with the ISEG Chair. If the IESG Chair is unable to satisfy the 
     complainant then the IESG as a whole should re-examine the action 
     taken, along with input from the complainant, and determine 
     whether any further action is needed.  The IESG shall issue a 
     report on its review of the complaint to the IETF. 
      
     In traditional audit models this circumstance, an instance where 
     the IESG Chair was petitioned to resolve a dispute with a decision 
     they (as the IESG chair) were personally a part of, would be noted 
     as a clear conflict of interest. Another interesting constraint 
     here is that the IESG chair by themselves is not capable of 
     resolving issues of failures in the IESGÆs performance, and by any 
     sane mind would be seen as adversarial since what was being 
     disagreed with was the IESGÆs actions in the first place.  
      
        Should the complainant not be satisfied with the outcome of the 
     IESG review, an appeal may be lodged to the IAB. The IAB shall 
     then review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner of 
     its own choosing and report to the IETF on the outcome of its 
     review. 
      
     So we see here that the IAB may æresolve the matterÆ in a method 
     of its choosing, but the problems are that the IAB cannot resolve 
     the matter at all, only recommend a resolution therein. Read onà 
      
        If circumstances warrant, the IAB may direct that an IESG 
     decision be annulled, and the situation shall then be as it was 
     before the IESG decision was taken.  
      
      
     Which means a ôbad decisionö can be reversed, but this only works 
     when an initiative is pointedly past over inside the Standards 
     Track. It has no effect on the prevention of malfeasance in the 
     standards process being used to inhibit any one initiativeÆs 
     advancement or initial submission.  
      
     The IAB may also recommend an action to the IESG, or make such 
     other recommendations as it deems fit. The IAB may not, however, 
     pre-empt the role of the IESG by issuing a decision, which only 
     the IESG is empowered to make. 
      
     Which effectively is to say, that the IAB may not force the IESG 
     to accept an initiative. And that the IESG still has the last word 
     in what is and is not an Internet Standard no matter what the IAB 
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      4 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     sayÆs, so in reality there is arguably no escalation or 
     adjudication of complaints functionally beyond the IESG in this 
     model. This is further supported in the last paragraph wherein we 
     see: 
      
        The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of 
     whether or not the Internet standards procedures have been 
     followed. 
      
     What this last paragraph effectively puts in place is a model 
     where the decision of the IAB cannot actually effect the outcome 
     of the IESGÆs efforts or intent with regard to this initiative is 
     final? Which means exactly what to the bigger picture? This is a 
     process question that must be asked and answered to fully 
     understand if the dispute resolution process has any possibility 
     of actually working and working fairly in all situations. 
      
      
      
     4.2.2    SS 6.5.3 û Questions of Applicable Procedure 
      
     In 6.5.3 û Questions of Applicable Procedure we see the ôlast 
     chanceö in the dispute resolution process. The text reads as 
     follows: 
      
     Further recourse is available only in cases in which the 
     procedures themselves (i.e., the procedures described in this 
     document) are claimed to be inadequate or insufficient to the 
     protection of the rights of all parties in a fair and open 
     Internet Standards Process.  
      
     Effectively the above paragraph allows one ôfinal bite at the 
     appeals appleö by challenging the underlying process as faulty. 
     What has to happen in this instance is that one would have to 
     prove that the process(es) in question are invalid or have flaws 
     such that one of the key goals was not possible to implement, like 
     being fair and open for instance. 
      
      
     Claims on this basis may be made to the Internet Society Board of 
     Trustees.   
      
      
     The above sentence specifies that claims are to be submitted to 
     the Board of trusteeÆs, but it doesnÆt specify what is to be 
     submitted or to whom the actual service happens. Or moreover what 
     will satisfy the required form of service. 
      
     The President of the Internet Society shall acknowledge such an 
     appeal within two weeks, and shall at the time of acknowledgment 
     advise the petitioner of the expected duration of the Trustees' 
     review of the appeal.   
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      5 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
      
     The above paragraph segment states that the president of the ISOC 
     will acknowledge the appeal within two weeks and at that time 
     advise the appellant of the time frame for the presentation and 
     review of the appeal. What is missing again is any semblance of a 
     description of what the appeal process actually entails other than 
     the Board of trusteeÆs meeting to do some magic, one would think. 
      
      
     The Trustees shall review the situation in a manner of its own 
     choosing and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review. 
      
        The Trustees' decision upon completion of their review shall be 
     final with respect to all aspects of the dispute. 
      
     Here again there is ambiguity as to the ôwhatö and the ôhowö of 
     the review process, such that this section of RFC2026, V3 is 
     probably of very limited value if its possible to implement at 
     all. 
      
      
      
      
      
     4.3 The Cost of participating 
      
     As a side note, we also in SS 1.2 find a formal acknowledgement of 
     the cost of participating and some hints to the financial value of 
     an IETF Internet Standards Process in the following excerpts 
      
     àThe goal of technical competence, the requirement for prior 
     implementation and testing, and the need to allow all interested 
     parties to comment all require significant time and effortà  
      
     àThe process is believed to be as short and simple as possible 
     without sacrificing technical excellence, thorough testing before 
     adoption of a standard, or openness and fairness. 
      
      
      
      
     The commitment of ôsignificant time and effortö has an obvious  
     financial cost, so there is a clearly identifiable costing to the 
     participation in the IETF whether its just working on its mailing 
     lists or its standards in general. 
       
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      6 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     5. The Term ôFairö 
      
     The term Fair is used in both an adjective and adverb form in 
     RFC2026. Its intent is to mandate that all processes and 
     procedures be ôequal for allö and ôthat all players and 
     initiatives get an equal opportunityö within the IETFÆs Standards 
     Process and Community.  
      
     The term ôfairö is  one of the conceptual cornerstones of the IETF 
     process and must be  an overriding principal in the qualification 
     to all changes to the participation and governance models. To 
     formally define the term fair we look to OxfordÆs Online 
     Dictionary and find: 
      
     ôFairö û Oxford Online Dictionary - 
     http://dictionary.cambridge.org/define.asp?key=fair*1+0&dict=A 
      
     fair (RIGHT) adjective  
     treating someone in a way that is right or reasonable, or treating people 
     equally and not allowing personal opinions to influence your judgment  
      
     fairly (adverb) 
     It's the responsibility of a judge to treat both sides fairly. 
      
      
     5.1 The Term ôFairö and its operational requirements. 
      
     In order to be ôfairö all IETF processes must be available to all 
     participants. This means that any individual can submit any 
     protocol specification, BCP, or other informational disclosure to 
     the IETFÆs publications and they, to be fair to all, must likewise 
     publish the submittal, without exception.  
      
     Anything less is a restraint of participation and may in fact 
     cause irreparable harm to the parties and their intellectual 
     properties and likewise expose the IETF and its ADÆs and WG Chairs 
     potentially to being instrumental in causing tort damages. 
      
     As a part of this embodiment of being fair, the IETFÆs management 
     teams and governance working groups must add a test for compliance 
     to being Fair and Open to each revision of the Governance Working 
     Documents. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      7 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
      
     6. The Term ôOpenö and its meaning, and operational requirements. 
      
     In RFC2026, The term Open is used in both a adjective and adverb 
     forms. It intent is to mandate that all processes and procedures 
     be ôunhiddenö and ôavailableö to all participants. This term is  
     also a  conceptual cornerstone of the IETF process and must be  an 
     overriding principal in the qualification to all changes to the 
     participation and governance models. 
      
      
     open (NOT SECRET) adjective 
     1 not secret: 
     There has been open hostility between them ever since they had that argument 
     last summer. 
      
     2 honest and not secretive: 
     He's quite open about his weaknesses. 
     I wish you'd be more open with me, and tell me what you're feeling. 
     She has an honest, open face. 
      
     And  
      
     openness noun [U]  
     honesty: 
     If these discussions are to succeed, we'll need openness from/on both sides. 
      
      
      
     6.1 Applying Fair and Open to the IETF standards process 
      
     In RFC2026 we also see ss 9.2 with the following words with 
     regards to variances in the general operations models set forth in 
     the previous sections of RFC2026: 
      
     9.2 Exclusions 
      
     No use of this procedure may lower any specified delays, nor 
     exempt  any proposal from the requirements of openness, fairness, 
     or consensus, nor from the need to keep proper records of the 
     meetings and mailing list discussions. 
      
     Specifically, the following sections of this document must not be 
     subject of a variance: 5.1, 6.1, 6.1.1 (first paragraph), 6.1.2, 
     6.3  (first sentence), 6.5 and 9. 
      
     Which furthers serves to reinforce that the concepts of Fair and 
     Open may not be abridged in any form within the IETFÆs processes, 
     except by a vote of the standardÆs issuing committee, the IESGà 
     making the concept of Open and Fair essentially a convenience 
     instead of an ethical boundary. 
      

       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      8 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     The real issues in moving forward are in addressing the 
     requirements that any changes to the processes also meet an ôOpen 
     and Fairö sniff test, prior to being implemented. This is 
     critically true of IP and IPR efforts within the IETF and the 
     larger ISOC as a whole. 
      
              
     7. Requirements Summary 
      
     These words, open and fair, constrain a set of high level 
     overriding requirements that all changes to the standards process 
     and IETF IP Publishing mechanisms meet the requirements set forth 
     in RFC2026 ss 9.2. 
      
      
     7.1 The IETF Standards Processes 
     The net-net of these words are that if the IETFÆs standards 
     process is to be fair and open it must be capable of allowing and 
     supporting more than one protocol per technology or it must 
     provide a formal manner for a challenging protocol to unseat and 
     capture the status as ôthe IETF standardö for any given physical 
     protocol or discipline, or the process becomes a ômonarchyö. 
      
     7.2 Publish all submittals 
     As part of this fairness and openness, the IETF must accept and 
     publish all submittals which are submitted in compliance with its 
     publication requirements, i.e. that are properly formatted, 
     pertinent to the IETFÆs mission, and properly IP-released, without 
     fail. Any exceptions to this must come in the form of restraining 
     orders or formal notices from the IETF counsel stating that this 
     submittal cannot be accepted and then specifying the causes 
     therein. 
      
     7.3 Equal access to vetting resources 
     It must also subject each and every protocol effort to the same 
     sets of diligence and vetting, and in all instances where the 
     effort qualifies, the IETF and IESG staff must not æstand in the 
     wayÆ of any initiative, else the IETF and its processes become 
     adversarial in nature to anyoneÆs efforts that is not part æof the 
     inner circleÆ so to speak. 
      
     7.4 Complaint(s) and Adjudication(s) 
     Likewise in regards to complaints and adjudications of complaints 
     issued on the IETFÆs actions, processes, conflicts within an Area 
     or Working Group must also be addressed with openness and 
     fairness. This means that complaints are heard in a timely manner 
     and each one is formally addressed. Failing to meet this 
     particular need may also open the IETF and its management staff 
     and possibly also their sponsors to damage claims as well. 
      
      
      
      
       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                      9 
                       draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
      
      
     8. Security Considerations 
      
     The security and integrity of the IETFÆs processes are 
     specifically what this I-D is about. 
      
      
     9. References
      
      
      
       1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
          BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
         
       2. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
          Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997  
         
       3. Bradner, Scott ôThe Internet Standards Processö, Revision 3, 
          RFC2026 V3, 1996.  
      
       4. Postel, J., "Internet Official Protocol Standards", STD 1, 
          USC/Information Sciences Institute, March 1996.  
         
       5. Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC 1311, 
          USC/Information Sciences Institute, March 1992.  
      
       6. Postel, J., "Instructions to RFC Authors", RFC 1543,  
          USC/Information Sciences Institute, October 1993.  
         
       7. Huitema, C., J. Postel, and S. Crocker "Not All RFCs are 
          Standards", RFC 1796, April 1995. 
         
    
    
       
 
     9.1 Terms 
      
     IETF Area: A management division within the IETF.  An Area   
     consists of Working Groups related to a general æarea of interestÆ 
     such as routing.   
      
     Area Director: The manager of an IETF Area.  An Area is managed by 
     one or two Area Directors who also serve as that AreaÆs voting 
     representative to the IESG, the Internet Engineering Steering 
     Group (IESG). 
      
     Internet Architecture Board (IAB: An appointed group that assists 
     in the management of the IETF standards process and serves as the 
     final layer of dispute resolution services in maintaining the 
     integrity of the IETFÆs processes. 
      

       
     Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                     10 
                  draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
 
 
     Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG): A group comprised of 
     the IETF Area Directors and the IETF Chair.  The IESG is 
     responsible for the direct management and operations of the IETF 
     along with the IAB, and it serves as is the standards approval 
     board for the IETF, and as the first layer of the IETFÆs oversight 
     models. 
      
     Working Group: An IETF group chartered by the IETF to work on a 
     particular discipline, or specific specification, set of 
     specifications, BCPÆs or other related topic. The formation of a 
     working group involves the creation of a formal and sanctioned 
     IETF initiative. 
      
     IETF initiative: Any IPÆs submitted for consideration or as an 
     IETF protocol effort, or as part of a vetting effort through its 
     publishing services, as disclosed on any of its mailing lists 
     under the IETF Note Well policy, or in any of the IETFÆs working 
     groupÆs, meetings, or other formally operated forums. 
      
      
     10.        Acknowledgments 
      
     Gotta acknowledge Scott Bradner, Christian Huitma, Jon Postel, and 
     of course the hundreds of others for their tireless work in 
     starting and guiding the IETF through its growth and pain, which 
     has gotten us to a point where real fair play rules are necessary! 
 
 
     11. Author's Addresses 
      
     Todd Glassey 
     TGC  
     Menlo Park, Ca., 94025 
     Email: todd at glassey.com 
 


















  
Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                     11 
                  draft-glassey-fairopen2026-00.txt           07-2003 
 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This 
document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, 
and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist 
in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the 
copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to 
translate it into 
 




































  
Glassey                Informational û 12/2003                     12 

