


DNS Extensions Working Group                                  G. Barwood
Internet-Draft                                                           
Intended status: Informational                          October 26, 2008
Expires: April 2009


                       Resolver side mitigations
              draft-barwood-dnsext-fr-resolver-mitigations-08

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire in March 2009   .

Abstract

   Describes mitigations against spoofing attacks on DNS, including:

   (1) Repeating the query, including techniques for handling 
       non-deterministic responses.

   (2) Prepending a random nonce to the question where a referral is 
       probable.

   (3) Estimating the entropy available, taking into account 
      (a) Observed packets with incorrect IDs.
      (b) The content of the cache.
   






Barwood                 Expires April 2009                      [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  Mitigations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Query repetition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  4
     3.2.  Randomize the case of the question (0x20). . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Use a randomly chosen source port  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Prepend a random nonce label to the question.  . . . . . .  6
     3.5.  Maintain a count of observed Bad IDs . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.6.  Use of calculated entropy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   4. Analyis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Query repetition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Impact on Root and TLD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Impact on other levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Lame servers and the random nonce. . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.5.  Security level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


























Barwood                 Expires April 2009                      [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document describes mitigations that a resolver can currently
   deploy to resist spoofing attacks on DNS, without server software
   being updated.

   The context in which these solutions were explored is CERT
   Vulnerability Note VU#800113, "Multiple DNS implementations 
   vulnerable to cache poisoning".   

   The Kaminsky attack proceeds by asking a recursive DNS server 
   a series of questions, each with a different random prefix, 
   and then sending spoof packets to the server, containing 
   additional records with genuine owner names but invalid data. 
   For example:

   Query: 
   Question <nonce>.com A

   Spoof response:
   Question <nonce>.com A
   Authority: com NS ns.evil.com

   The effect is to inject an invalid record into the cache.

   Since the ID field in the DNS packet header is only 16 bits, a 
   DNS server that does not deploy any mitigations can be 
   compromised in a matter of seconds.

   [ An implementation of the techniques described can accessed at 
     http://www.george-barwood.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/DnsServer/ ]

2.  Criteria

   These are resolver side solutions, thus only the resolver needs to be 
   redeployed, or the software updated.  This allows updated resolvers
   to be deployed immediately.

   The solutions have to follow the DNS protocol.

   The solutions have to be practical, non disruptive, and not 
   anti-social.   





   






Barwood                 Expires April 2009                      [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008
   
   
3.  Mitigations

   Below, the resolver side mitigations are described.
   
   Query repetition (3.1) is necessary and sufficient, the other 
   mitigations reduce the number of queries needed for good security.

3.1.  Query repetition

   By repeating the query, additional entropy may be obtained. 

   Repetition is the only method of obtaining suitable entropy under
   all conditions, so a general purpose resolver MUST implement 
   repetition.
   
   A practical problem occurs when responses are non-deterministic, 
   that is many different responses are obtained for the same question.
    
   In this case, the resolver will need to perform an analysis to 
   produce a converged result, or to report server failure (or a 
   security warning, if this is possible) if convergence has not 
   been achieved after some iteration limit.

   The suggested method is to accumulate entropy for various attributes 
   of the response, specifically non-zero Rcodes (including an internal 
   representation of no Data ), the Resource Records (RRs), and the
   cardinality of each Resource Record Set (RRset).
   
   Each Response can have a counter that represents the number of
   attributes that have not reached the required threshold. When the 
   counter reaches zero, that response is considered fully checked,
   and is used as the converged result.
   
   For example, suppose the question is MX records for example.com.

   First response:
   example.com MX mail1.example.com
   example.com MX mail2.example.com

   Second response:
   example.com MX mail2.example.com  ( mail2.example.com confirmed)
   example.com MX mail3.example.com

   Also confirmed : example.com MX has 2 alternatives.

   Third response:
   example.com MX mail3.example.com ( mail3.example.com confirmed )
   example.com MX mail4.example.com 

   The result is the second response.




Barwood                 Expires April 2009                       [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008

   Note that it is possible for an attacker to break RRset integrity
   with a single forged response in the non-deterministic case.
   For example, the second response in the example could be forged. 
   However this appears to be a very weak achievement.

   Where convergence is very slow, some records may be omitted from the 
   convergence test, and discarded ( if not acceptable as described
   in section 3.6 ), to be fetched later as required. 
   
   The records that are always kept are

   (E1) Records where the owner name and type exactly match the question.
   (E2) NS records where the query question ends with the owner name.

   Other records may be discarded ( normally glue A records ).

   For example, if the question is www.example.com A, then in a response

   www.example.com A 1.2.3.4 : is always kept by (E1)

   example.com NS ns.example.com : is always kept by (E2)

   ns.example.com A 1.2.3.4 : may be discarded
   
   There is a possibility that combinations of resource records may 
   result that would not occur normally. In the Akamai case, this could
   in principle result in a loss of resilience, instead of 9 distinct 
   IP addresses for the name servers, some might be duplicated.
   
   However no examples have yet been identified where a significant
   problem arises, and discarding records is only found to be necessary 
   for the Akamai case, where full convergence might otherwise need about
   100 queries. Stopping after about 10 queries typically results in one 
   or two glue A records being discarded, and 9 NS records and the 
   remaining 7 glue records being accepted.

   In other cases, convergence generally occurs after at most 3 or 4 
   queries.

3.2.  Randomize the case of the question (0x20)

   Most authoritative servers preserve the case of the question in the
   response, so some additional entropy may usually be obtained by 
   randomizing the case of the question.











Barwood                    Expires April 2009                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008
  

3.3.  Use a randomly chosen source port

   This is a well-known method of obtaining extra entropy. 

   Unfortunately it is impractical for a program to reliably determine 
   whether a resolver is currently situated behind a NAT device that 
   may undo port randomization ( and this can change for each packet 
   sent ), so a general purpose resolver MUST not rely on port 
   randomization for security.

   To avoid problems where authoritative servers may be behind firewalls
   that enforce very low limits on incoming UDP connections, resolvers 
   MUST use the same source port when repeating a query ( 3.1 ).

3.4. Prepend a random nonce label to the question.

   This msy be used where a referral is probable.

   It allows an amount of entropy to be encoded limited only by the 256
   character limit on a question, provided the authority server returns 
   a copy of the question in the response.

   If the response is not a referral*, the response should be discarded, 
   and the query repeated without the nonce.

   * That is any of the following are observed:
     (a) The response is Authoritative ( AA bit is set in the header ).
     (b) There is an error ( RCODE is not zero ).
     (c) The answer section is not empty.
     (d) The authority section is empty. 

   A simple heuristic for deciding where a referral is probable is:

   (1) If the Bailiwick is Root or a TLD, and the question is not equal 
       to the Bailiwick a referral is probable.

   (2) Otherwise a referral is not probable.

















Barwood                  Expires April 2009                     [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008


3.5.  Maintain a count of observed Bad IDs

   The approximate number of incorrect IDs observed in some fixed 
   time period, for example the last 20 seconds, may be kept.

   This value may be used to decide when to deploy mitigations, such
   as extra query repetition, and allows a smooth response to attacks, 
   while maximising performance under normal conditions where no 
   attack is observed.

3.6.  Use of calculated entropy

   When a response is received, an entropy calculation may be performed
   to estimate how many bits have been checked.

   It will typically include 16 bits for the ID, 0x20 bits, 
   bits from the prepended nonce, and discount for unusual / 
   non-standard features (such as IP mismatch, question not copied).

   The entropy is accumulated for each response attribute, as described
   in 3.1, and a decision  is then made to decide whether a value is 
   to be accepted as valid, which in turn affects whether the query needs
   to be repeated as described in 3.1.

   For example, the test for whether a value is valid could be

   E + C > 50 + 2*K

   where 
     E is the accumulated entropy 
     C is zero if the value is not in the cache, otherwise 30       
     K is the logarithm (base 2) of the Bad Id count (3.5)
     
   Cache entries may be retained in the cache for some period ( say 1 
   day ) after their normal TTL expiry time, to reduce the number of
   queries when the value needs to be refreshed after TTL expiry.


















Barwood                     Expires April 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008

4. Analysis

  This section is intended to be less formal, to give some insight
  into the rationale for the recommendations given in section 3,
  and to discuss possible adverse effects.

  The intention is that these mitigations have minimal effects, other 
  than to make DNS spoof attacks impractical.  

4.1.  Query repetition
  Query repetition should have no impact other than on server load.
  Servers do not normally retain any state information about clients
  after the query/response transaction completes.

4.2.  Impact on Root and TLD servers

  The random nonce (3.4) is valuable because it means that no 
  extra queries to Root and top level servers are needed in normal 
  operation. This is important because these servers constitute 
  the shared public base of the DNS, so the stability of these 
  servers is very important.

  The exceptions are the initial root "priming" query and queries 
  for non-existent domains. For the root domain, by assuming 
  that every child domain has an SOA record, Name Errors need not 
  be retried ( by checking the ower name for the SOA record ).  
  While this assumption is currently correct (and is also observed 
  to be true for net and com domains), implementors need to carefully 
  weigh any performance advantage with the risk that the assumption 
  may not be valid in future.

  Clients in general should implement user interfaces that make it
  unlikely that users will enter invalid domain names, and that   
  errors are properly notified, so they can be corrected. However 
  this is outside the scope of this document.

  In practice, most root server queries emanate from mis-configured 
  software, so in any case proportional effect on root servers will be 
  small. It is important that negative results be  properly cached.
















Barwood                     Expires April 2009                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008

4.3.  Impact on other levels

  For the example test given in 3.6, two queries are usually
  required the first time a record is fetched. However when the 
  TTL expires, the refresh operation only requires a single query.

  It is expected that such refresh operations dominate proper
  DNS traffic, so the impact should be minimal.

  Operators of authoritative servers have several options if 
  the query repetition may cause overload.

  (a) Increase unreasonably low TTLs.
  (b) Use names with more alpha characters (to take advantage of 0x20).
  (c) Implement support for the proposed AL record or equivalent.

  The latter implies that agreeing a specification for the proposed
  AL record type (or EDNS Ping equivalent) would be useful. 

4.4   Lame servers and the random nonce

  In order to resolve domain names where servers are incorrectly
  configured, it may be necessary to use a query without the nonce.

  A current example is resolving the IP addresses for the name servers 
  for www.iahc.org, which are ns2.ar.com and ns3.ar.com.
  
  The com nameservers generate a referral for the question 
  <nonce>.ns2.ar.com, which leads only to lame name servers, but the 
  IP address for a non-lame server when the nonce is omitted.

  Thus when lame servers are detected, special logic to allow name
  resolution to still occur is needed.

  Of course a resolver may choose to merely report failure in this
  case, however this may not be practical.

4.5.  Security Level

  The 50 bits suggested in 3.6 should provide a good margin of
  safety. An attack sending one spoof packet every 20 seconds at a 
  particular target will take about 50 million years to succeed. 

  Taking Bad IDs into consideration (3.5) implies that an attacker gains 
  nothing from sending attacks at a faster rate.
  
  As a test, the resolver was run with the security level set to 200 bits
  with no perceptible decrease in performance ( the required number of
  packets can be calculated in advance and sent in parallel, except in
  the non-deterministic case ).





Barwood                 Expires April 2009                      [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   All of the mitigations aim to provide more security. Query repetition
   has an obvious adverse effect on performance and bandwith.

   Each query repetition provides an extra attack opportunity, so the 
   total entropy requirement may be adjusted to reflect this.

   The random nonce may expose internal state to an attacker who 
   controls a name server. It is essential that a cryptographically
   strong source of random numbers be used to generate IDs, 0x20 bits 
   and prepended nonces. This must be seeded from data that cannot be
   guessed by an attacker, such as thermal noise or other random 
   physical fluctuations.

 





6.  IANA Considerations

   No direct considerations.
   Indirectly, the TYPE code for AL record described in 4.4.


7.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Nicholas Weaver (ICSI Berkeley) and Wouter Wijngaards (NLnet
   Labs). The idea of prepending a nonce may be due to Paul Vixie (ISC).

8.  Informative References

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

Author's Address

   George Barwood
   33 Sandpiper Close
   Gloucester 
   GL2 4LZ
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 452 722670
   EMail: george.barwood@blueyonder.co.uk
   Skype: george.barwood






Barwood                    Expires April 2009                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Resolver mitigations           October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.















Barwood                  Expires April 2009                    [Page 11]
