Network work group                                        Diego Caviglia 
Internet Draft                                             Dino Bramanti 
                                                                Ericsson 
                                                                  Dan Li 
                                                                  Huawei 
                                                            Dave McDysan 
                                                                 Verizon 
 
Intended Status: Informational 
Expires: February 2008                                  August 3, 2007 
                                      


                                      
     Requirements for the Conversion Between Permanent Connections and 
    Switched Connections in a Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching 
                              (GMPLS) Network 


                  draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 3, 2008. 

Abstract 

 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   From a Carrier perspective, the possibility of turning a Permanent 
   Connection (PC) into a Soft Permanent Connection (SPC) and vice 
   versa, without actually affecting Data Plane traffic being carried 
   over it, is a valuable option. In other terms, such operation can 
   be seen as a way of transferring the ownership and control of an 
   existing and in-use Data Plane connection between the Management 
   Plane and the Control Plane, leaving its Data Plane state untouched. 

   This memo sets out the requirements for such procedures within a 
   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) network. 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC 2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction.................................................3 
   2. Motivation...................................................3 
   3. Label Switched Path Terminology..............................4 
   4. LSP within GMPLS Control Plane...............................4 
      4.1. Resource Ownership......................................4 
      4.2. Setting Up a GMPLS Controlled Network...................5 
   5. Typical Use Cases............................................6 
      5.1. PC to SC/SPC Conversion.................................6 
      5.2. SC to PC Conversion.....................................7 
   6. Requirements.................................................7 
      6.1. Data Plane LSP Consistency..............................7 
      6.2. No Disruption of User Traffic...........................7 
      6.3. Transfer from Management Plane to Control Plane.........8 
      6.4. Transfer from Control Plane to Management Plane.........8 
      6.5. Synchronization of state among nodes during conversion..8 
      6.6. Support of Soft Permanent Connections...................8 
      6.7. Failure of Transfer.....................................8 
   7. Security Considerations......................................8 
   8. IANA Considerations..........................................9 
   9. References...................................................9 
      9.1. Normative References....................................9 
      9.2. Informative References..................................9 
   10. Acknowledgments.............................................9 
   11. Authors' Addresses.........................................10 
   12. Full Copyright Statement...................................11 
   13. Intellectual Property Statement............................11 
    
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

1. Introduction 

   In a typical, traditional transport network scenario, Data Plane 
   connections between two endpoints are controlled by means of a 
   Network Management System (NMS) operating within the Management Plane 
   (MP). The NMS/MP is the owner of such transport connections, being 
   responsible of their setup, teardown, and maintenance. Provisioned 
   connections of this kind, initiated and managed by the Management 
   Plane, are known as Permanent Connections (PCs) [G.8081]. 

   When the setup, teardown, and maintenance of connections are achieved 
   by means of a signaling protocol owned by the Control Plane such 
   connections are known as Switched Connections (SCs) [G.8081]. 

   In many deployments a hybrid connection type will be used. A Soft 
   Permanent Connection (SPC) is a combination of a permanent connection 
   segment at the source user-to-network side, a permanent connection 
   segment at the destination user-to-network side, and a switched 
   connection segment within the core network. The permanent parts of 
   the SPC are owned by the Management Plane, and the switched parts are 
   owned by the Control Plane [G.8081]. 

   At least some control plane initiated aspects of a connection must be 
   capable of being queried by the management plane. These aspects 
   should be independent of how the connection was established. 

2. Motivation 

   The main motivation for this work is the LSP conversion from 
   Management Plane PC to Control Plane SC. The objective is to be able 
   to introduce a control plane into an existing network without 
   disrupting user traffic.  An example of this is an operator 
   establishing PCs before the SC technology is mature, or SC 
   interoperation is achieved between multiple implementations. 

   Conversion from the Management Plane to Control Plane is proposed as 
   a mandatory requirement while the conversion from the Control Plane 
   to Management is seen as a nice to have, or desirable, feature. The 
   requirement for LSP conversion from Control Plane to Management Plane 
   should be scoped as a back-out procedure. 

   A significant benefit of GMPLS in networks is discovering and 
   validating the current state of the network. For example, an operator 
   could invoke an SC, determine that the automatically discovered path 
   is good and then "pin" a connection to this specific path using the 
   SC to PC conversion procedures.  This is attractive to network 

 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   operators who prefer the static nature of the path for a PC as 
   compared with the potentially dynamic path of an SC. 

3. Label Switched Path Terminology 

   A Label Switched Path (LSP) has different semantics depending on the 
   plane in which it the term is used. 

   In the Data Plane, an LSP indicates the Data Plane forwarding path. 
   It defines the forwarding or switching operations at each network 
   entity. It is the sequence of data plane resources (links, labels, 
   cross-connects) that achieves end-to-end data transport. 

   In the Management Plane, an LSP is the management state information 
   (such as the connection attributes and path information) associated 
   with and necessary for the creation and maintenance of a Data Plane 
   connection. 

   In the Control Plane, an LSP is the control plane state information 
   (such as Path and Resv state) associated with and necessary for the 
   creation and maintenance of a Data Plane connection. 

   A Permanent Connection has an LSP presence in the Data Plane and the 
   Management Plane. A Switched Connection has an LSP presence in the 
   Data Plane and the Control Plane. An SPC has LSP presence in the Data 
   Plane for its entire length, but has Management Plane presence for 
   part of its length and Control Plane presence for part of its length. 

   In this document, when we talk about the LSP conversion between 
   Management Plane and Control Plane, we mainly focus on the conversion 
   of Control Plane state information and Management Plane state 
   information. 

4. LSP within GMPLS Control Plane 

   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) [RFC 3471], [RFC 
   3473] defines a powerful Control Plane architecture for transport 
   networks. This includes both routing and signaling protocols for the 
   creation and maintenance of Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in networks 
   whose Data Plane is based on different technologies such as TDM 
   (SDH/SONET G.709 at ODUk level) transport and WDM (G.709 OCh level). 

4.1. Resource Ownership 

   A resource used by an LSP is said to be 'owned' by the plane that was 
   used to set up the LSP through that part of the network. Thus, all 
   the resources used by a Permanent Connection are owned by the 
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   Management Plane, and all the resources used by a Switched Connection 
   are owned by the Control Plane. The resources used by an SPC are 
   divided between the Management Plane (for the resources used by the 
   permanent connection segments at the edge of the network) and the 
   Control Plane (for the resources used by the switched segment in the 
   middle of the network). Note that the management plane assigns 
   resources to the control plane. 

   The division of resources available for ownership by the Management 
   and Control Planes is an architectural issue. A carrier may decide to 
   pre-partition the resources at a network entity so that LSPs under 
   Management Plane control use one set of resources and LSPs under 
   Control Plane control use another set of resources. Other carriers 
   may choose to make this distinction resource-by-resource as LSPs are 
   established. 

   It should be noted, however, that even when a resource is owned by 
   the Control Plane it will usually be the case that the Management 
   Plane has a controlling interest in the resource. Consider e.g. the 
   basic safety requirements that imply that management commands must be 
   available to set laser out of service. 

4.2. Setting Up a GMPLS Controlled Network 

   The implementation of a new network using a Generalized Multiprotocol 
   Label Switching (GMPLS) Control Plane may be considered as a green 
   field deployment. But in many cases it is desirable to introduce a 
   GMPLS Control Plane into an existing transport network that is 
   already populated with permanent connections under Management Plane 
   control. 

   In a mixed scenario, Permanent Connections owned by the Management 
   Plane and Switched Connections owned by the Control Plane have to 
   coexist within the network.  

   It is also desirable to transfer the control of connections from the 
   Management Plane to the Control Plane so that connections that were 
   originally under the control of an NMS are now under the control of 
   the GMPLS protocols. In case such connections are in service, such 
   conversion must be performed in a way that does not affect traffic. 

   Since attempts to move a LSP under GMPLS control might fail due to a 
   number of reasons outside the scope of this draft, it is also highly 
   desirable to have a mechanism to convert the control of an LSP back 
   to the Management Plane, in fact undoing the whole process for 
   reasons summarized in the motivation section. 

 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   Note that a Permanent Connection may be converted to a Switched 
   Connection or to an SPC, and an SPC may be converted to a Switched 
   Connection as well (PC to SC, PC to SPC, and SPC to SC). So the 
   reverse mappings may be also needed (SC to PC, SC to SPC, and SPC to 
   PC). 

   Conversion to/from control/management will occur in many MIBs or 
   network management data structures where the owner of the hop level 
   information (e.g., cross-connect, label assignment, label stacking, 
   etc.) is identified as either a specific control protocol, or manual 
   (i.e., NMS). When converting, this hop-level owner information needs 
   to be completed for all hops. If conversion cannot be done for all 
   hops, then the conversion must be done for no hops and the state of 
   the hop level information restored to that before the conversion was 
   attempted, and an error condition reported to the management system. 

   In either case of conversion, the Management Plane shall initiate the 
   change. When converting from a PC to an SC, the management system 
   must somehow indicate to each hop that a control protocol is now to 
   be used, and then configure the data needed by control protocol at 
   the connection endpoints. When converting from an SC to a PC, the 
   management plane must change the owner of each hop. Somehow, then the 
   instance in the control plane must be removed without affecting the 
   data plane. This may best be done via a make before break operation. 

   The case where the CP and/or MP fail at one or more nodes during the 
   conversion procedure must be handled in the solution. If the network 
   is viewed as the database of record (including data, control and 
   management plane elements), then a solution that has procedures 
   similar to those of a two-phase database commit process may be needed 
   to ensure integrity and support the need to revert to the state prior 
   to the conversion attempt if there is a CP and/or MP failure during 
   the attempted conversion. 

5. Typical Use Cases 

5.1. PC to SC/SPC Conversion 

   A typical scenario where a PC to SC (or SPC) procedure can be a 
   useful option is at the initial stage of Control Plane deployment in 
   an existing network. In such a case all the network connections, 
   possibly carrying traffic, are already set up as PCs and are owned by 
   the Management Plane. 

   Next step in such conversion process presents a similar scenario 
   where the network is partially controlled by the Management Plane and 
   partially controlled by the Control Plane (PCs and SCs/SPCs coexist). 
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   In this case a network upgrade by a Control Plane coverage extension 
   may be required. 

   In both cases the point is that a connection, set up and owned by 
   the Management Plane, may need to be transferred to Control Plane 
   control. If a connection is carrying traffic, its transfer has to be 
   done without any disruption to the Data Plane traffic. 

5.2. SC to PC Conversion 

   The main reason making a SC to PC conversion interesting is to give 
   an operator the chance of undoing somehow the action represented by 
   the above introduced PC to SC conversion. 

   In other words the SC to PC conversion is a back-out procedure and as 
   such is not specified as mandatory in this document, but is still a 
   highly desirable function.  

   Again it is worth stressing the requirement that such 'SPC to PC' 
   conversion is achieved without any effect on the associated Data 
   Plane state so that the connection continues to be operational and to 
   carry traffic during the transition. 

6. Requirements 

   This section sets out the basic requirements for procedures and 
   processes that are used to perform the functions this document is 
   about. 

6.1. Data Plane LSP Consistency 

   The Data Plane LSP, staying in place throughout the whole transfer 
   process, MUST follow the same path through the network and MUST use 
   the same network resources. 

6.2. No Disruption of User Traffic 

   The transfer process MUST NOT cause any disruption of user traffic 
   flowing over the LSP whose control is being transferred or any other 
   LSP in the network. 

   SC to PC conversion and vice-versa shall occur without generating 
   management plane alarms toward the end users at neither the UNI 
   endpoints nor the NMS. 



 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

6.3. Transfer from Management Plane to Control Plane 

   It MUST be possible to transfer the ownership of an LSP from the 
   Management Plane to the Control Plane  

6.4. Transfer from Control Plane to Management Plane 

   It SHOULD be possible to transfer the ownership of an LSP from the 
   Control Plane to the Management Plane. 

6.5. Synchronization of state among nodes during conversion 

   It MUST be assured that the state of the LSP is synchronized among 
   all nodes traversed by it before proceeding to the conversion. 

6.6. Support of Soft Permanent Connections 

   It MUST be possible to segment an LSP such that it is converted to or 
   from an SPC. 

6.7. Failure of Transfer 

   It MUST be possible for a transfer from one plane to the other to 
   fail in a non-destructive way leaving the ownership unchanged and 
   without impacting traffic. 

   If during the transfer procedure some issues arise causing an 
   unsuccessful or incomplete, unexpected result it MUST be assured that 
   at the end: 

   1. Traffic over Data Plane is not affected 

   2. The LSP status is consistent in all the Transport Network Elements 
      (TNEs) involved in the procedure 

   Point 2 above assures that, even in case of some failure during the 
   transfer, the state of the affected LSP is brought back to the 
   initial one and it is fully under control of the owning entity. 

7. Security Considerations 

   Allowing control of an LSP to be taken away from a plane introduces 
   another way in which services may be disrupted by malicious 
   intervention. 

   It is expected that any solution to the requirements in this document 
   will utilize the security mechanisms inherent in the Management Plane 
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   and Control Plane protocols, and no new security mechanisms are 
   needed if these tools are correctly used. 

   If SNMP MIBs are used for configuration, then the management plane 
   should support at least authentication for PC<>SC configuration 
   changes as specified in [RFC 3414]. 

   Note also that implementations may enable policy components to help 
   determine whether individual LSPs may be transferred between planes. 

8. IANA Considerations  

   This requirement document makes no requests for IANA action. 

9. References  

9.1. Normative References  

   [RFC 2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 

   [G.8081]    ITU-T, "Terms and definitions for Automatically Switched 
               Optical Networks (ASON)," Recommendation G.8081/Y.1353, 
               June 2004 

   [RFC 3414]  U. Blumenthal, B. Wijnen, "User-based Security Model(USM) 
               for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol 
               (SNMPv3)," RFC 3414, December 2002 

9.2. Informative References  

   [RFC 3471]  L. Berger (Ed.) "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
               Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 
               3471, January 2003 

   [RFC 3473]  L. Berger (Ed.) "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
               Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation 
               Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 
               3473, January 2003 

10. Acknowledgments  

   We whish to thank the following people (listed randomly) Adrian 
   Farrel for his editorial assistance to prepare this draft for 
   publication, Dean Cheng and Julien Meuric, Dimitri Papadimitriou, 
   Deborah Brungard, Igor Bryskin, Lou Berger, Don Fedyk, John Drake and 
   Vijay Pandian for their suggestions and comments on the CCAMP list.   
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

11. Authors' Addresses 

   Diego Caviglia 
   Ericsson 
   Via A. Negrone 1/A 
   Genova-Sestri Ponente, Italy 
    
   Phone: +390106003738 
   Email: diego.caviglia@marconi.com 
     

   Dino Bramanti 
   Ericsson 
   Via Moruzzi 1 
   C/O Area Ricerca CNR 
   Pisa, Italy 
    
   Email: dino.bramanti@marconi.com   
            

   Nicola Ciulli 
   NextWorks 
   Corso Italia 116 
   56125 Pisa, Italy 
    
   Email: n.ciulli@nextworks.it 
    

   Dan Li 
   Huawei Technologies Co., LTD. 
   Huawei Base, Bantian, Longgang, 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.Chin 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972910 
   Email: danli@huawei.com 
    

   Han Li  
   China Mobile Communications Co. 
   53A Xibianmennei Ave. Xuanwu District 
   Beijing 100053 P.R. China 
    
   Phone: +86-10-66006688 ext.3092 
   Email: lihan@chinamobile.com 
    


 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   Dave McDysan 
   Verizon 
   Ashburn, VA, USA 
    
   Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com 
    

12. Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

13. Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008               [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-01.txt      August 2007 
    

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress". 

    


































 
 
Caviglia et al.       Expires February 3, 2008               [Page 12] 

