     DTN Research Group                                               V. Cerf 
     INTERNET-DRAFT                        Worldcom/Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
     <draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-00.txt>                               S. Burleigh 
     March 2003                                                      A. Hooke 
     Expires September 2003                                      L. Torgerson 
                                               NASA/Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
                                                                     R. Durst 
                                                                     K. Scott 
                                                        The MITRE Corporation 
                                                                      K. Fall 
                                                            Intel Corporation 
                                                                     H. Weiss 
                                                                 SPARTA, Inc. 
     Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture 
      
     Status of this Memo 
         
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
        all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
        groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.   
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
        and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
        time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
         
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
         
        This document was produced within the IRTF's Delay Tolerant 
        Networking Research Group (DTNRG).  See http://www.dtnrg.org 
         
     Abstract 
         
        This document describes an architecture for delay-tolerant networks, 
        and is a generalization of the architecture designed for the 
        Interplanetary Internet: a communication system to provide Internet-
        like services across interplanetary distances in support of deep 
        space exploration.  This generalization addresses networks with 
        operational and performance characteristics make conventional 
        networking approaches either unworkable or impractical.  We define a 
        message-based overlay that exists above the transport layer of the 
        networks on which it is hosted.  The document presents an 
        architectural overview followed by discussions of services, topology, 
        routing, security, reliability and state management. 





      
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
     Table of Contents 
        Status of this Memo................................................1 
        Abstract...........................................................1 
        Table of Contents..................................................2 
        1     Introduction................................................4 
        2     Why an Architecture for Delay-Tolerant Networking?..........4 
        3     DTN Architectural Description...............................5 
              3.1  The DTN Architecture is Based on Virtual Message 
                   Switching..............................................5 
              3.2  DTN Classes of Service Mimic Postal Operation..........5 
              3.3  DTN Postal-Style Delivery Options......................6 
              3.4  Nodes..................................................7 
              3.5  Regions and Gateways...................................8 
              3.6  Tuples.................................................9 
              3.7  Late Binding...........................................9 
              3.8  Routing...............................................10 
              3.9  Bundle Fragmentation and Reassembly...................12 
              3.10 Bundle Layer Reliability and Custodianship............13 
              3.11 Time Synchronization..................................13 
              3.12 Congestion and Flow Control at the Bundle Layer.......14 
              3.13 Security..............................................15 
        4     State Management Considerations............................16 
              4.1  Demultiplexing and Binding State......................16 
              4.2  Bundle Retransmission State...........................17 
              4.3  Bundle Routing State..................................17 
              4.4  Security-Related State................................17 
        5     Bundle Header Information..................................18 
        6     Application Structuring Issues.............................19 
        7     Convergence Layer Considerations for Use of Underlying 
              Protocols..................................................20 
        8     Summary....................................................20 
        9     Informative References.....................................20 
        10    Security Considerations....................................21 
        11    Authors' Addresses.........................................22 
        12    Intellectual Property Notices..............................23 
        13    Copyright Notices..........................................23 
         
















      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 2] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
     Acknowledgments 
         
        John Wroclawski, David Mills, Greg Miller, James P. G. Sterbenz, Joe 
        Touch, Steven Low, Lloyd Wood, Robert Braden, Deborah Estrin, Stephen 
        Farrell and Craig Partridge all contributed useful thoughts and 
        criticisms to previous versions of this document.  We are grateful 
        for their time and participation. 
         
        This work was performed in part under DOD Contract DAA-B07-00-CC201, 
        DARPA AO H912; JPL Task Plan No. 80-5045, DARPA AO H870; and NASA 
        Contract NAS7-1407. 
         
     Release Notes 
         
     draft-irtf-ipnrg-arch-00.txt, May 2001:  
         
        Original Issue. 
         
     draft-irtf-ipnrg-arch-01.txt, August 2002:  
         
        -Restructured document to generalize architecture for delay-tolerant 
        networking. 
        -Refined DTN classes of service and delivery options.  Added a 
        "reply-to" address to have response information such as error 
        messages or end-to-end acks directed to a source-specified third 
        party. 
        -Further defined the topological elements of delay tolerant networks. 
        -Elaborated routing and reliability considerations. 
        -Initial model for securing the delay tolerant network 
         infrastructure. 
        -Expanded discussion of flow and congestion control. 
        -Added section discussing state information at the bundle layer. 
        -Updated bundle header information and end-to-end data transfer. 
         
     draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt, March 2003:   
         
        -Revised model for delay tolerant network infrastructure security. 
        -Introduced fragmentation and reassembly to the architecture. 
        -Removed significant amounts of rationale and redundant text. 
        -Moved bundle transfer example(s) to separate draft(s). 
         












      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 3] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
     1  Introduction 
         
        This document describes an architecture for Delay-Tolerant 
        interoperable networking.  The architecture embraces the concepts of 
        occasionally-connected networks that suffer from frequent partitions 
        and that may be comprised of more than one divergent set of protocol 
        families.  The basis for this architecture lies with that of the 
        Interplanetary Internet, which focused primarily on the issue of deep 
        space communication in high-delay environments.  We expect the 
        current DTN architecture described here to be utilized in various 
        high-delay and unusual environments; the case of deep space is one of 
        these, and is still being pursued as a specialization of this 
        architecture (http://www.ipnsig.org).  Other networks to which we 
        believe this architecture may apply include sensor-based networks 
        using scheduled intermittent connectivity, classes of terrestrial 
        wireless networks that cannot ordinarily maintain end-to-end 
        connectivity, and more "conventional" internets with long delays.  A 
        DTN tutorial [FW03], aimed at introducing DTN and the types of 
        networks for which it is designed is available to introduce new 
        readers to the fundamental concepts and motivation.  
         
        The particular approach we employ is that of an end-to-end message-
        based overlay that exists above the transport layers of the networks 
        on which it is hosted.  The overlay employs intermediate storage at 
        message switches, and includes a hop-by-hop transfer of reliable 
        delivery responsibility known as "custody transfer."  It also 
        includes a flexible naming format and a security model aimed at 
        protecting infrastructure from unauthorized use. 
         
     2  Why an Architecture for Delay-Tolerant Networking? 
         
        The reason for pursuing an architecture for delay tolerant networking 
        stems from several factors.  These factors are summarized below; much 
        more detail on their rationale can be explored in [SB03,KF03,DFS02]. 
         
        The existing Internet Protocols do not work well for some 
        environments.  Some environments violate these inherent assumptions 
        in the TCP/IP approach: 
        - that an end-to-end path between source and destination exists for 
          the duration of the communication session;  
        - (for reliable communication) that the maximum round-trip time over 
          that path is not excessive and not highly variable from packet to 
          packet; and  
        - that the end-to-end loss is relatively small 
        - that all routers and end stations support the TCP/IP protocols 
        - that applications need not worry about communication performance 
         
        In light of these issues, the DTN architecture is conceived based on 
        a number of design principles that are summarized here (and further 
        discussed in [KF03], as mentioned above): 
        - use messages (not streams or packets) as the communication 
          abstraction 
        - encourage applications to minimize round-trip exchanges 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 4] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        - guide application design to cope with application restart after 
          failure while network transactions remain pending 
        - use storage within the network to support store-and-forward 
          operation over potentially long timescales (i.e. to support 
          operation in environments where no end-to-end path may ever exist) 
        - provide security mechanisms that protect the infrastructure from 
          unauthorized use; if appropriate, provide access to these 
          mechanisms by applications for use in their own application-level 
          security protocols 
        - provide a coarse-grained class of service and delivery options 
          based on services provided by the US (and other) postal systems 
         
     3  DTN Architectural Description  
         
        The previous section presented the design principles that guide the 
        definition of the DTN architecture.  This section presents a 
        description of the design decisions that result from those design 
        principles. 
         
     3.1 The DTN Architecture is Based on Virtual Message Switching 
         
        A DTN transmits application-layer "bundles" that contain whatever the 
        requesting application wishes to send.  Bundles are sent by and 
        delivered to applications in an atomic fashion, although they may be 
        split up during transmission.  Bundles are also called "messages" in 
        this document.  Message senders and recipients are identified by 
        (variable-length) source and destination names called tuples 
        (described below).  Messages may also contain an optional reply-to 
        tuple used when special diagnostic operations are requested to direct 
        diagnostic output to an entity other than the sender.  Generally, 
        messages are transferred in an overlay above the transport layer 
        called the "bundle layer." 
         
        A message-switched abstraction provides the network with a priori 
        knowledge of the size and performance requirements of requested data 
        transfers.  When there is a significant amount of queuing that can 
        occur prior to transmission over an outbound route (as is the case in 
        the DTN version of store-and-forward) the advantage provided by 
        knowing this information may be significant for making scheduling 
        decisions.  An alternative abstraction (i.e. of stream based 
        delivery) would make such scheduling very difficult.  Although 
        packets provide some of the same benefits as messages, larger 
        aggregates provide a way for the network to apply scheduling and 
        buffer management to entire units of data that are useful to 
        applications.    
         
     3.2 DTN Classes of Service Mimic Postal Operation 
         
        The (U.S. or similar) Postal Service provides a strong metaphor for 
        the services that a Delay-Tolerant Network offers.  Traffic is 
        generally not interactive.  It may be one-way in nature.  There are 
        generally no strong guarantees of timely delivery, yet there are some 
        forms of class of service and security.   
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 5] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
         
        The DTN Architecture, like the Postal Service, offers *relative* 
        measures of priority (low, medium, high).  It may offer basic 
        notifications, for example: "the intended recipient has accepted 
        delivery of the message," "the route taken by this message is as 
        follows..." and "the message has been transmitted." 
         
        An essential element of Postal Service operation for networking is 
        that messages have a place to wait in queue until an outbound 
        communication opportunity is available.  This highlights the 
        following assumptions: 
         
         1. that storage is available and well-distributed throughout the 
           network  
         2. that storage is sufficiently persistent and robust to store 
           messages until forwarding can occur, and 
         3. (implicitly) that this 'store-and-forward' model is a better 
           choice than attempting to effect continuous connectivity or other 
           alternatives 
         
        For a network to effectively support the DTN architecture, these 
        assumptions must be considered and must be found to hold. 
      
        We have currently defined three specific classes of service in the 
        DTN architecture: 
         
        - Bulk - In bulk class, bundles are shipped on a "best effort" 
          basis.  No bulk class bundle will be shipped until all complete 
          bundles of other classes bound for the same next hop destination 
          have been shipped.   
        - Normal - Normal class bundles that are in queue and bound for the 
          same next hop destination are shipped prior to any complete bulk 
          class bundles that are in queue. 
        - Expedited - Expedited bundles, in general, are shipped prior to 
          bundles of other classes.  However, the bundle layer *may* 
          implement a queue service discipline that prevents starvation of 
          the normal class, which may result in some normal bundles being 
          shipped before expedited bundles bound for the same next hop 
          destination as the normal class bundles.  
         
        Applications specify their requested class of service.  This request, 
        coupled with policy applied at message switches, affects the overall 
        likelihood and timeliness of message delivery. 
         
     3.3 DTN Postal-Style Delivery Options  
         
        Applications may request any of the following five delivery options: 
         
        - Custodial Delivery - a bundle will be transmitted by the bundle 
          layer using reliable transport protocols (if available), and the 
          point of reliable delivery responsibility (i.e. retransmission 
          buffer) will advance through the network from one custodian to 
          another until the bundle reaches its destination.  The bundle 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 6] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
          layer depends on the underlying transport protocols of the 
          networks that it operates over to provide the primary means of 
          reliable transfer from one bundle layer to the next.  However, 
          when custodial delivery is requested, the bundle layer 
          additionally provides a coarse-grained timeout and retransmission 
          mechanism and an accompanying (bundle-layer) hop-by-hop 
          acknowledgment mechanism.  When a bundle application does *not* 
          request custodial delivery, this bundle layer timeout and 
          retransmission mechanism is not employed, and successful bundle 
          layer delivery depends solely on the reliability mechanisms of the 
          underlying transport layers 
        - Return Receipt - a return-receipt bundle is issued by the 
          receiving bundle layer implementation when the (arriving) subject 
          bundle is consumed *by the destination application* (not simply 
          the destination bundle layer).  The receipt is issued to the 
          entity specified in the source tuple of the subject bundle or the 
          source's designated alternate (reply-to field), which would 
          typically be located on a different host.  The return receipt uses 
          the same custodial delivery option setting used in the subject 
          bundle.  (Return receipts are never issued with the return receipt 
          delivery option requested, to avoid "return receipt storms.")  
        - Forwarding Indication - sent by a bundle router when the last 
          fragment of a bundle has been forwarded.  The indication is sent 
          to the reply-to destination if specified, and to the source of the 
          subject bundle otherwise 
        - Custody Transfer Indication - same as forwarding indication, but 
          sent when a custodial transfer has successfully completed 
        - Secured Delivery - indicates the application has provided 
          authentication material along with its message send request. To 
          operate under general circumstances, applications should be 
          prepared to supply authentication credentials and request secured 
          delivery.  Local policy determines whether any bundles may be sent 
          lacking the security option, and regions beyond the originating 
          region may require security even if the originating region does 
          not. 
         
     3.4 Nodes 
         
        A DTN node (or "node" in this document) is an engine for sending and 
        receiving DTN messages (bundles).  DTN nodes may act as sources, 
        destinations, or forwarders of bundles.  Each node is uniquely 
        identified by at least one tuple containing a region name and an 
        entity name; a node that is reachable within multiple regions will 
        have at least one identifying tuple for each region in which it is 
        reachable.   
         
        The name for a DTN node itself, as opposed to an application *using* 
        that node, is specified in a region-specific manner using all or part 
        of the entity identifier.  This is necessary for generating custody 
        acknowledgments to the bundle layer itself rather than to a specific 
        application. 
          

      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 7] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
         
     3.5 Regions and Gateways  
         
        The DTN architecture defines a "network of internets" Comprised of 
        "DTN regions."  Assignment of DTN nodes to particular regions is an 
        administrative decision, and may be influenced by differences in 
        protocol families, connection dynamics, or administrative policies.  
        Regions may also be delimited based upon other criteria, such as 
        trust boundaries [NEWARCH].  Each DTN region has a unique name that 
        is known (or knowable) among all regions of the DTN.  Thus, a DTN-
        wide repository for region names is required. 
         
        All inter-region communication takes place via DTN *gateways*, which 
        provide the interconnection points between regions.  These correspond 
        to "waypoints" in [META], and to the gateways described in the 
        original ARPANET/Internet designs [CK74].  DTN gateways differ from 
        ARPANET gateways because they operate above the transport layer and 
        are focused on message switching rather than packet switching.  
        However, both DTN gateways and ARPANET gateways provide 
        interoperability between the protocols specific to one region and the 
        protocols specific to another.  
         
        Regions are key concepts in the DTN architecture.  DTN bundles that 
        originate outside the destination region are first transmitted toward 
        one of the DTN gateways that connect the source region with one or 
        more other regions.  Routing outside the destination region is based 
        solely on the destination region's name, and not on the completely 
        formed destination name (see below). 
      
        The following list identifies the requirements for DTN regions: 
         
        - Each DTN region shall have an identifier space that is shared by 
          all DTN nodes within the region.  A region must specify the naming 
          conventions to be employed within that region for entity 
          identification.   
           
        - Each node that is a member of the region shall have a unique 
          identifier drawn from that identifier space.  (Note that for some 
          types of regions, a "node" may be made up of a collection of 
          computational elements, possibly geographically distributed.  A 
          single unique identifier may collectively refer to them.  Further, 
          the unique identifier requirement only applies to nodes that are 
          intended to *receive* data from other DTN nodes.)  
           
        - To be considered a member of a region, each prospective member of 
          the region shall have the ability to reach every other member of 
          the region without depending on any DTN nodes outside the region 
          using some protocol(s) known or knowable to each node.  (Although 
          a DTN node may not necessarily be *directly* reachable.  This may 
          require forwarding and/or store-and-forward operation by other DTN 
          nodes inside the same region.) 


      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 8] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
      
     3.6 Tuples 
         
        The region name described above (plus some forwarding state) is 
        necessary and sufficient to route a bundle of data to its destination 
        region, but not to deliver it to the specific endpoint(s) for which 
        it is intended.  The DTN architecture uses a tuple comprised of the 
        region name and a region-specific entity name to identify a 
        particular set of entities in the DTN.  The entity name is *opaque* 
        outside the region of definition. An entity might be a host, a 
        protocol, an application, some aggregate of these, or something else 
        depending on the nature of the addressing and naming structures used 
        in the containing region.  In the Internet, for example, an entity 
        name could be as general as a URI or URL.  In any case, some form of 
        binding mechanism (local to the containing region) is required to 
        associate communication endpoints (and their local addressing or 
        naming ID) with a DTN tuple.  The details of the binding mechanism 
        are region-specific and not discussed here.  However, such a 
        mechanism must provide a way for a requesting application to bind to 
        a prefix of a fully specified destination tuple.   
         
        Regions are named by applications using syntax identical to that used 
        in the domain name system (DNS). (That is, hierarchical tree 
        structure, dot-separated text node names, left to right progresses 
        from leaf to root, sibling nodes must have different names.)  The 
        bundle layer may translate a region name to a bundle-layer-specific 
        region address for transmission.  The scope of the region name space 
        (and region address space, if used) spans an entire DTN.  
         
        Discovery of valid DTN region names is the responsibility of bundle-
        layer routing.  Knowledge of appropriate entity identifiers is out of 
        the scope of this document, but corresponds directly to the Internet 
        problem of knowing port numbers a-priori. 
          
     3.7 Late Binding 
         
        The opacity of entity names outside their local region enforces 
        another key concept in the DTN Architecture: that of late binding.  
        Late binding refers to the fact that the entity name of a tuple is 
        not interpreted (e.g., used to form an address for delivery within 
        the region) outside its local region.  This avoids having a universal 
        name-to-address binding space (and its associated database and 
        synchronization issues).   
         
        This approach preserves a significant amount of autonomy within each 
        region.  The entity names used in bundles might be built on DNS 
        names, or URLs, but they might also be "expressions of interest" or 
        forms of database-like queries as in a directed diffusion-routed 
        network [IGE00] or intentional naming [WSBL99]. 
         
        Additionally, late binding avoids the delay-related issue that the 
        binding information might be highly ephemeral relative to the transit 
        time of a bundle.  We assume that the internal details of a 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003                [Page 9] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        destination region will be sufficiently stable for the duration of a 
        transmission of a message within that region, or that delay-tolerant 
        mechanisms will be employed *within* the region to compensate.  (This 
        is, by definition, a local issue within the region and may be 
        accommodated in whatever manner is most practical for that region.) 
         
     3.8 Routing 
      
        The bundle layer provides routing among DTN nodes, including DTN 
        gateways.  There may be many DTN gateways that interconnect adjacent 
        regions, and there may be multiple bundle routing "hops" within a 
        region (particularly if intra-regional connectivity is intermittent). 
      
        The distinction between a router and a gateway relates to the late 
        binding of names, as described above.  In particular, a region's 
        gateways are the first in an inter-region store-and-forward chain to 
        utilize the region-local entity identifier portion of tuples for 
        forwarding decisions.  The DTN nodes are responsible for using 
        whatever reliability mechanisms exist in the underlying (transport-
        and-below) layers, and augmenting those mechanisms with bundle-layer 
        mechanisms to implement the required reliability. 
         
     3.8.1  Types of Routes 
         
        DTNs may be required to function in the presence of any or all of the 
        following types of connectivity.  Routes are comprised of a sequence 
        of "contacts" that indicate the duration, endpoints, and forwarding 
        capacity of a link in the topology graph.  They are generally assumed 
        to be describing edges on a *directed* graph, as communication 
        capabilities cannot be assumed to be symmetric. 
         
        Persistent Contacts 
         
        Persistent contacts are edges with a neighboring DTN node that are 
        always available, with no connection establishment required. In the 
        IP world, a Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or other "always-on" 
        connection is an example. 
         
        OnDemand Contacts 
         
        OnDemand contacts are contacts that require some action in order to 
        instantiate, but then otherwise function as persistent contacts until 
        terminated. Dial-up connections are an example of OnDemand contacts 
        (at least, from the viewpoint of the dialer; they may be viewed as an 
        Opportunistic Contact û below û from the viewpoint of the dial-up 
        service provider). 
         
        Intermittent - Scheduled Contacts 
         
        Scheduled contacts are those where there is an agreement to establish 
        a link between two points at a particular time, for a particular 
        duration.  An example of a scheduled route is a link that uses a low-
        earth orbiting satellite.  A schedule of view times and durations can 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 10] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        be constructed when next-hop neighbors are accessible via the 
        satellite.   
         
        Intermittent - Opportunistic Contacts 
         
        Opportunistic contacts are those that are not scheduled, but rather 
        present themselves unexpectedly.  Such contacts could be with an 
        aircraft flying overhead and beaconing, advertising its availability 
        for communication.  Another type of opportunistic contacts might be 
        via infrared communication link between a personal digital assistant 
        (PDA) and a kiosk in an airport concourse offering bundle service as 
        the PDA's owner walks by.  If the PDA's owner authorizes it, the PDA 
        could communicate the owner's planned path and a desire for contacts 
        with subsequent kiosks in the concourse, resulting in a set of 
        probable communication opportunities for which bundle transfers can 
        be scheduled. 
         
        Intermittent - Predicted Contacts 
         
        Predicted contacts are those that are based on no fixed schedule, but 
        rather a history of opportunistic contacts that suggests that contact 
        with an intermittently-connected neighbor will probably occur within 
        a certain period of time and will probably last for some inferred 
        duration.  Given a great enough certainty that the contact will 
        occur, a DTN node may allocate bundles to that predicted contact 
        period that would be allocated to different contacts otherwise.  In 
        the previous example, the probable contacts in the airport concourse 
        would result in the establishment of a set of predicted contacts of a 
        given duration (perhaps based on the PDA owner's walking speed and 
        the kiosk's coverage area).  The PDA could decide how to use those 
        contacts for transmitting waiting bundles, as well as perhaps to 
        request bundles that were awaiting delivery at any of a number of 
        store-and-forward points to which the user had access. 
         
        The algorithms for establishing the predicted time and duration of a 
        contact, the degree of uncertainty in those estimates, the time at 
        which to abandon the wait for a predicted contact, and the guidelines 
        for allocating bundles to such contacts are all open research areas. 
         
     3.8.2  Bundle Storage for Store-and-forward operation 
         
        While IP networks are based on "store-and-forward" operation, there 
        is an assumption that the "storing" will not persist for more than a 
        modest amount of queuing and transmission delay.  In contrast, the 
        DTN architecture does not expect that an outbound link will be 
        available when a bundle is received, and expects to store that bundle 
        for some time until a link does become available.  We anticipate that 
        most DTN nodes will use some form of persistent storage for this -- 
        disk, flash memory, etc.   
         
        All DTN forwarding nodes ("DTN routers"), even those that do not 
        provide custodial operations as described in section 3.3, must be 
        able to queue bundles until outbound contacts are available.  Each 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 11] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        DTN node that is also willing to provide custody transfer operations 
        should provision for longer-term storage of bundles, committing to 
        store bundles for which it takes custody for the entire remainder of 
        their lifetimes, if necessary. 
         
        It is entirely possible that a custodian will need to "take a break" 
        from further custodianship while it completes pending custodial 
        operations and recovers persistent storage.  Two mechanisms support 
        this: First, the node can simply forward incoming bundles without 
        taking custody.  The fact that a node is a potential custodian is no 
        guarantee that it will take custody of any given bundle that is 
        routed to it.  Second, the node can revise its advertisement of 
        custodial capability in routing updates.  This is a longer-term 
        solution, but has the attractive property that DTN nodes searching 
        for a custodian do not route a bundle out of its way vainly in search 
        of custodianship at the node in question.  Also, see section 3.12 on 
        DTN flow and congestion control.   
      
        The availability of long-term storage for bundles allows the next-hop 
        forwarding decision to potentially be revoked.  In particular, if a 
        future contact is chosen to carry a bundle and some other superior 
        contact becomes known, the bundle could be re-assigned.  Details of 
        this re-assignment operation are local to a particular bundle router 
        and influenced by the times at which contact schedules become known. 
         
     3.9 Bundle Fragmentation and Reassembly 
         
        There are two forms of fragmentation/reassembly in Bundling: 
         
          Any DTN router may ûproactively- choose to divide a block of data 
          into multiple self-identifying smaller blocks and transmit each 
          such block as a bundle.  In this case the *final destination(s)* 
          are responsible for extracting the smaller blocks from incoming 
          bundles and reassembling them into the original large block. This 
          form of fragmentation is analogous to IP fragmentation. 
           
          A bundle router may ûreactively- choose to fragment a bundle on 
          receipt.  This situation arises when a portion of a bundle may 
          have been received successfully.  In this case, the receiving node 
          modifies the incoming bundle to indicate it is a fragment, and 
          forwards it normally.  The previous-hop sender may learn that only 
          a portion of the bundle was delivered to the next hop, and 
          optimistically continue sending the remaining portion of the 
          original bundle when subsequent contacts become available.  
          Reactive fragmentation is specifically designed to handle cases in 
          which a router is faced with forwarding a bundle for which no 
          single contact provides sufficient data transfer volume.  






      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 12] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
      
     3.10 Bundle Layer Reliability and Custodianship 
         
        The bundle layer provides an end-to-end reliable message delivery 
        service that employs in-network retransmission between (possibly non-
        network-layer-adjacent) DTN nodes.  The bundle layer makes use of the 
        reliability mechanisms available from the underlying transport layers 
        of each region, and a single bundle-layer hop *may* span an entire 
        region.  The bundle layer supports end-to-end reliability derived 
        solely from the custody transfer mechanism, but also provides a true 
        end-to-end acknowledgement for application use.  Applications wishing 
        to utilize this indication for their own end-to-end bundle 
        retransmission mechanisms are free to do so. 
         
        The bundle layer provides three types of delivery services, with 
        various levels of reliability-enhancing mechanisms: end-to-end 
        acknowledgment of a bundle, custodial transmission (with in-network 
        retransmission if required), and unacknowledged bundle transmission.  
         
        Custody transfer allows the source to delegate retransmission 
        responsibility and recover its retransmission-related resources 
        relatively soon after sending the bundle (on the order of a round-
        trip time to the first bundle hop).  While not every node in a DTN 
        must be capable of providing custodial services, all DTN routers 
        (that span networks that may be frequently disconnected) are expected 
        to be able to be custodians.  This expectation supports custodial 
        operation along the primary path without forcing custodial bundles to 
        make routing diversions in order to locate a custodian. 
         
     3.11 Time Synchronization 
         
        The DTN architecture depends on time synchronization (supported by 
        external, region-local protocols) for two primary purposes: routing 
        with scheduled or predicted contacts and bundle "time to live" 
        computations.   
         
        Routing based on schedules and dependent upon coordination of shared 
        assets (such as directional antennas) creates a requirement for time 
        synchronization to achieve contact rendezvous.   
         
        Time to live computations are achieved by including a source time 
        stamp and an explicit time to live field (in time units after the 
        time in the source time stamp).  Its sole use is for purging data 
        from the network, so the synchronization requirements posed here are 
        not strict.  This approach allows a source time stamp to be used for 
        a number of purposes, such as unique identification of individual 
        messages from a particular source.  DTN nodes must ensure that 
        timestamps in bundles they send never decrease. 
      
        Applications specify an expiration time (actually, a time to live in 
        seconds) for bundles they send.  If not supplied, or if the user-
        supplied value is larger than local policy permits, the bundle layer 
        will provide a value.  Note that this value is treated as an actual 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 13] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        "time to live" -- it is added to the time that a bundle was submitted 
        by the application to determine the time at which the bundle will be 
        purged from the network.  Appropriate values depend on the network 
        and the data, and could conceivably vary widely (e.g. from 
        milliseconds to weeks). 
         
     3.12 Congestion and Flow Control at the Bundle Layer 
         
        The subject of congestion control and flow control at the bundle 
        layer is one on which the authors of this document have not yet 
        reached consensus.  We have unresolved concerns about the efficiency 
        and efficacy of congestion and flow control schemes implemented 
        across long and/or highly variable delay environments.  
      
        One view of congestion control is as follows:  "Congestion control is 
        concerned with allocating the resources in a network such that the 
        network can operate at an acceptable performance level when the 
        demand exceeds or is near the capacity of the network resources. 
        These resources include bandwidths of links, buffer space (memory), 
        and processing capacity at intermediate nodes.  Congestion occurs 
        when the demand is greater than the available resources." [RJ90]  
         
        For the purposes of this document, we define "flow control" as a 
        means of assuring that the rate at which a sending node transmits 
        data to a receiving node does not exceed the maximum rate at which 
        the receiving node is prepared to receive data from that sender. 
        (Note that this is a generalized notion of flow control, rather than 
        one that applies only to end-to-end communication.  In particular, 
        the concept of flow control between the two ends of a single link may 
        be indispensable in such DTN regions as the "interplanetary 
        backbone.")  We define "congestion control" as a means of assuring 
        that the aggregate rate at which all traffic sources inject data into 
        a network does not exceed the maximum aggregate rate at which the 
        network can deliver data to destination nodes.  If flow control is 
        propagated backward from destination nodes to routers and eventually 
        back to traffic sources, then flow control can be at least a partial 
        solution to the problem of congestion as well. 
         
        DTN flow control decisions must be made within the bundling layer 
        itself based on information about resources (in this case, primarily 
        persistent storage) available within the bundle node.  However, the 
        bundle layer *might* be able to delegate the implementation of those 
        decisions to the underlying transport protocols, as follows. 
         
        We have not yet considered multipoint communication at or below the 
        bundle layer, so each individual flow control problem involves just 
        two nodes.  Because inter-region traffic must pass through inter-
        region gateways, any two nodes between which flow control is an issue 
        must inhabit a common DTN region and be using a common transport 
        protocol below the bundle layer (otherwise they could not be 
        communicating and there would be no flow to control).  Therefore, it 
        may be possible to accomplish DTN flow control by invoking whatever 

      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 14] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        flow control mechanisms are already provided within the region by the 
        common transport protocol, if such mechanisms exist.  
         
        Alternatively, a new, supplementary flow control protocol could be 
        developed at the bundling layer; this would have the advantage of 
        reducing a DTN's reliance on capabilities provided by the underlying 
        protocols.  At this time it's still unclear which approach is 
        preferable, and some combination of the two may eventually be 
        declared to be the best choice. 
         
        In either case, the problem of flow control between nodes separated 
        by very large signal propagation times remains to be solved: TCP's 
        flow control and congestion control facilities could be leveraged 
        within regions characterized by small round-trip times, but at this 
        time no comparable protocol exists for very long delay paths. 
        It remains as an exercise for us to demonstrate that a hop-by-hop 
        flow control scheme in long and/or highly variable delay environments 
        can effect end-to-end congestion control in a fair and efficient 
        manner. 
      
     3.13 Security 
         
        Resource scarcity in delay-tolerant networks dictates that some form 
        of access control to the network itself is required in many 
        circumstances.  It is not acceptable for an unauthorized user to be 
        able to easily flood the network with traffic, possibly preventing 
        the network's mission from being accomplished.  Implicit in this 
        statement is a requirement for some form of admission control and/or 
        in-network authentication that is sensitive to the class of service 
        that a user has requested, and the means to verify that the user is 
        authorized to make that request.  In a low delay environment, this 
        would be tedious for performance reasons.  In a high/variable delay, 
        and possibly low data rate environment, it is potentially much worse: 
        remote access control lists are difficult to update, query/response 
        keying protocols are not resource-efficient, and routers or end nodes 
        might be compromised for significant periods of time before being 
        noticed.   
         
        To implement the security model, each message includes an immutable 
        "postage stamp" (a type of capability) containing a verifiable 
        identity of the sender (or role), an approval (and approving 
        authority) of the requested class of service (CoS) associated with 
        the message, and other conventional cryptographic material to verify 
        accuracy of the message content. Routers check credentials at each 
        DTN hop, and discard traffic as early as possible if authentication 
        fails. This approach has the associated benefit of making denial-of-
        service attacks considerably harder to mount as compared with 
        conventional Internet routers. 
         
        The current approach uses public key cryptography as a starting point 
        for keying. Routers and principals are issued public/private key 
        pairs, and a principal sending a message must obtain a signed copy of 
        its public key from a certificate authority known to DTN routers. 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 15] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        (All routers in a DTN are assumed to be pre-equipped with copies of 
        one or more certificate authority public keys and their own 
        public/private key pairs). A user then presents her signed public key 
        along with a message to be carried signed using her private key. At 
        the first DTN router, the signed public key is used to validate the 
        sender and requested CoS against an access control list stored in the 
        router. Accepted messages are then re-signed in the key 
        of the router for transit. Using this approach, only first-hop 
        routers need cache per-user certificates, and then only for adjacent 
        users. Non-edge "core" routers can rely on the authentication of 
        upstream routers to verify the authenticity of messages.  We believe 
        this approach will help to improve the scalability of key management 
        for these networks, as it will limit the number of cached public key 
        certificates to a function of the number of adjacent routers rather 
        than the number of end-users. This should provide both the obvious 
        advantage of space savings, but also an improvement to system 
        management as router keys are expected to be changed less frequently 
        than end-user keys.  As DTN routers are likely to be deployed in 
        remote areas, re-keying operations may be comparatively burdensome 
        system management tasks, so limiting the number and frequency of 
        certificate updates should provide additional savings. 
         
        The current approach is partially susceptible to compromised routers. 
        If an otherwise-legitimate router is compromised, it would be able to 
        utilize network resources at an arbitrary CoS setting and send 
        traffic purportedly originating from any user who's identity is known 
        to the router. However, if the message signature is carried end-to-
        end (an option for DTN security), a legitimate user could repudiate 
        the origin of any traffic generated in this manner. Thus, we believe 
        a reasonable trade-off is to admit the possibility that a compromised 
        router could launch a denial-of-service attack in order to gain the 
        scalability benefits of not checking end-user credentials at every 
        hop. 
      
     4  State Management Considerations 
         
        An important aspect of any networking architecture is its management 
        of state information.  This section describes the state information 
        that is managed at the bundle layer and discusses the conditions 
        under which that state information is established and how it is 
        removed. 
         
     4.1 Demultiplexing and Binding State 
         
        In long/variable delay environments, an asynchronous application 
        interface seems to be the only sensible approach. Such interfaces 
        involve callback registration actions that create state information.  
        This information is typically created by explicit request of the 
        application, and is removed by a separate explicit request, and is 
        thus "hard" state. In most cases, there must be provision for 
        retaining this state information across application 
        termination/restart operations, and across operating system 
        termination/restart operations because a client/server message round-
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 16] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        trip time may exceed the requesting application's execution time (or 
        hosting system's uptime). 
         
        In addition, the tuples for which an application wishes to receive 
        data must be associated with the protocol endpoint identifier 
        information needed to reach the application itself in the region it 
        exists.  This operation (analogous to the socket bind() operation) 
        may result in a client/server type of interaction within a region 
        because regional gateways must extract and resolve incoming bundle 
        entity names to information required to perform delivery within the 
        destination region (compare, for example with other name/addressing 
        mapping services such as dynamic DNS [RFC2136]).  
         
     4.2 Bundle Retransmission State  
         
        State information to support bundle retransmission is created at a 
        DTN node when a bundle is received from a DTN user application 
        requesting custodial transmission) or when a bundle is received from 
        a peer DTN node and the receiving node intends to assume custody of 
        the bundle. The bundle's time-to-live field (possibly mitigated by 
        local policy) determines when this state is purged from the system in 
        the event that it is not purged explicitly due to acknowledgment. 
      
     4.3 Bundle Routing State 
         
        Forwarding tables, whether statically configured or maintained by 
        routing protocols, introduce state information that must be managed 
        in a manner that is dependent upon the specific routing mechanisms 
        that are employed. While routing protocols have not yet been 
        developed for DTN networks, in order to provide forwarding a DTN 
        router will be required to have available a forwarding table 
        containing region names and next-hops.  In addition, it seems highly 
        useful to also include a method for routers to learn about potential 
        custodians.  This information would enlarge the overall forwarding 
        state, but probably not significantly. 
         
        We have not yet seriously considered the routing protocols or metrics 
        that we will use, so we do not have an estimate for the size of each 
        routing entry, whether it be for inter-region or intra-region 
        routing.  This remains work to be done. 
         
     4.4 Security-Related State 
      
        The infrastructure protection model described in this architecture 
        requires maintenance of state in all DTN nodes.  All nodes are 
        required to store their own public/private key pairs and their 
        network access credentials, signed by an appropriate approving 
        authority.  Additionally, all nodes are required to cache public keys 
        for one or more certificate authorities and.  Further, in most cases, 
        DTN nodes will cache the public keys (and possibly the credentials) 
        of their next-hop (in bundle-space) neighbors.  All keys will have 
        expiration times, and nodes are responsible for acquiring and 
        distributing newly signed copies of their public keys and credentials 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 17] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        prior to the expiration of the old set (in order to avoid a 
        disruption in network service).   
         
        Some DTNs may implement security boundaries at various points in the 
        network, at which point end-user credentials are checked in addition 
        to checking router credentials.  User application public keys will 
        typically be cached at these points in the network. 
         
     5  Bundle Header Information 
         
        The bundle layer must carry some information end-to-end.  The full 
        details of the fields present in a bundle header are specified in 
        [BundleSpec].  This section documents the meta-data information that 
        must be carried end-to-end, and notes which of those data elements 
        may be supplied by the application using the bundle service. 
         
         * Version Identifier: an 8-bit bundle protocol   
         * Destination entity ID: a variable-length field containing the 
            destination tuple, as described above.  It is supplied by the 
            local application when sending using the bundle service. 
         * Source entity ID: this is the identifier of the source bundle 
            application instance, and is a tuple.  It is supplied by the 
            local bundle service, since a particular host may have multiple 
            names and one may be chosen based on routing decisions or other 
            criteria opaque to the application (as in multihomed hosts).  
            The source entity ID may be returned to the application to 
            support return receipt processing. 
         * Reply-to entity ID (optional): a source may anticipate not being 
            able to accept replies, and may use the reply-to entity ID to 
            specify the destination for return receipts and delivery 
            records. 
         * Current custodian ID (optional): Entity ID of the current 
            custodian.  It is necessary to identify the upstream node that 
            currently has custody of a bundle, in order to acknowledge 
            correct receipt or custody transfer of a bundle or bundle 
            fragments. 
         * Class of service flags:  
            - Flags: custody, return receipt, delivery record 
            - CoS Selector: bulk, normal, expedited 
            - Security: presence of authentication and/or encryption  
         * Send timestamp: the time that a bundle was presented by the 
            sending application to the bundle layer for transmission. 
         * Time to live: an offset, in seconds, from the send timestamp 
            that indicates when the bundle shall be purged from the DTN. 
         * Authentication information (optional): authentication data used 
            to prove that this bundle should be forwarded in the network. 
         * Fragmentation information (optional): for a bundle fragment, 
            indicates the place in the original bundle this fragment 
            belongs. 
         
        Some bundles (or events) cause a status indication to be generated by 
        the bundle layer.  Bundle layer indications are sent as bundles with 

      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 18] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        the user data portion replaced by a Status Report, consisting of the 
        following information: 
         
         * Source entity ID of the subject bundle: a copy of the source 
            tuple from the subject bundle. 
         * Send timestamp of the subject bundle: used to disambiguate 
            status reports for different bundles from the same source entity 
         * Status flags, indicating whether or not a bundle was:  
            . received correctly by the sender of the Status Report 
            . Custodially transferred to the sender of the Status Report  
            . Forwarded by the sender of the Status Report  
         * Time of Receipt (optional): the time at which the sender of the 
            Status Report received the bundle. 
         * Time of Forward (optional): the time at which the sender of the 
            Status Report forwarded the bundle  
          
     6  Application Structuring Issues 
         
        DTN bundle delivery is intended to operate in a *delay-tolerant* 
        fashion over a broad range of network types.  That does not mean that 
        there *must* be delays in the network, but that there *may* be very 
        significant delays.  The protocols providing the services exposed by 
        the bundle layer are delay tolerant, so to take best advantage of 
        them, applications using them should be, too. 
         
        Message-oriented communication differs from conversational 
        communication.  In general, applications should attempt to include 
        enough information in a bundle so that it may be treated as an 
        independent unit of work by the remote entity (a form of "application 
        data unit" [CT90] or "transaction", although transactions carry 
        connotations of multi-phase commitment that we do not intend here).  
        The goal is to minimize conversation between applications that are 
        separated by a network that presents long and possibly highly 
        variable delays, and to constrain any conversation that does occur to 
        be asynchronous in nature.  A single file transfer request bundle, 
        for example, might include authentication information, file location 
        information, and requested file operation. Comparing this style of 
        operation to a classic FTP transfer, one sees that the bundled model 
        can complete in one round trip time, whereas an FTP file "put" 
        operation can take as many as eight round trips to get to a point 
        where file data can flow [DFS02].   
         
        Delay-tolerant applications must consider additional factors beyond 
        the conversational implications of long delay paths.  Application 
        instances may terminate (voluntarily or not) between the time that a 
        bundle is sent and the time its response is received.  If an 
        application has anticipated this possibility, it is possible to re-
        instantiate the application instance with state information saved in 
        persistent storage.  This is an implementation issue, but also an 
        application design consideration.   
         
        Some consideration of delay-tolerant application design can result in 
        applications that work reasonably well in low-delay environments, and 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 19] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        that do not suffer extraordinarily in high or highly-variable delay 
        environments. 
         
     7  Convergence Layer Considerations for Use of Underlying Protocols 
      
        Implementation experience with the DTN architecture has revealed an 
        important architectural construct and interface for DTN routers.  Not 
        all transport protocols in different protocol families provide the 
        same exact functionality, so some additional adaptation or 
        augmentation on a per-stack basis may be require.  This adaptation is 
        accomplished by a set of convergence layers placed between the bundle 
        layer and underlying transport protocols. The convergence layers 
        manage the protocol-specific details of interfacing with a particular 
        transport service and present a consistent interface to the bundle 
        layer. 
         
        The complexity of a convergence layer may vary substantially 
        depending on the type of protocol stack it adapts.  For example, a 
        TCP/IP convergence layer for use in the Internet might only have to 
        add message boundaries to TCP streams, whereas a convergence layer 
        for some network where no reliable transport protocol exists may have 
        a considerable amount of work to do, at least if custody transfer is 
        to be supported. 
      
     8  Summary  
      
        The DTN architecture addresses many of the problems of networks that 
        must operate in environments subject to poor performance and non-
        continuous end-to-end connectivity.  It is based on asynchronous 
        messaging, and uses as a model of service classes those offered by 
        the postal mail system.  It accommodates many different forms of 
        connectivity, including scheduled, predicted, and opportunistically 
        connected links.  It introduces a novel approach to end-to-end 
        reliability across frequently partitioned and unreliable networks.  
        It also proposes a scheme for securing the network infrastructure 
        against unauthorized access.   
         
        It is our belief that this architecture is applicable to many 
        different types emerging environments.  In subsequent documents, we 
        intend to specify profiles of this architecture that address specific 
        environments in detail. 
         
     9  Informative References 
         
        [SB03] S. Burleigh et al, "Delay-Tolerant Networking û An Approach to 
        Interplanetary Internet," To appear in IEEE Communications Magazine 
        approximately May 2003. 
         
        [CT90] D. Clark, D. Tennenhouse, "Architectural Considerations for a 
        new generation of protocols," Proc. SIGCOMM 1990. 
      
        [FW03] F. Warthman, "Delay-Tolerant Networks (DTNs): A Tutorial", 
        Wartham Associates, Available from http://www.dtnrg.org 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 20] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
         
        [KF03] K. Fall, "A Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture for Challenged 
        Internets," Intel Research, IRB-TR-03-003.  Available from 
        http://www.intel-research.net/publications.asp 
         
        [IGE00] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, "Directed 
        Diffusion: A  scalable  and  robust  communication  paradigm for 
        sensor  networks", MobiCOM  2000, Aug  2000. 
         
        [WSBL99] William Adjie-Winoto, Elliot Schwartz, Hari Balakrishnan, 
        Jeremy Lilley, The design and implementation of an intentional naming 
        system, Proc. 17th ACM SOSP, Kiawah Island, SC, Dec. 1999. 
          
        [NEWARCH]  NewArch Project: Future-Generation Internet Architecture. 
        http://www.isi.edu/newarch  
         
        [META]  Wroclawski, John T., "The Metanet," Workshop on Research 
        Directions for the Next Generation Internet, May 12-14, 1997, Vienna, 
        VA. http://www.cra.org/Policy/NGI/papers/wroklawWP.  
         
        [CK74] V. Cerf, R. Kahn, "A  Protocol  for  Packet  Network 
        Intercommunication", IEEE  Trans. on  Comm., COM-22(5), May  1974 
         
        [DFS02] R. Durst, P. Feighery, K. Scott, "Why not use the Standard 
        Internet Suite for the Interplanetary Internet?", MITRE White Paper, 
        http://www.ipnsig.org/reports/TCP_IP.pdf  
         
        [RJ90] R. Jain, "Congestion Control in Computer Networks:  Issues and 
        Trends," IEEE Network Magazine, May 1990. 
         
        [RFC2136] P. Vixie, ed., "Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System 
        (DNS UPDATE)," Internet Request for Comments, RFC2136, Apr. 1997   
         
        [BundleSpec] S. Burleigh, et al, "Bundle Protocol Specification" work 
        in progress, (draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-spec-00.txt), March 2003. 
        Available from http://www.dtnrg.org. 
      
     10 Security Considerations 
         
        Security is an integral concern of the Delay Tolerant Network 
        Architecture.  Section 3.13 of this document presents an approach for 
        securing the DTN architecture.  These capabilities may also be useful 
        in providing facilities to DTN applications to construct their own 
        end-to-end security protocols. 









      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 21] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
         
     11 Authors' Addresses 
         
        Dr. Vinton G. Cerf 
        MCI WorldCom 
        22001 Loudoun County Parkway 
        Building F2, Room 4115, ATTN: Vint Cerf 
        Ashburn, VA 20147 
        Telephone +1 (703) 886-1690 
        FAX  +1 (703) 886-0047 
        Email vcerf@mci.net  
         
        Scott C. Burleigh 
        Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
        4800 Oak Grove Drive 
        M/S: 179-206 
        Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
        Telephone +1 (818) 393-3353 
        FAX  +1 (818) 354-1075 
        Email Scott.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov  
         
        Robert C. Durst 
        The MITRE Corporation 
        1820 Dolley Madison Blvd. 
        M/S W650 
        McLean, VA 22102 
        Telephone +1 (703) 883-7535 
        FAX +1 (703) 883-7142 
        Email durst@mitre.org  
         
        Dr. Kevin Fall 
        Intel Research, Berkeley 
        2150 Shattuck Ave., #1300 
        Berkeley, CA 94704 
        Telephone +1 (510) 495-3014 
        FAX +1 (510) 495-3049 
        Email kfall@intel-research.net  
         
        Adrian J.  Hooke 
        Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
        4800 Oak Grove Drive 
        M/S: 303-400 
        Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
        Telephone +1 (818) 354-3063 
        FAX  +1 (818) 393-3575 
        Email Adrian.Hooke@jpl.nasa.gov  
         
        Dr. Keith L. Scott 
        The MITRE Corporation 
        1820 Dolley Madison Blvd. 
        M/S W650 
        McLean, VA 22102 
        Telephone +1 (703) 883-6547 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 22] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        FAX +1 (703) 883-7142 
        Email kscott@mitre.org  
         
        Leigh Torgerson 
        Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
        4800 Oak Grove Drive 
        M/S: T1710- 
        Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
        Telephone +1 (818) 393-0695 
        FAX  +1 (818) 354-9068 
        Email Leigh.Torgerson@jpl.nasa.gov  
         
        Howard S. Weiss 
        SPARTA, Inc.  
        9861 Broken Land Parkway               
        Columbia, MD 21046 
        Telephone +1 (410) 381-9400 x201      
        FAX  +1 (410) 381-5559           
        Email hsw@sparta.com  
         
        Please refer comments to dtn-interest@mailman.dtnrg.org 
         
     12 Intellectual Property Notices 
      
        The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
        any intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to  
        pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
        described in this document or the extent to which any license 
        under such rights might or might not be available; neither does 
        it represent that it has made any effort to identify any such 
        rights.  Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights 
        in standards-track and standards-related documentation 
        can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of claims of rights made 
        available for publication and any assurances of licenses to be made 
        available, or the result of an attempt made 
        to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
        proprietary rights by implementors or users of this 
        specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
      
        The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its 
        attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or 
        other proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be 
        required to practice this standard.  Please address the 
        information to the IETF Executive Director. 
         
     13 Copyright Notices 
         
        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
         
        This document and translations of it may be copied and 
        furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or 
        otherwise explain it or assist in its implmentation may be 
        prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in 
      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 23] 
     Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt           March 2003 
      
        part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
        copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such 
        copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may 
        not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright 
        notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet 
        organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of developing 
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
        defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
        required to translate it into languages other than English 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will 
        not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
        assigns. 
      
        This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
        "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
        TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
        BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE 
        OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY 
        IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
         
         






























      
     Cerf, et al.            Expires September 2003               [Page 24] 

