INTERNET DRAFT                                   Mukesh Bhatla
8 November 2002                                  Motorola Inc.
                                                


							  

                    DNS RR type for Multiple Unicast
                    draft-bhatla-dnsext-murr-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.




Abstract
 
To date, the scenario of multiple IP addresses for same domain name 
arises for the case where either we have multihomed IP hosts or we 
have multiple servers having the same domain name and application 
on the client needs to approach only one of those IP hosts. However, 
the penetration of mobile hosts and personal devices identified, on 
the internet, by the user's Network Access Identifier (NAI) may 
create a scenario where multiple devices may have same domain name 
but different IP addresses and all of those devices may need to get 
the service or data from the application which only identifies them 
by their host name.
  
This document proposes to add a new Resource Record called the 
Multiple Unicast Resource Record (MURR) to the DNS system. This 
resource record is added for a domain name where the applications 
retrieving the IP address for the domain name have to provide the 
service  (like PUSH data) to all the IP addresses retrieved in the 
multiple MURRs for the domain name. 


Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 1]


Internet Draft                                           November 2002

1. Introduction

   The use of mobile Internet is projected to increase manifolds, each
   Individual is foreseen to use multiple mobile devices. Each of 
   these devices may be identified by the Network Access Identifier
   (NAI-RFC2486)[3].  This will create the scenario where multiple 
   devices have the same domain name but different IP addresses. The 
   DNS which maps the domain name to IP address may have multiple 
   Resource records for each domain name. Each of these RRs will map 
   the domain name to an IP address.

  
   This document proposes to add a new Resource Record called the 
   Multiple Unicast Resource Record (MURR) to the DNS system. This 
   resource record is added for a domain name where the applications 
   retrieving the IP address for the domain name have to provide the 
   service  (like PUSH data) to all the IP addresses retrieved in 
   the multiple MURRs for the domain name.



2. Applicability Statement
   
   Currently DNS stores the Resource records corresponding to 
   each domain name. These Resource Records include the A and 
   AAAA resource records, which map a host name to an IPv4 and 
   IPv6 address respectively. A domain name may have multiple 
   IP addresses corresponding to it, each of this IP address is 
   represented by an A record. Applications query the DNS server 
   for these resource records to map the domain name to the 
   IP address. These A records are retrieved by the client 
   application through the Resolver, which resides on client 
   itself. Its not well defined whether the resolver will convey 
   the multiple IP addresses retrieved for a domain name or will
   convey only one of them to the application. Application 
   normally communicates with only one of the IP address, which 
   is retrieved by the application by the domain name query.
   The scenario where all the hosts, who have the same domain name, 
   and have to be sent the same data is a possibility. (It is 
   possible in the case where same NAI is used on various mobile 
   hosts and the domain name of these mobile hosts is derived from 
   the NAI,and all these mobile hosts have to be sent PUSH DATA).

   Multiple Unicast resource record is added for a domain name 
   where the application retrieving the IP address for the domain 
   name has to provide the service  (e.g. PUSH data) to all the IP 
   addresses retrieved in the multiple MURRs for the domain name. 
   A domain name can have multiple MURRs, if multiple hosts having 
   different IP addresses but the same domain name are present. 
   The application can either do a MURR DNS query or all the MURR 
   records could be sent as a part of the additional part of the 
   DNS A resource record query.
   
Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 2]
Internet Draft                                           November 2002


   The main goal of MURR is to convey to the application that 
   all the hosts having the same domain name desire Multiple 
   Unicast. The application can easily distinguish between the 
   need for Multiple unicast to all the IP addresses provided 
   by MURR or to provide/get the service to/from a single host
   in the case IP addresses are provided by the A records. 
   This enables host whose domain name is being resolved to have 
   control over how it wants to get/provide a service. Resolver 
   MUST forward  all the RRs of the type MURR to the application.   
   

   MURR is especially useful for the IP Reachability service for the 
   wireless mobile stations. For the IP Reachability service the 
   host name of the mobile station is derived from the NAI (user@domain) 
   of the user on the mobile. The NAI is converted from user@domain to
   user.domain to derive the domain name for the mobile. This derived 
   domain is updated along with the IP address of the domain name 
   (A resource records) to the DNS server by the home AAA or 
   the Home Agent (HA) for the mobile station. An application on 
   the network can resolve this domain name to the IP address to 
   provide a service (like PUSH data) to the subscriber. It's a 
   possibility that same NAI could be used on multiple mobiles; 
   this will   create a scenario where same domain name will be mapped 
   to multiple IP addresses. This will result in multiple A resource 
   records being returned to the resolver on the client where 
   application is resolving the domain name to the IP address. 
   Most of the current applications/resolver will pick up one of 
   the IP addresses and unicast the data to it. 

   If MURR is used instead of the A Resource Record to map the domain 
   name to the IP address. The application will have to unicast 
   the data to all the hosts having the same domain name but different 
   IP addresses as specified in the MURRs for that domain name.
   
   MURR's use is not limited to the wireless scenario; it could be 
   used in any access method.

   A domain name can have multiple MURRs in master file of DNS server. 
   The dynamic DNS server update procedures are as specified in the 
   RFC 2136.








Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 3]



Internet Draft                                           4 January 2002


3. NAI RR Type
   
   The MURR record has the DNS RR type of "?", hence has the same QTYPE 
   number of "?".  Note: MURR RR requires IANA number assignment.
   The class of MURR RR is defined in the IN class only.

4. MURR RDATA format

   The RDATA of MURR is same as A RDATA format, 32 bit Internet Address.

4. Examples

   An example MURR can be:
  
   Mbhatla1.Motorola.com  10000  IN   MURR  165.213.221.4
   Mbhatla1.Motorola.com  10000  IN   MURR  165.213.179.2


5. Security Considerations

   Any information obtained from the DNS should be regarded as unsafe
   unless techniques specified in [RFC2535] or [RFC2845] were used.  The
   definition of a new RR type does not introduce security problems into
   the DNS.

6. IANA Considerations

   It requires new RR type number from IANA.
















Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 4]



Internet Draft                                           November 2002


References


   
   [1]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - Concepts and Facilities", RFC
        1034, Nov 1987.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - Implementation and
        Specification", RFC 1035, Nov 1987.

   
   [3]  Bernard Aboba and Mark A. Beadles "The Network Access 
        Identifier". RFC 2486. January 1999.
   
   [4]  3GPP2 P.S0001-B work in progress.






Addresses

Questions about this memo can be directed to the authors:

	Mukesh Bhatla
	Motorola Inc.
	1501 West Shure Drive,
	Arlington Heights, IL 60074
	Mbhatla1@email.mot.com
	(847)435-0732     


Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 5]           



Internet Draft                                           November 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Bhatla               Expires  April 2003                    [Page 6]
                                                     

