





Internet Engineering Task Force                                P. Savola
Internet Draft                                                 CSC/FUNET
Expiration Date: November 2003
                                                                May 2003


  Mentioning Intellectual Property Rights Considerations in Last Calls

                    draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This memo describes an additional policy with last calls regarding
   Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) claims.  The existence and the
   pointer to the IPR claims or an indication of non-existence of
   knowledge of such claims must be mentioned in all IETF last calls and
   should be mentioned in working group last calls.  Additionally, all
   documents under the IETF change control for which a last call prior
   to the approval was not required and IPR claims are known, must now
   be either last-called or rejected.

   This memo updates RFC 2026 and RFC 2418.








Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 1]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  ...............................................   2
   2.  General Last Call Procedure  ................................   3
     2.1.  Examples  ...............................................   3
   3.  Working Group Last Calls  ...................................   4
   4.  IETF Last Calls  ............................................   4
     4.1.  When to Have an IETF Last Call  .........................   4
     4.2.  The Contents of the IETF Last Call  .....................   5
   5.  Process Considerations  .....................................   5
   6.  Acknowledgements  ...........................................   6
   7.  Security Considerations  ....................................   6
   8.  References  .................................................   6
     8.1.  Normative  ..............................................   6
     8.2.  Informative  ............................................   7
   Author's Address  ...............................................   7
   Intellectual Property Statement  ................................   7
   Full Copyright Statement  .......................................   7




1. Introduction

   This memo describes an additional policy with last calls regarding
   Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) claims.

   The existence and the pointer to the IPR claims or an indication of
   non-existence of knowledge of such claims must be mentioned in all
   IETF last calls and should be mentioned in working group last calls.

   Additionally, all documents under the IETF change control for which a
   last call prior to the approval was not required and IPR claims are
   known, must now be either last-called or rejected.

   The second describes the general last call procedure.  The third and
   fourth sections discuss specific issues in working group and IETF
   last calls, respectively.  The fourth section lists a few brief notes
   on the impact on the process.

   This memo updates RFC 2026 [IETF] and RFC 2418 [WG].










Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 2]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


2. General Last Call Procedure

   When last-calling a document, it should (WG last call) or must (IETF
   last call) be mentioned whether IPR concerns are known.

   Such a short mention should include at least:

     o the existence of IPR claim(s), and
     o the pointer to all the relevant claim(s) in the IETF IPR
       repository.

   On the other hand, if there are no known IPR issues, the fact should
   be clearly mentioned in the last call announcement.

   If IPR claims are known but have not been recorded in the IETF IPR
   repository yet, documents must not be last-called prior to the claims
   appearing in the repository.

   If, after a significant delay and attempts to get the IPR claims
   registered to the repository are unsuccesful, the last caller can
   choose either:

      1. to register a placeholder claim, giving a pointer to the
         disclosure,
      2. to indicate the fact that claims have not been registered in
         the last call, giving a pointer to the disclosure, or
      3. not to proceed until claims have been properly registered.

   Such placeholder claims must be clearly separated from other claims.

2.1. Examples

   In case there are IPR claims, the portion of the text in the last
   call could be like:

        Relevant IPR has been claimed.  See
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/IPR/SRI-NGTRANS.txt for details.

   Or if no claims are known, the text in the last call could be like:

        No IPR claims are known.










Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 3]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


3. Working Group Last Calls

   Working group (WG) last calls are optional [WG], but in practice are
   issued for all Internet-Drafts prior to the submission to the IESG.

   If there is a working group last call, the chair(s) issuing the last
   call should also make a mention whether IPR concerns have been raised
   regarding the document, or whether no claims are known, as described
   in section 2.

   The reason why describing IPR issues in WG last calls is not
   mandatory is due to the assumption that most WG participants can be
   expected to be aware of the IPR claims of the technologies being
   worked on in the working group.  However, everyone may not be fully
   aware of all the IPR in a WG, and IPR claims may have been made only
   recently after a participant has last looked at the IPR repository.
   Thus, it is strongly encouraged to include an IPR notice in all
   working group last calls.

4. IETF Last Calls

   IETF Last Calls are mandatory for all standards track documents
   [IETF], whether for entering into, advancing within or removing from
   the standards track.

4.1. When to Have an IETF Last Call

   It has not been necessary to last-call Experimental and Informational
   RFC's which are products of a working group.  If such a document has
   IPR claims, an IETF last call must be executed in the similar fashion
   as with standards track documents [IETF].

   It has not been necessary to last-call non-WG Experimental or
   Informational RFC submissions going directly to the RFC Editor.  Some
   of these documents are not under the IETF change control, i.e., no
   rights to create derivative works are granted, or that only
   publication as an Internet-Draft is allowed; examples of such are
   proprietary protocols and republications of other Standards
   Organizations' documents.

   When a document under the IETF change control is passed to the IESG
   for review, and the document has IPR claims, an IETF last call must
   be executed in similar fashion as with standards track documents, or
   the IESG must propose that the RFC Editor not publish the document.

   If the RFC Editor publishes such a document anyway, the IESG must
   insert an appropriate IESG Note in the document, as described in
   [IETF], indicating the presence of IPR claims.



Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 4]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


   Note that due to possibly different policies, the existence of IPR
   issues in e.g. IRTF RFC submissions may not be known at all if no IPR
   disclosures are made for such Internet-Drafts.

4.2. The Contents of the IETF Last Call

   Any IETF Last Call must include an indication whether IPR has been
   claimed, and if so, the pointer to the disclosure in the IPR
   repository, as specified in section 2.

   It is recommended that some additional information is also provided
   in the last call, as the readers of the IETF last call cannot be
   expected to know the details why the particular solution was chosen
   despite the IPR claims.

   If a document is being removed from the standards track and is being
   replaced with something else, possible IPR claims with the latter
   should also be described in the similar fashion in the last call.

   The responsibility for filling the IPR parts of an IETF last call is
   with the shepherding Area Director [PROCED], but it is expected that
   in practice it's done by the working group chairs (if applicable) or
   document authors/editors.

5. Process Considerations

   The memo adds only little weight to the process while making the IPR
   claims much more apparent in all the stages of the RFC approval
   process; this should make it easier for people which may be hampered
   by particular types of IPR claims or licensing to comment and debate
   the solutions prior to the approval.

   It is possible that some forms of licensing could be excepted from
   the "IPR claims" category -- but as the terms vary from company to
   company and license to license and there has not been any
   harmonization, there cannot be exceptions at the moment.

   This policy has been designed with "good-faith" IETF participants in
   mind, but provides enough flexibility in any case, for example
   against denial-of-service attacks, third-party disclosures and
   "submarine" patents.

   The general principle of this policy is that as it is impossible to
   completely judge the quality of claims, any claim must be made known
   with as much detail as is reasonable, so that others will be able to
   judge whether it might affect them.





Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 5]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


   In certain cases, it may be questionable whether a claim is "known"
   or not.  All claims made by the a person associated with the
   organization owning the IPR should be considered known.  However,
   especially some third party notices may sometimes be very vague, for
   example like "I think I've heard of a patent application on this a
   year ago".  Whether such claims can be considered "known" is at the
   discretion of last-caller(s), typically WG chair(s) or an Area
   Director.  A good rule of the thumb, however, is that it's better to
   err on the side of caution.

   If claims arrive during or after the last call period, prior to the
   approval of the document, a new last call should be announced.

6. Acknowledgements

   The first proposal was presented in Apr 2003 on the IPR working group
   mailing list; Spencer Dawkins and Brian Carpenter provided support
   and comments.  The first published version was commented by Bob
   Wyman, Mike Heard, Steve Coya, and Brian Carpenter.

7. Security Considerations

   The memo makes the IETF RFC approval process of documents with IPR
   claims more transparent; this has no security considerations.

   A policy without any flexibility could be easily wielded to aid in a
   denial-of-service attack.  Such attacks are expected to be relatively
   rare that spending resources in specifing a detailed process in
   advance would seem to be a waste of energy.  Therefore, a degree of
   flexibility has been added to enable better protection if something
   unforeseen happens.

8. References

8.1. Normative

   [IETF]      Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process --
               Revision 3", RFC2026, BCP9, Oct 1996.

   [WG]        Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
               Procedures", RFC2418, BCP25, Sep 1998.










Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 6]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


8.2. Informative

   [PROCED]    Alvestrand, H., "IESG Procedures",
               draft-iesg-procedures-00.txt, work-in-progress,
               Jan 2002.

Author's Address

   Pekka Savola
   CSC/FUNET
   Espoo, Finland
   EMail: psavola@funet.fi

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of



Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 7]

Internet Draft      draft-savola-ipr-lastcall-01.txt            May 2003


   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.
































Savola                   [Expires November 2003]                [Page 8]
