Networking Working Group                                 A. Brandt
Internet Draft                                 Sigma Designs, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                            J. Buron
Expires: July 2010                             Sigma Designs, Inc.
                                                         G. Porcu
                                                   Telecom Italia
                                                 January 13, 2010


      Home Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
                              Networks
                 draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-11


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 13, 2010.



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
   info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document.




Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s)
   controlling the copyright in such materials, this document may not
   be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative
   works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards Process,
   except to format it for publication as an RFC or to translate it
   into languages other than English.

Abstract

   This document presents home control and automation application
   specific requirements for Routing Over Low power and Lossy
   networks (ROLL). In the near future many homes will contain high
   numbers of wireless devices for a wide set of purposes. Examples
   include actuators (relay, light dimmer, heating valve), sensors
   (wall switch, water leak, blood pressure) and advanced controllers
   (RF-based AV remote control, Central server for light and heat
   control). Because such devices only cover a limited radio range,
   routing is often required. The aim of this document is to specify
   the routing requirements for networks comprising such constrained
   devices in a home control and automation environment.



Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119
   [RFC2119].


















Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


Table of Contents


   1. Introduction................................................4
      1.1. Terminology............................................5
   2. Home Automation Applications................................6
      2.1. Lighting Application In Action.........................6
      2.2. Energy Conservation and Optimizing Energy Consumption..6
      2.3. Moving a Remote Control Around.........................7
      2.4. Adding A New Module To The System......................7
      2.5. Controlling Battery Operated Window Shades.............8
      2.6. Remote Video Surveillance..............................8
      2.7. Healthcare.............................................8
         2.7.1. At-home Health Reporting..........................9
         2.7.2. At-home Health Monitoring........................10
      2.8. Alarm Systems.........................................10
   3. Unique Routing Requirements of Home Automation Applications11
      3.1. Constraint-based Routing..............................11
      3.2. Support of Mobility...................................12
      3.3. Scalability...........................................12
      3.4. Convergence Time......................................13
      3.5. Manageability.........................................13
      3.6. Stability.............................................13
   4. Traffic Pattern............................................13
   5. Security Considerations....................................14
   6. IANA Considerations........................................16
   7. Acknowledgments............................................16
   8. Disclaimer for pre-RFC5378 work............................16
   9. References.................................................16
      9.1. Normative References..................................16
      9.2. Informative References................................16





















Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


1. Introduction

   This document presents home control and automation application
   specific requirements for Routing Over Low power and Lossy
   networks (ROLL). In the near future many homes will contain high
   numbers of wireless devices for a wide set of purposes. Examples
   include actuators (relay, light dimmer, heating valve), sensors
   (wall switch, water leak, blood pressure) and advanced
   controllers. Basic home control modules such as wall switches and
   plug-in modules may be turned into an advanced home automation
   solution via the use of an IP-enabled application responding to
   events generated by wall switches, motion sensors, light sensors,
   rain sensors, and so on.

   Network nodes may be sensors and actuators at the same time. An
   example is a wall switch for replacement in existing homes. The
   push buttons may generate events for a controller node or for
   activating other actuator nodes. At the same time, a built-in
   relay may act as actuator for a controller or other remote
   sensors.

   Because ROLL nodes only cover a limited radio range, routing is
   often required. These devices are usually highly constrained in
   term of resources such as battery and memory and operate in
   unstable environments. Persons moving around in a house, opening
   or closing a door or starting a microwave oven affect the
   reception of weak radio signals. Reflection and absorption may
   cause a reliable radio link to turn unreliable for a period of
   time and then being reusable again, thus the term "lossy". All
   traffic in a ROLL network is carried as IPv6 packets.

   The connected home area is very much consumer-oriented. The
   implication on network nodes is that devices are very cost
   sensitive, which leads to resource-constrained environments having
   slow CPUs and small memory footprints. At the same time, nodes
   have to be physically small which puts a limit to the physical
   size of the battery; and thus, the battery capacity. As a result,
   it is common for battery operated sensor-style nodes to shut down
   radio and CPU resources for most of the time. The radio tends to
   use the same power for listening as for transmitting

   Section 2 describes a few typical use cases for home automation
   applications. Section 3 discusses the routing requirements for
   networks comprising such constrained devices in a home network
   environment. These requirements may be overlapping requirements
   derived from other application-specific routing requirements
   presented in [I-D.Martocci-Building-reqs], [I-D.Pister-Industial-
   reqs] and [RFC5548].

   A full list of requirements documents may be found in section 9.



Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


1.1. Terminology

   ROLL:         Routing Over Low-power and Lossy networks
                 A ROLL node may be classified as sensor, actuator
                 or controller.

   Actuator:     Network node which performs some physical action.
                 Dimmers and relays are examples of actuators.
                 If sufficiently powered, actuator nodes may
                 participate in routing network messages.

   Border router:Infrastructure device that connects a ROLL network
                 to the Internet or some backbone network.

   Channel:      Radio frequency band used to carry network packets.

   Controller:   Network node that controls actuators. Control
                 decisions may be based on sensor readings, sensor
                 events, scheduled actions or incoming commands from
                 the Internet or other backbone networks.
                 If sufficiently powered, controller nodes may
                 participate in routing network messages.

   Downstream:   Data direction traveling from a Local Area Network
                 (LAN) to a Personal Area Network (PAN) device.

   DR:           Demand-Response
                 The mechanism of users adjusting their power
                 consumption in response to actual pricing of power.

   DSM:          Demand Side Management
                 Process allowing power utilities to enable and
                 disable loads in consumer premises. Where DR relies
                 on voluntary action from users, DSM may be based on
                 enrollment in a formal program.

   HC-LLN:       Home Control in Low-Power and Lossy Networks

   LAN:          Local Area Network.

   PAN:          Personal Area Network.
                 A geographically limited wireless network based on
                 e.g. 802.15.4 or Z-Wave radio.

   PDA           Personal Digital Assistant. A small, handheld
                 computer.

   PLC           Power Line Communication

   RAM           Random Access Memory



Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   Sensor:       Network node that measures some physical parameter
                 and/or detects an event.
                 The sensor may generate a trap message to notify a
                 controller or directly activate an actuator.
                 If sufficiently powered, sensor nodes may
                 participate in routing network messages.

   Upstream:     Data direction traveling from a PAN to a LAN
                 device.

   Refer to the roll-terminology reference document [I-D.Vasseur-
   Terminology] for a full list of terms used in the IETF ROLL WG.



2. Home Automation Applications

   Home automation applications represent a special segment of
   networked devices with its unique set of requirements.
   Historically, such applications used wired networks or power line
   communication (PLC), but wireless solutions have emerged; allowing
   existing homes to be upgraded more easily.

   To facilitate the requirements discussion in Section 3, this
   section lists a few typical use cases of home automation
   applications. New applications are being developed at a high pace
   and this section does not mean to be exhaustive. Most home
   automation applications tend to be running some kind of
   command/response protocol. The command may come from several
   places.

2.1. Lighting Application In Action

   A lamp may be turned on, not only by a wall switch but also by a
   movement sensor. The wall switch module may itself be a push-
   button sensor and an actuator at the same time. This will often be
   the case when upgrading existing homes as existing wiring is not
   prepared for automation.

   One event may cause many actuators to be activated at the same
   time.
   Using the direct analogy to an electronic car key, a house owner
   may activate the "leaving home" function from an electronic house
   key, mobile phone, etc. For the sake of visual impression, all
   lights should turn off at the same time. At least, it should
   appear to happen at the same time.

2.2. Energy Conservation and Optimizing Energy Consumption

   In order to save energy, air conditioning, central heating, window
   shades etc. may be controlled by timers, motion sensors or


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   remotely via internet or cell. Central heating may also be set to
   a reduced temperature during night time.

   The power grid may experience periods where more wind-generated
   power is produced than is needed. Typically this may happen during
   night hours.

   In periods where electricity demands exceed available supply,
   appliances such as air conditioning, climate control systems,
   washing machines etc. can be turned off to avoid overloading the
   power grid.
   This is known as Demand-Side Management (DSM).
   Remote control of household appliances is well-suited for this
   application.

   The start/stop decision for the appliances can also be regulated
   by dynamic power pricing information obtained from the electricity
   utility companies. This method called Demand-Response (DR) works
   by motivation of users via pricing, bonus points, etc. For
   example, the washing machine and dish washer may just as well work
   while power is cheap. The electric car should also charge its
   batteries on cheap power.

   In order to achieve effective electricity savings, the energy
   monitoring application must guarantee that the power consumption
   of the ROLL devices is much lower than that of the appliance
   itself.

   Most of these appliances are mains powered and are thus ideal for
   providing reliable, always-on routing resources. Battery-powered
   nodes, by comparison, are constrained routing resources and may
   only provide reliable routing under some circumstances.

2.3. Moving a Remote Control Around

   A remote control is a typical example of a mobile device in a home
   automation network. An advanced remote control may be used for
   dimming the light in the dining room while eating and later on,
   turning up the music while doing the dishes in the kitchen.
   Reaction must appear to be instant (within a few hundred
   milliseconds) even when the remote control has moved to a new
   location. The remote control may be communicating to either a
   central home automation controller or directly to the lamps and
   the media center.

2.4. Adding A New Module To The System

   Small-size, low-cost modules may have no user interface except for
   a single button. Thus, an automated inclusion process is needed
   for controllers to find new modules. Inclusion covers the



Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   detection of neighbors and assignment of a unique node ID.
   Inclusion should be completed within a few seconds.

   For ease of use in a consumer application space such as home
   control, nodes may be included without having to type in special
   codes before inclusion. One way to achieve an acceptable balance
   between security and convenience is to block inclusion during
   normal operation and explicitly enable inclusion support just
   before adding a new module and disable it again just after adding
   a new module.
   For security considerations, refer to section 5.

   If assignment of unique addresses is performed by a central
   controller, it must be possible to route the inclusion request
   from the joining node to the central controller before the joining
   node has been included in the network.

2.5. Controlling Battery Operated Window Shades

   In consumer premises, window shades are often battery-powered as
   there is no access to mains power over the windows. For battery
   conservation purposes, such an actuator node is sleeping most of
   the time. A controller sending commands to a sleeping actuator
   node via ROLL devices will have no problems delivering the packet
   to the nearest powered router, but that router may experience a
   delay until the next wake-up time before the command can be
   delivered.

2.6. Remote Video Surveillance

   Remote video surveillance is a fairly classic application for Home
   networking providing the ability for the end user to get a video
   stream from a Web Cam reached via the Internet. The video stream
   may be triggered by the end-user after receiving an alarm from a
   sensor (movement or smoke detector) or the user simply wants to
   check the home status via video.
   Note that in the former case, more than likely, there will be a
   form of inter-device communication: Upon detecting some movement
   in the home, the movement sensor may send a request to the light
   controller to turn on the lights, to the Web Cam to start a video
   stream that would then be directed to the end user's cell phone or
   Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) via the Internet.
   In contrast to other applications, e.g. industrial sensors, where
   data would mainly be originated by a sensor to a sink and vice
   versa, this scenario implicates a direct inter-device
   communication between ROLL devices.

2.7. Healthcare

   By adding communication capability to devices, patients and
   elderly citizens may be able to do simple measurements at home.


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   Thanks to online devices, a doctor can keep an eye on the
   patient's health and receive warnings if a new trend is discovered
   by automated filters.

   Fine-grained daily measurements presented in proper ways may allow
   the doctor to establish a more precise diagnosis.

   Such applications may be realized as wearable products which
   frequently do a measurement and automatically deliver the result
   to a data sink locally or over the Internet.

   Applications falling in this category are referred to as at-home
   health reporting. Whether measurements are done in a fixed
   interval or if they are manually activated, they leave all
   processing to the receiving data sink.

   A more active category of applications may send an alarm if some
   alarm condition is triggered. This category of applications is
   referred to as at-home health monitoring. Measurements are
   interpreted in the device and may cause reporting of an event if
   an alarm is triggered.

   Many implementations may overlap both categories.

   Since wireless and battery operated systems may never reach 100%
   guaranteed operational time, healthcare and security systems will
   need a management layer implementing alarm mechanisms for low
   battery, report activity, etc.
   For instance if a blood pressure sensor did not report a new
   measurement, say 5 minutes after the scheduled time, some
   responsible person must be notified.
   The structure and performance of such a management layer is
   outside the scope of the routing requirements listed in this
   document.

2.7.1. At-home Health Reporting

   Applications might include:

   o Temperature
   o Weight
   o Blood pressure
   o Insulin level

   Measurements may be stored for long term statistics. At the same
   time, a critically high blood pressure may cause the generation of
   an alarm report. Refer to 2.7.2.

   To avoid a high number of request messages, nodes may be
   configured to autonomously do a measurement and send a report in
   intervals.


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


2.7.2. At-home Health Monitoring

   An alarm event may become active e.g. if the measured blood
   pressure exceeds a threshold or if a person falls to the ground.
   Alarm conditions must be reported with the highest priority and
   timeliness.

   Applications might include:

   o Temperature
   o Weight
   o Blood pressure
   o Insulin level
   o Electrocardiogram (ECG)
   o Position tracker

2.8. Alarm Systems

   A home security alarm system is comprised of various sensors
   (vibration, fire or carbon monoxide, door/window, glass-break,
   presence, panic button, etc.).

   Some smoke alarms are battery powered and at the same time mounted
   in a high place. Battery-powered safety devices should only be
   used for routing if no other alternatives exist to avoid draining
   the battery. A smoke alarm with a drained battery does not provide
   a lot of safety. Also, it may be inconvenient to exchange battery
   in a smoke alarm.

   Alarm system applications may have both a synchronous and an
   asynchronous behavior; i.e. they may be periodically queried by a
   central control application (e.g. for a periodical refreshment of
   the network state), or send a message to the control application
   on their own initiative.

   When a node (or a group of nodes) identifies a risk situation
   (e.g. intrusion, smoke, fire), it sends an alarm message to a
   central controller that could autonomously forward it via Internet
   or interact with other network nodes (e.g. try to obtain more
   detailed information or ask other nodes close to the alarm event).

   Finally, routing via battery-powered nodes may be very slow if the
   nodes are sleeping most of the time (they could appear
   unresponsive to the alarm detection). To ensure fast message
   delivery and avoid battery drain, routing should be avoided via
   sleeping devices.






Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


3. Unique Routing Requirements of Home Automation Applications

   Home automation applications have a number of specific routing
   requirements related to the set of home networking applications
   and the perceived operation of the system.

   The relations of use cases to requirements are outlined in the
   table below:

   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   | Use case                     | Requirement                 |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.1. Lighting Application In  |3.2. Support of Mobility     |
   |Action                        |3.3. Scalability             |
   |                              |                             |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.2. Energy Conservation and  |3.1. Constraint-based Routing|
   |Optimizing Energy Consumption |                             |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.3. Moving a Remote Control  |3.2. Support of Mobility     |
   |Around                        |3.4. Convergence Time        |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.4. Adding A New Module To   |3.4. Convergence Time        |
   |The System                    |3.5. Manageability           |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.7. Healthcare               |3.1. Constraint-based Routing|
   |                              |3.2. Support of Mobility     |
   |                              |3.4. Convergence Time        |
   |                              |                             |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+
   |2.8. Alarm Systems            |3.3. Scalability             |
   |                              |3.4. Convergence Time        |
   +------------------------------+-----------------------------+


3.1. Constraint-based Routing

   For convenience and low operational costs, power consumption of
   consumer products must be kept at a very low level to achieve a
   long battery lifetime. One implication of this fact is that Random
   Access Memory (RAM) is limited and it may even be powered down;
   leaving only a few 100 bytes of RAM alive during the sleep phase.

   The use of battery powered devices reduces installation costs and
   does enable installation of devices even where main power lines
   are not available. On the other hand, in order to be cost
   effective and efficient, the devices have to maximize the sleep
   phase with a duty cycle lower than 1%.




Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   Some devices only wake up in response to an event, e.g. a push
   button.

   Simple battery-powered nodes such as movement sensors on garage
   doors and rain sensors may not be able to assist in routing.
   Depending on the node type, the node never listens at all, listens
   rarely or makes contact on demand to a pre-configured target node.
   Attempting to communicate to such nodes may at best require long
   time before getting a response.

   Other battery-powered nodes may have the capability to participate
   in routing. The routing protocol SHOULD route via mains-powered
   nodes if possible.

   The routing protocol MUST support constraint-based routing taking
   into account node properties (CPU, memory, level of energy, sleep
   intervals, safety/convenience of changing battery).

3.2. Support of Mobility

   In a home environment, although the majority of devices are fixed
   devices, there is still a variety of mobile devices: for example a
   remote control is likely to move. Another example of mobile
   devices is wearable healthcare devices.

   While healthcare devices delivering measurement results can
   tolerate route discovery times measured in seconds, a remote
   control appears unresponsive if using more than 0.5 seconds to
   e.g. pause the music.

   In more rare occasions, receiving nodes may also have moved.
   Examples include safety-off switch in a clothes iron, a vacuum
   cleaner robot or the wireless chime of doorbell set.

   Refer to section 3.4. for routing protocol convergence times.

   A non-responsive node can either be caused by 1) a failure in the
   node, 2) a failed link on the path to the node or 3) a moved node.
   In the first two cases, the node can be expected to reappear at
   roughly the same location in the network, whereas it can return
   anywhere in the network in the latter case.

3.3. Scalability

   Looking at the number of wall switches, power outlets, sensors of
   various nature, video equipment and so on in a modern house, it
   seems quite realistic that hundreds of low power devices may form
   a home automation network in a fully populated "smart" home.
   Moving towards professional building automation, the number of
   such devices may be in the order of several thousands.



Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   The routing protocol MUST support 250 devices in the network.

3.4. Convergence Time

   A wireless home automation network is subject to various
   instabilities due to signal strength variation, moving persons and
   the like.
   Measured from the transmission of a packet, the following
   convergence time requirements apply.

   The routing protocol MUST converge within 0.5 second if no nodes
   have moved.

   The routing protocol MUST converge within 4 seconds if nodes have
   moved.

   In both cases, "converge" means "the originator node has received
   a response from the destination node". The above-mentioned
   convergence time requirements apply to a home control network
   environment of up to 250 nodes with up to 4 repeating nodes
   between source and destination.

3.5. Manageability

   The ability of the home network to support auto-configuration is
   of the utmost importance. Indeed, most end users will not have the
   expertise and the skills to perform advanced configuration and
   troubleshooting. Thus the routing protocol designed for home
   automation networks MUST provide a set of features including zero-
   configuration of the routing protocol for a new node to be added
   to the network. From a routing perspective, zero-configuration
   means that a node can obtain an address and join the network on
   its own, almost without human intervention.

3.6. Stability

   If a node is found to fail often compared to the rest of the
   network, this node SHOULD NOT be the first choice for routing of
   traffic.

4. Traffic Pattern

   Depending on the design philosophy of the home network, wall
   switches may be configured to directly control individual lamps or
   alternatively, all wall switches send control commands to a
   central lighting control computer which again sends out control
   commands to relevant devices.

   In a distributed system, the traffic tends to be multipoint-to-
   multipoint. In a centralized system, it is a mix of multipoint-to-
   point and point-to-multipoint.


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   Wall switches only generate traffic when activated, which
   typically happens from a one to tens of times per hour.

   Remote controls have a similar transmit pattern to wall switches,
   but are activated more frequently.

   Temperature/air pressure/rain sensors send frames when queried by
   the user or can be preconfigured to send measurements at fixed
   intervals (typically minutes). Motion sensors typically send a
   frame when motion is first detected and another frame when an idle
   period with no movement has elapsed. The highest transmission
   frequency depends on the idle period used in the sensor.
   Sometimes, a timer will trigger a frame transmission when an
   extended period without status change has elapsed.

   All frames sent in the above examples are quite short, typically
   less than 5 bytes of payload. Lost frames and interference from
   other transmitters may lead to retransmissions. In all cases,
   acknowledgment frames with a size of a few bytes are used.

   As mentioned in the introduction, all messages are carried in IPv6
   packets; typically as UDP but ICMP echo and other types may also
   appear.
   In order to save bandwidth, the transport layer will typically be
   using header compression [I-D.Hui-HeaderCompression].



5. Security Considerations

   As every network, HC-LLNs are exposed to routing security threats
   that need to be addressed.  The wireless and distributed nature of
   these networks increases the spectrum of potential routing
   security threats.  This is further amplified by the resource
   constraints of the nodes, thereby preventing resource-intensive
   routing security approaches from being deployed.  A viable routing
   security approach SHOULD be sufficiently lightweight that it may
   be implemented across all nodes in a HC-LLN.  These issues require
   special attention during the design process, so as to facilitate a
   commercially attractive deployment.

   An attacker can snoop, replay, or originate arbitrary messages to
   a node in an attempt to manipulate or disable the routing
   function.
   To mitigate this, the HC-LLN MUST be able to authenticate a new
   node prior to allowing it to participate in the routing decision
   process.  The routing protocol MUST support message integrity.

   Further examples of routing security issues that may arise are the
   abnormal behavior of nodes that exhibit an egoistic conduct, such
   as not obeying network rules or forwarding no or false packets.


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   Other important issues may arise in the context of denial-of-
   service (DoS) attacks, malicious address space allocations,
   advertisement of variable addresses, a wrong neighborhood, etc.
   The routing protocol(s) SHOULD support defense against DoS attacks
   and other attempts to maliciously or inadvertently cause the
   mechanisms of the routing protocol(s) to over-consume the limited
   resources of LLN nodes, e.g., by constructing forwarding loops or
   causing excessive routing protocol overhead traffic, etc.

   The properties of self-configuration and self-organization that
   are desirable in a HC-LLN introduce additional routing security
   considerations.  Mechanisms MUST be in place to deny any node that
   attempts to take malicious advantage of self-configuration and
   self-organization procedures.  Such attacks may attempt, for
   example, to cause DoS, drain the energy of power-constrained
   devices, or to hijack the routing mechanism.  A node MUST
   authenticate itself to a trusted node that is already associated
   with the HC-LLN before the former can take part in self-
   configuration or self-organization.  A node that has already
   authenticated and associated with the HC-LLN MUST deny, to the
   maximum extent possible, the allocation of resources to any
   unauthenticated peer.  The routing protocol(s) MUST deny service
   to any node that has not clearly established trust with the HC-
   LLN.
   In a home control environment, it is considered unlikely that a
   network is constantly being snooped and at the same time, ease of
   use is important. As a consequence the network key MAY be exposed
   for short periods during inclusion of new nodes.
   Electronic door locks and other critical applications SHOULD apply
   end-to-end application security on top of the network transport
   security.

   If connected to a backbone network, the HC-LLN SHOULD be capable
   of limiting the resources utilized by nodes in said backbone
   network so as not to be vulnerable to DoS. This should typically
   be handled by border routers providing access from a backbone
   network to resources in the HC-LLN.

   With low computation power and scarce energy resources, HC-LLNs'
   nodes may not be able to resist any attack from high-power
   malicious nodes (e.g., laptops and strong radios).  However, the
   amount of damage generated to the whole network SHOULD be
   commensurate with the number of nodes physically compromised.  For
   example, an intruder taking control over a single node SHOULD NOT
   be able to completely deny service to the whole network.

   In general, the routing protocol(s) SHOULD support the
   implementation of routing security best practices across the HC-
   LLN.  Such an implementation ought to include defense against, for
   example, eavesdropping, replay, message insertion, modification,
   and man-in-the-middle attacks.


Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   The choice of the routing security solutions will have an impact
   on the routing protocol(s).  To this end, routing protocol(s)
   proposed in the context of HC-LLNs MUST support authentication and
   integrity measures and SHOULD support confidentiality (routing
   security) measures.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.

7. Acknowledgments

   J. P. Vasseur, Jonathan Hui, Eunsook "Eunah" Kim, Mischa Dohler
   and Massimo Maggiorotti are gratefully acknowledged for their
   contributions to this document.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

8. Disclaimer for pre-RFC5378 work

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s)
   controlling the copyright in such materials, this document may not
   be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative
   works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards Process,
   except to format it for publication as an RFC or to translate it
   into languages other than English.

9. References

9.1. Normative References

   [I-D.Vasseur-Terminology] Vasseur, JP. "Terminology in Low power
            And Lossy Networks", draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02
            (work in progress), October 2008.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
            Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.



9.2. Informative References

   [RFC5548] Dohler, M., "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power
            and Lossy Networks", BCP 14, RFC 5548, May 2009.




Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


   [I-D.Pister-Industial-reqs] Pister, K., "Industrial Routing
            Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks ", draft-
            ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs (work in progress)

   [I-D.Martocci-Building-reqs] Martocci, J., "Building Automation
            Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks ",
            draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs (work in progress)

   [I-D.Levis-Protocols-survey] Lewis, P. "Overview of Existing
            Routing Protocols for Low Power and Lossy Networks",
            draft-ietf-roll-protocols-survey (work in progress)

   [I-D.Hui-HeaderCompression] Hui, J., "Compression Format for IPv6
            Datagrams in 6LoWPAN Networks ", draft-ietf-6lowpan-hc
            (work in progress), December 2008.





   Author's Addresses


   Anders Brandt

   Sigma Designs, Inc.
   Emdrupvej 26
   Copenhagen, DK-2100
   Denmark

   Email: abr@sdesigns.dk



   Jakob Buron
   Sigma Designs, Inc.
   Emdrupvej 26
   Copenhagen, DK-2100
   Denmark

   Email: jbu@sdesigns.dk



   Giorgio Porcu
   Telecom Italia
   Piazza degli Affari, 2
   20123 Milan
   Italy




Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs   January 13, 2010


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.














































Brandt                 Expires July 13, 2010                [Page 18]

