
Network Working Group                                        S. Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
                                                                 Editor
                                                          February 2005

                            Extracting RFCs

                  <draft-bradner-rfc-extracts-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 7, 2005.

Abstract
   Many people have expressed a desire to extract material from IETF
   RFCs for use in documentation, text books, on-line help systems, and
   for similar uses. In addition, some IETF RFCs contain MIBs and other
   types of program code that could be compiled. This document proposes
   an update to RFC 3667 and 3668 to explicitly permit extracting
   material for a wide range of uses.

   RFC 2026 limited the rights the IETF requires of document authors and
   editors.  RFC 2026, and its successors, do not require that the
   authors permit the creation of derivative works based on their
   contribution outside of the IETF process.  Some people have expressed
   a desire for the IETF to obtain such permission to enable people
   outside of the IETF to create derivative works, for example, within



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   an open source environment.  This document tries to spell out the
   issues surrounding this desire in order to stimulate discussion
   within the IETF community about possibly updating RFC 3667 and RFC
   3668 to request such rights from RFC authors.

Copyright Notice
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society. (2005)

1. Introduction
   Section 3.3(a)(E) of RFC 3667 [RFC 3667] requires that the author(s)
   of IETF contributions grant the IETF the right to make and use
   certain types of extracts of the contributions for purposes not
   limited to the IETF standards process.  When I wrote that section I
   intended that to mean that anyone could make such extracts but the
   wording I used limited the permission to the IETF.  This document
   tries to fix the words to match my intent.

   Historically RFCs have been assumed to be fair game to anyone who
   wanted to use text and ideas from an RFC in their own work.  The RFC
   publication process did not explicitly request that RFC authors
   surrender the right for the creation of such derivative works but no
   limits to do so were noted in RFCs.

   Starting with RFC 1602 [RFC 1602] the IETF stared requesting that RFC
   authors agree to grant specific rights to the IETF regarding the text
   and ideas in RFCs.  These requests were made more explicit in RFC
   2026 [RFC 2026] and clarified in RFC 3667.  Currently, as defined in
   RFC 3667, authors must grant to the IETF the right for derivative
   works to be created within the IETF standards process but the IETF
   does not request the right for people not working within the IETF
   standards process to make derivative works.  The author(s) may do
   that on their own if they want but its not part of the rights the
   IETF requires the author grant as part of RFC publication process.
   Note that the RFC Editor requires that authors grant the right for
   anyone to make derivative works as a requirement for the publication
   of a non-IETF RFC.  Note also that authors may explicitly add text to
   their submission that prohibits the creation of derivative works at
   all. (See RFC 3667 Section 5.2.)

   Recently there has been considerable discussion on the IETF IP
   working group mailing list about the implications of the IETF not
   requiring that authors grant the right for anyone to create
   derivative works from RFCs.  This document discusses the issue and is
   intended to serve as a catalyst for discussion.

2. Extractions from RFCs
   I see no reason to limit the ability for people to make and use
   extracts from RFCs as long as the extract is not modified and that



Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   proper acknowledgement is given and the ISOC copyright notice is
   included.  Thus I propose that something like the following be added
   to RFC 3667 as Section 3.3(c):

   c. To the extent that a Contribution or any portion thereof is
      protected by copyright and other rights of authorship, the
      Contributor, and each named co-Contributor, and the organization
      he or she represents or is sponsored by (if any) grant a
      perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
      right and license to extract, copy, publish, display, distribute,
      and incorporate into other works, for any purpose (and not limited
      to use within the IETF Standards Process) any portion of the
      Contribution as long as the extract is not modified, proper
      acknowledgement is given and as long as the ISOC copyright notice
      is included.  It also being understood that the licenses granted
      under this paragraph (c) shall not be deemed to grant any right
      under any patent, patent application or other similar intellectual
      property right disclosed by the Contributor under [IETF IPR]).

3. Unrestricted derivative works
   A number of people have expressed the opinion that it should be
   possible for anyone to modify and republish a RFC if they feel that
   they can improve on the technology described in the RFC.  A number of
   messages to the IETF IP working group mailing list asserted that the
   open source development process depends on the ability to do this.
   As noted above, historically this was possible with RFCs until RFC
   2026 changed things so that modifications had to be done within the
   IETF standards process unless the author had given specific
   permission for modifications to be done elsewhere.

   The IETF is not alone in not providing the right to make unrestricted
   derivative works.  The W3C, the ITU, ANSI, IEEE, etc all restrict the
   ability to make derivative works based on their specifications.  I
   have not found a standards organization that permits it (but I'm sure
   that it will be pointed out if there are such standards
   organizations.

   Disclaimer: I do not think that granting the unrestricted ability to
   make derivative works is a good thing for the IETF to do so I expect
   the following list of advantages is far from complete.

3.1. Advantages of the unrestricted ability to make derivative works
3.1.1. Support for open source
   The assertion was made by a number of posters to the IETF IPR working
   group mailing list that the open source community requires the
   unrestricted ability to make derivative works.

3.1.2. Speed of technological evolution



Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   It is clear that there would be more rapid evolution of technology
   standards if anyone could create their own variation and document it
   so that others could implement and support that version.

3.2.  Disadvantages of the unrestricted ability to make derivative works
3.2.1. Confusion over what constitutes the standard
   It would clearly be confusing if someone could take an IETF standard
   such as RFC 3270 (MPLS Support of Differentiated Services), change a
   few key words and republish it, maybe in a textbook, as the
   definitive standards for MPLS Support of Differentiated Services.
   The IETF could, as Larry Rosen suggested create a process whereby the
   IETF could create a certification mark and a process to ensure that
   the mark was only used on products that implement the IETF version
   but that would be adding a lot of extra effort of a type that the
   IETF has not shown itself to be very good at.

3.2.2. Architecturally agnostic modifications
   IETF working groups undertake a great deal of effort to develop a
   common understanding of the underlying architectural assumptions of
   the standards they develop.  Modifications or extensions to a
   standard done without an understanding of those architectural
   assumptions may easily introduce significant operational or security
   issues.  The best place to extend a standard is in the working group
   that developed it because they know what the underlying assumptions
   are and can properly ascertain if the modification or extension is
   something that fills a real need (and not just a local optimization
   of something that can already be done) and if its done in a way that
   does not break the existing standard.

3.2.2. Cooperation between standards organizations
   Many standards development organizations (SDOs) are now working in
   the technology areas that were once the nearly exclusive territory of
   the IETF.  This increased standards activity can be very good for
   innovation but frequently other standards organizations have decided
   that IETF technologies are almost, but not quite, right for them to
   use.  If it were perfectly OK for such an SDO to publish a modified
   version of an IETF standard as one of their own standards (and most
   likely publish it in a way that bans the creation of derivative
   works) it would distort the standards playing field.  I think that
   SDOs working in the same or overlapping areas should cooperate with
   each other not try to usurp the other SDO's work.  Just as the IEEE
   would not like it if the IETF to republish a modified specification
   for 802.11 and the ITU-T would not like it if the IETF were to
   republish a modified version of the specification of SONET/SDH,
   neither of these organizations should assume that they are encouraged
   to create modified versions of IETF specifications.

3.2.3. Restricting open source



Bradner                                                         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   I do not buy the argument that the open source community requires the
   ability to make capricious changes in standards.  I fully agree that
   the IETF should place no restrictions on the ability of anyone to
   implement an IETF standard (some people or companies claiming patent
   rights might do so but that is not something the IETF should do).  I
   do not see that the open source community requires the ability to
   create a modified and incompatible version of ATM signaling or of the
   Ethernet backoff algorithm. If someone in the open source community
   thinks they have a better idea then they should present that idea to
   the standards organization that developed the technology to see if
   the standards organization agrees.

   The open source community does not have this ability with the output
   of other standards organizations, I do not see justification to say
   that its OK to do so for Internet technology.  It seems to be
   perfectly reasonable for an open source development effort to
   implement a standard rather than assume they know better.

3.3. Call for discussion
   The question of the IETF's getting from RFC authors the right to let
   anyone create derivative should be discussed on the IETF IP working
   group list and in the next meeting.

   Adding something like the following as Section 3.3.(c) to RFC 3667
   would make the change:
   c. To the extent that a Contribution or any portion thereof is
      protected by copyright and other rights of authorship, the
      Contributor, and each named co-Contributor, and the organization
      he or she represents or is sponsored by (if any) grant a
      perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
      right and license to extract, modify, copy, publish, display,
      distribute, and incorporate into other works, for any purpose (and
      not limited to use within the IETF Standards Process) any portion
      of the Contribution as long as proper acknowledgement is given and
      as long as the ISOC copyright notice is included.  It also being
      understood that the licenses granted under this paragraph (c)
      shall not be deemed to grant any right under any patent, patent
      application or other similar intellectual property right disclosed
      by the Contributor under [IETF IPR]).


4. Other problems in what RFC 3667 requires from authors
   Sam Hartman posted a note to the IETF IPR working group mailing list
   in which he said that he was not sure that the current granting of
   rights on RFC 3667 was sufficient to cover the case where he too text
   from an existing standard to use in a new RFC since he felt that he
   might not be able to fulfill the Internet-Draft boilerplate
   requirements.  (http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ipr-



Bradner                                                         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   wg/current/msg02677.html) I'm not sure there is a problem but the
   working group should explore the issue to see if a change is needed
   to fix the problem Sam sees.

5. References

5.1. Normative References

   [RFC 3667] Bradner, S., Ed., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
      RFC 3667, February 2004.

5.2. Informative References

   [RFC 1602] IAB, IESG, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 2",
      RFC 1602, March 1994.




6. Editor's Address

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St.
   Cambridge MA, 02138

   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   EMail: sob@harvard.edu


7. Full copyright statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78 and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to



Bradner                                                         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                 February 2005


   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  The IETF invites any interested party to
   bring to its attention any copyrights, patents or patent
   applications, or other proprietary rights that may cover technology
   that may be required to implement this standard.  Please address the
   information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





























Bradner                                                         [Page 7]

