Network Working Group                                           J. Bi
Internet Draft                                                 G. Yao
Intended status: Informational                    Tsinghua University
Expires: March 4, 2015							   September 26, 2014



            Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA) Gap Analysis
                       draft-bi-supa-gap-analysis-00


Abstract

   As operators struggle to optimize their network for different
   applications while maximizing network resources usage, there's
   growing business pressure to minimize operational tasks and the
   deployment time of new services.

   New automation paradigms are meant to help reach these goals,
   including the optimization of network functions through application
   control. This control could be signaled directly by an application,
   through a proxy or orchestrated in a centralized manner.

   The current version of the Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA)
   group charter identifies two fields where standardization would be
   desirable for operators: the definition of a generic model for the
   description of network topologies at any layer and with any degree
   of granularity, and the definition of a standardized model for
   applications to push policies toward a central network controller.
   The first of these topics, the topology modeling, is meant to
   support the definition and application of the second. The present
   memo analyses the current state of the art of the industries
   regarding these two topics and discusses whether an IETF
   standardization is desirable and for which reasons.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents




Bi, et al              Expires March 26, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 26, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Scope and target for SUPA.................................... 3
      2.1. Criteria used .......................................... 4
   3. Topology models at the IETF.................................. 4
      3.1. I2RS Working Group...................................... 4
      3.2. ALTO Working Group...................................... 4
      3.3. FORCES Working Group.................................... 5
      3.4. SPRING Working Group.................................... 5
      3.5. SFC Working Group....................................... 5
      3.6. ACTN Proposed Working Group............................. 6
      3.7. NVO3 Proposed Working Group............................. 6
   4. Topology models in other organizations .......................6
      4.1. ONF - Open Networking Foundation ........................6
      4.2. Open Daylight .......................................... 7
      4.3. OpenStack Neutron....................................... 7
      4.4. VmWware NSX      ....................................... 7
   5. Policy models ............................................... 8
      5.1. Neutron Group-based Policies............................ 8
      5.2. OpenStack Congress...................................... 9
   6. Modeling language ........................................... 9
      6.1. Transport mechanism..................................... 9
   7. Security Considerations..................................... 10
   8. IANA Considerations ........................................ 10
   9. References ................................................. 10
      9.1. Informative References................................. 10
   10. Acknowledgments ........................................... 12




Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


1. Introduction

   Network operators, including Internet Service Providers, Datacenters
   operators and others, are under constant pressure to optimize the
   usage of their installed network resources while maintaining high
   availability and deploying new services at an ever-increasing pace.
   The introduction of new paradigms aims at reducing these efforts,
   optimize network resource usage and minimize operational overhead.

   Such a new paradigm is the deployment of automated network
   configuration and optimization through the use of a centralized
   management system. Some functions such as access control and policy
   enforcement can be greatly simplified as they are implemented from a
   centralized point. Management applications would benefit from a view
   of the network that is adapted to their needs and from a policy
   framework that is efficient and simple to use.

   Several organizations have started working on protocols and models
   to be used between controllers and network devices, either physical
   ones or virtualized. This work started some years ago in a number of
   different organizations and has spawned a large amount of interest
   in the networking community. However the definition of interfaces
   between controllers and applications, the so-called "northbound"
   side, has seen a lot less progress during the same time.

   There's a need for management applications to interface with
   controllers in a simple and elegant way. For this purpose,
   applications require a way to express their requirements in the form
   of simple policy statements applied to network elements. These
   network elements should be as simplified (abstracted) as possible
   for their manipulation by the application. The responsibility of
   providing an abstract and simple view adapted to each application
   need is the burden of the controller.

   The goal of the Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA) group is to
   define a standard way for controllers to exchange policy information
   with management applications using layer-agnostic modeling. Such a
   multi-layer models first needs to be defined. Then a model for
   exchanging policy information can be developed. The present gap
   analysis will look into these two aspects of the group work. First,
   the current state of the work on network and topology models will be
   reviewed. Then the policy side will be analyzed.

2. Scope and target for SUPA

   The scope of SUPA work is to first define a topology model that
   could be used to define any type of network configuration at any


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   level of abstraction. The model has to be able to describe very
   detailed topologies, such as physical connectivity, logical
   connectivity and of course IP connectivity. Above these, the
   description of more abstract concepts such as tunnels, wide-area
   VPNs, service chains, flows and host sessions should also be
   supported.

2.1. Criteria used

   The following criteria are applied to each technology or current
   work regarding modeling:

   - Does the model offer higher abstraction capabilities for
     applications?
   - Does it support network management capabilities?
   - Does it allow the transfer of large data sets efficiently?
   - Can the model be extended easily?
   - Does it allow for the control of a wide range of policy variables
     (by opposition to routing state only or access-control only)?
   - Does it permit the instantiation or destruction of a virtualized
     device on a physical node?

3. Topology models at the IETF

   This section describes the work being done in current IETF working
   groups or proposed groups and how it relates to the modeling work
   proposed within SUPA. The text discusses whether there is overlap or
   not and if the work coverage would be enough for the needs described
   above.

3.1. I2RS Working Group

   The goal of the I2RS work is to allow the external modification of a
   router RIB by an external controller. For this purpose a topology
   model has been proposed in draft-clemm-i2rs-yang-network-topo.

   This model is a very simple graph model based on links and nodes. It
   is certainly sufficient to describe a network from the physical
   level to the IP and protocol levels, but falls short when it comes
   to provide higher abstractions or more flexibility.

3.2. ALTO Working Group

   The alto working group defined an architecture that aims at exposing
   topology information and more specifically the cost of paths through
   an infrastructure, as defined in RFC7285. Alto services are able to
   provide network maps defined as groups of endpoints. Endpoints are


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   providers-defined entities and can therefore represent any
   granularity of network, from the physical to groups of networks
   following similar paths or restrains.

   Although this model can represent different levels of abstraction at
   multiple granularities, it's not clear if it could be adapted easily
   for other purposes than providing cost maps in the context of ALTO.
   The ALTO model is meant to be used outside of the trust domain of an
   ISP and a controller toward external clients. It could be used in
   the context of multiple datacenters for example, which may be an
   area of overlap with SUPA. SUPA only targets management applications
   and controllers in the same trust domain.

3.3. FORCES Working Group

   The FORCES working group standardized a way for control elements to
   configure forwarding elements. These elements may be in the same
   chassis or in separate physical entities. This last case is
   consistent with a controller southbound interface toward network
   elements.

   As far as the authors can judge, there isn't any overlap with the
   work proposed by SUPA.

3.4. SPRING Working Group

   The SPRING work aims at controlling network traffic with parameters
   other than the usual unicast destination routing or source routing.
   Use cases include protection (fast-reroute), traffic engineering and
   load-balancing, up to network programmability.

   This last aspect would be achieved by a central controller using
   SPRING as a mechanism to direct traffic over specific paths. One
   document published within the group, [draft-kim-spring-use-cases],
   describes some interactions between a controller and SPRING
   mechanisms. Since the SPRING group hasn't defined a northbound way
   to control the mechanism on devices, there's no overlap with this
   work and what SUPA proposes.

3.5. SFC Working Group

   The Service Function Chaining (SFC) working group aims at defining
   and controlling a mechanism where traffic is classified before going
   through an ordered set of services. The set of services is a
   definite and ordered group of instances defining a service function
   path. More than one instance may exist for each service in order to
   allow for load-balancing.


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   A YANG definition for SFC is already proposed in draft-penno-sfc-
   yang and has been subject to an early implementation in Open
   Daylight. This interface and its model, as currently defined, is an
   abstraction limited to the scope of service chains. There is a
   possible overlap with SUPA in this regard, but the scope of SUPA is
   seen as larger. Although an overlap is possible, it could be avoided
   by not providing models targeting service chains specifically.

3.6. ACTN Proposed Working Group

   The ACTN proposed work, as described in draft-ceccarelli-actn-
   framework and draft-fang-actn-multidomain-dci has two main goals,
   the abstraction of multiple control domains into a single controller
   offering an abstract fused topology and the splitting of that
   topology into abstract client views, which are usually a fraction of
   the complete network. The ACTN work is therefore about unification
   of several physical controllers in a virtual one and also about the
   segmentation, isolation and sharing of network resources.

   The ACTN work is not explicitly about policies, but some level of
   policing is applied in the creation of a client view and the way it
   interacts with the virtual controller beneath. One point where
   overlap may exist with some of the work proposed in SUPA is in the
   definition of multiple levels of abstract topologies.

3.7. NVO3 Proposed Working Group

   The NVO3 group proposes a way to virtualize the network edge for
   datacenters in order to be able to move virtual instances without
   impacting their network configuration. This is realized through a
   centrally controlled overlay layer-3 network, as described in draft-
   lasserre-nvo3-framework.

   At first sight, there doesn't seem to be an overlap between this
   work and what is being proposed in SUPA. This type of architecture
   could support a virtual tenant model similar to what is proposed in
   Open Daylight, but does not offer policing or new models for
   applications to use.

4. Topology models in other organizations

4.1. ONF - Open Networking Foundation

   The Open Networking Foundation has, so far, mostly published
   interface standards for the southbound side of controllers, for
   example the well-known OpenFlow specification, now at version 1.3.
   This model describes an abstraction directly above the hardware


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   layer, a forwarding abstraction, and is therefore not suitable for
   exposure at higher levels.

   The ONF created a group responsible of defining northbound
   interfaces, but the creation of this group is recent and hasn't lead
   to the publication of standards in this area so far. In its charter
   [NBI-CHARTER], the group seemed for favor a neutral model, but to
   define different APIs for each possible level of abstraction. The
   membership of this group being closed in nature, it isn't possible
   to know if an overlap exists with current draft proposals.

4.2. Open Daylight

   Open Daylight offers a set of models that are often closely relating
   to the actual configuration of devices. These types of models are
   most of the time used by controllers to configure devices with a
   high level of sophistication implementing several protocols in an
   independent fashion (so-called "fat devices", by opposition, for
   example to a barebone Open-Flow switch, although OF is supported in
   ODL).

   The Open Daylight models are therefore mostly used in a southbound
   fashion. They could be used northbound, for example by management
   applications holding a central configuration, but very little
   abstraction is then provided by the controller. Such an approach
   would not be desirable for exposure to applications requiring a
   simpler view of the network and of policies to apply. One notable
   exception is the framework for Model-Driven Service Abstraction
   Layer (MD-SAL), that aims at offering higher level services through
   abstract models implemented in plugins.

   Although Open Daylight is an open source project, it does not define
   standards, but is structured to adopt existing ones as necessary, as
   mentioned in [ODL-FAQ]. It is therefore not the proper forum to seek
   the standardization of interfaces and models.

4.3. Tail-f

   Tail-f provides a fast configuration management tool to facilitate
   the mapping of service configuration changes to device configuration
   commands including L2/L3VPN, BGP, firewall and etc. It offers a
   uniform approach based on YANG at all levels, and this kind of
   language based approach which can render various interface
   representations. One of the marked features of Tail-f is that the
   unified YANG modeling for both services and devices, in another word,
   YANG for both northbound and southbound.



Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   Tail-f is developed to simplify the service deployment and auto
   configuration which are mainly focused on modeling both northbound
   and southbound. For the northbound, interface can be CLI, REST,
   Netconf, while the southbound device interface can be CLI, Netconf,
   SNMP and others. All the interfaces are auto-rendered from
   declarative YANG data models. This approach is desirable for service
   deployment but there is no high level view of the network, e.g.
   network topology and abstraction of the network graph.

   Tail-f is a product, a solution which aims at service deployment and
   auto configuration of network changes only. It is service oriented
   and model-driven and does not rely on a higher view of the entire
   network. Besides, it does not define standards although it is open
   structured to support existing ones such as OpenFlow.

4.4. OpenStack Neutron

   To complete.



5. Policy models

   One of the goals of SUPA is to provide a way for applications to
   express policies and apply them to defined objects models. The
   definition of such policies should be easily extendable, i.e.
   defining new types of policies should not require to go through the
   standardization process again.

5.1. Neutron Group-based Policies

   One promising policy model recently proposed within OpenStack
   Neutron is the group-based policy model. In this system, entities
   are assembled in Endpoints Groups (EPG) and provide or consume
   Contracts. Such Contracts are hierarchical entities containing
   policy rules.

   For example, a group of firewalls may provide a network access
   control contract to a group of application servers that wishes to
   have a set of ports open.

   This type of approach is more relational than declarative, but could
   be used to describe a large amount of possible scenarios. It has the
   advantage of providing a relatively simple policy model that covers
   a large applicability.




Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


5.2. OpenStack Congress

   Congress is a policy language recently proposed for OpenStack by two
   VMware employees who have been working on it for nearly a year. It
   works in conjunction with the Keystone module or any other data
   source such as Active Directory or LDAP to declare and enforce
   policies.

   Congress uses for now Datalog, a derivative of Prolog, as its base
   language. It is entirely declarative and first-order logic, which
   gives it interesting properties, such as providing the same result
   no matter the order in which the statements are made. The language
   allows for the definition of types and for active enforcement or
   verification of the policies.

   The largest drawback of this approach seems to be it's computational
   complexity and its probable inability to react in real time to
   network events. These limitations may disappear as the language is
   refined and computation capacities grows with time.

6. Modeling language

   The modeling language must be chosen amongst existing ones unless
   the requirements defined in SUPA cannot be met, which seems unlikely.
   A modeling language should be a structured language able to describe
   objects, parameters and define types in a flexible manner.

   Candidates for modeling languages include YANG of course, but also
   pure XML or JSON exchanged over a transport protocol. Considering
   extensibility is a major criterion, YANG would be the most logical
   choice.

   As suggested by some contributors to SUPA, if the only proposal for
   a modeling language is YANG, then it could be chosen directly and
   included in later versions of the group charter.

6.1. Transport mechanism

   The transport mechanism is usually tightly coupled with the modeling
   language chosen. In the case of YANG, NETCONF could be used with XML
   encoding. RESTCONF would allow either XML or JSON encoding.

   Because RESTCONF uses HTTP methods to identify operations, it may
   show some limitations in the way it operates, for example in the
   request size or capacity to operate fast transfers of large data
   sets. The pros and cons of these mechanisms should be investigated
   further within SUPA.


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


7. Security Considerations

   Security considerations are to be completed.

8. IANA Considerations

   No IANA consideration is present in this draft.

9. References

9.1. Informative References

   [RFC6020] Bjorklund & al., "YANG - A Data Modeling Language for the
             Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6020,
             October 2010.

   [RFC6020]Alimi & al., "Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
             Protocol", RFC 7285, September 2014.

   [RFC3746] Yang & al., "Forwarding and Control Element Separation
             (ForCES)  Framework", RFC 3746, April 2004.

   [RFC6241] Enns & al., "Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)",
             RFC6241, June 2011.

   [sfc-yang] Penno & al., "Yang Data Model for Service Function
             Chaining" (work in progress), draft-penno-sfc-yang-05,
             July 2014.

   [spring-use-cases] Kim & al., "SPRING Use Cases for Software-defined
             Networking" (work in progress), draft-kim-spring-use-
             cases-00, July 2014.

   [netconf-restconf] Bierman & al., "RESTCONF Protocol" (work in
             progress), draft-bierman-netconf-restconf-04, February
             2014.

   [alto-topology] Scharf & al., "Path-Vector and Node-Edge Topology
             Maps in ALTO" (work in progress), draft-scharf-alto-
             topology-00, July 2014.

   [alto-yang] Scharf & al., "ALTO Extension for YANG Modules" (work in
             progress), draft-scharf-alto-yang-00, July 2014.

   [actn-framework] Daniele & al., "Framework for Abstraction and
             Control of Transport Networks" (work in progress), draft-
             ceccarelli-actn-framework-02, May 2014.


Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


  [actn-multidomain-dci] Fang, "ACTN Use-case for Multi-domain Data
                          Center Interconnect" (work in progress),
                          draft-fang-actn-multidomain-dci-00, June 2014

   [i2rs-yang-network-topo] Clemm & al., "A YANG Data Model for Network
                            Topologies" (work in progress), draft-
                            clemm-i2rs-yang-network-topo-00, Feburary
                            2014.

  [nvo3-framework-] Lasserre & al., "Framework for DC Network
                     Virtualization" (work in progress), draft-lasserre-
                     nvo3-framework-03, July 2012.

  [multi-layer-oam-ps] Wu & al., "Problem Statement for Layer and
                        Technology Independent OAM in a Multi-Layer
                        Environment" (work in progress), draft-edprop-
                        opsawg-multi-layer-oam-ps-00, September 2014.

   [ip-te-pib] Boucadair & al., "An IP Traffic Engineering Policy
               Information Base" (work in progress), draft-jacquenet-ip-
               te-pib-02, June 2002.

   [i2rs-architecture] Atlas & al., "An Architecture for the Interface
                       to the Routing System" (work in progress),
                       draft-ietf-i2rs-architecture-04, June 2014.

  [i2rs-problem-statement] Atlas & al., "Interface to the Routing
                           System Problem Statement" (work in progress),
                           draft-ietf-i2rs-problem-statement-03, June
                           2014.

  [NBI-Charter] Sarwar & al., "Open Networking Foundation North Bound
                 Interface Working Group (NBI-WG) Charter", October 2013.

  [OpenStack-Congress] Peter & al., "A System For Declaring, Auditing,
                        and Enforcing Policy In Heterogeneous Cloud
                        Environments", May 2014.

   http://www.opendaylight.org/project/faq#20

   https://wiki.openstack.org/wiki/Neutron/GroupPolicy




Bi, et al              Expires March 4, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            SUPA Gap Analysis             September 2014


   https://docs.google.com/document/d/1f2xokl9Tc47aV67KEua0PBRz4jsdSDLX
             th7dYe-jz6Q/edit#



   https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Nn1HjghAvk2RTPwvltSrnCUJkidW
             KWY2ckU7OYAVNpo/edit#slide=id.g1d4b92af0_105



10. Acknowledgments

   Jean-Francois Tremblay from Viagenie contributed to some significant
   portions of this text. James Huang, Oliver Huang, Yiyong Zha helped 
   in providing valuable comments and text.

Authors' Addresses

   Jun Bi
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   Email: junbi@cernet.edu.cn

   Guang Yao
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   EMail: yaoguang@cernet.edu.cn





















Bi                     Expires March 4, 2015                [Page 12]

