


IRTF                                                           A. Farrel
Internet-Draft                                        Old Dog Consulting
Intended status: Informational                                   D. King
Expires: May 12, 2022                               Lancaster University
                                                        November 8, 2021


                  An Introduction to Semantic Routing
         draft-farrel-irtf-introduction-to-semantic-routing-00

Abstract

   Many proposals have been made to add semantics to IP packets by
   placing additional information existing fields, by adding semantics
   to IP addresses, or by adding fields to the packets.  The intent is
   to facilitate enhanced routing decisions based on these additional
   semantics to provide differentiated paths for different packet flows
   distinct from simple shortest path first routing.  The process is
   known as Semantic Routing.

   This document provides a brief introduction to Semantic Routing.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 12, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Objectives and Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Approaches to Semantic Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Packet and Service Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Semantic Routing Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Address Space Partitioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Prefix-based Contextual Address Usage . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Semantic Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  Flow Marking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.5.  Deep Packet Inspection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.6.  Semantic Field Overloading  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.7.  IPv6 Extension Headers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.8.  New Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Architectural Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Isolated Domains  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Bridged Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.3.  Semantic Prefix Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   Historically, the meaning of an IP address has been to identify an
   interface on a network device.  Network routing protocols were
   initially designed to determine paths through the network toward
   destination addresses so that IP packets with a common destination
   address converged on that destination.  Anycast and multicast
   addresses were also defined, and these new address semantics
   necessitated variations to the routing protocols, and in some casese
   the development of new protocols.

   Over time, routing decisions were enhanced to route packets according
   to additional information carried within the packets and dependent on
   policy coded in, configured at, or signaled to the routers.  Perhaps
   the most obvious example is Equal-Cost Multipath (ECMP) where a
   router makes a consistent choice for forwarding packets over a number



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   of parallel links or paths based on the values of a set of fields in
   the packet header.

   Upper-layer applications are placing increasingly sophisticated
   demands on the network for better quality, more predictability, and
   increased reliability.  Some of these applications are futuristic
   predictions (for example, haptic augmented reality multiplayer 3D
   worlds), some are new ideas on the threshold of roll-out (such as
   holographic conferencing), and many are rapidly developing sectors
   with established revenue streams (such as multiplayer immersive
   gaming).

   At the same time, lower-layer network technologies are advancing
   rapidly providing increased bandwidth to the home and to mobile hand-
   held devices.  These advances create an environment that enables the
   potential of advanced applications being run by very many end-users.
   This coincides with a growing trend to extend end-to-end
   communications to include machines and services, and to introduce
   routing and addressing behaviors and semantics specific to a
   particular use case and set of requirements applied within a limited
   region or domain of the Internet.  Examples of these three
   developments include 5G, predicted wireless evolutions, IoT and
   vehicular connectivity, space-terrestrial communication, industrial
   networks, cloud computing, service function chaining and network
   functions virtualization, digital twins, and data-centric data
   brokerage platforms.

   Despite this plurality of communication scenarios, IP-based
   addressing and network layer routing have remained focused on
   identifying locations of communication and determining paths between
   those locations.  This has previously depended on higher-layer
   capabilities (e.g., for name-to-location resolution) to support those
   comprehensive communication scenarios, but that approach introduces
   latency and dependencies (e.g., changing locator assignments may
   depend on the capabilities of the upper-layer capability that are
   outside the core addressing and routing system).  Furthermore, multi-
   layer lookups and interactions may impact the efficacy of
   communication scenarios, particularly those that employ different
   routing and addressing approaches beyond just locators.

   "Semantic Routing" places the support for advanced routing and
   location functions directly at the packet routing layer, such as
   through extensions to the identification properties of addresses (so
   that the address indicates more than just the network location) or
   through performing routing functions on an extended set of inputs
   (for example, other fields carried in packet headers).  Such an
   approach should preserve the Internet architecture as it is today
   while enabling additional routing function.



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   This document provides a brief introduction to semantic routing and
   outlines the possible approaches that might be taken.  A separate
   document ([I-D.king-irtf-semantic-routing-survey]) makes a start at a
   survey of pre-existing work in this area, while
   [I-D.king-irtf-challenges-in-routing] sets out some of the issues
   that should be considered when researching, developing, or proposing
   a semantic routing scheme.

2.  Objectives and Scope

   As with all advances in Internet protocols, semantic routing may be
   considered for Internet-wide deployment or may be restricted
   (possibly only initially) to well-defined and contained networks
   referred to as "limited domains" (see [RFC8799]).  The information
   used for semantic routing may be opaque within the network (in other
   words, the additional information is not visible to the routers), may
   be transparent (so that routers may see the information, but their
   processing does not need to be changed to accommodate the information
   or its encoding), or may be active (so that semantic routing is fully
   enabled).

   Semantic routing may select paths in one domain that are not
   consistent with the paths selected in other domains.

   In any case, concern and consideration must be coexistence with, and
   backward compatibility to, existing routing and addressing schemes
   that are widely deployed.

   A strategic objective of semantic routing, and associated semantic
   enhancements, is to enable Service Providers to modify the default
   forwarding behaviour to be based on other information present in the
   packet and policy configured or dynamically programmed into the
   routers and devices.  This is aimed to cause new and alternative path
   processing by routers, including:

   o  Determinism of quality of delivery in terms of throughput,
      latency, jitter, drop precedence.

   o  Determinism of resilience in terms of survival of network failures
      and delivery degradation.

   o  Determinism of routing performance in terms of the volume of data
      that has to be exchanged both to establish and to maintain the
      routing tables.

   o  Deployability in terms of configuration, training, development of
      new hardware/software, and interaction with pre-existing network
      technologies and uses.



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   o  Efficiency of manageability in terms of:

      1.  diagnostic management

      2.  management of Service KPIs with/without guarantees

      3.  dynamic and controlled instantiation of management information
          in the packets.

   Issues of security and privacy have been largely overlooked within
   the routing systems.  However, there is increasing concern that
   attacks on routing systems can not only be disruptive (for example,
   causing traffic to be dropped), but may cause traffic to be routed
   via inspection points that can breach the security or privacy of the
   payloads.  While semantic routing may offer tools for increasing
   security and privacy, it is possible that semantic routing and the
   additional information that may be carried in packets to enable
   semantic routing may provide vectors for attacks or compromise
   privacy.  This must be examined by any semantic routing proposals.

3.  Approaches to Semantic Routing

   Typically, in an IP-based network packets are forwarded using the
   least-cost path to the destination IP address.  Service Providers may
   also use techniques to modify the default forwarding behavior based
   on other information present in the packet and configured or
   programmed into the routers.  These mechanisms, sometimes called
   semantic routing techniques include "Preferential Routing", "Policy-
   based Routing", and "Flow Steering".

   Examples of existing semantic routing usage in IP-based networks
   include the following.

   o  Using addresses to identify different device types so that their
      traffic may be handled differently [SEMANTICRTG].

   o  Expressing how a packet should be handled, prioritized, or
      allocated network resources as it is forwarded through the network
      [TERASTREAMref].

   o  Deriving IP addresses from the lower layer identifiers and using
      addresses depending on the underlying connectivity (for example,
      [RFC6282].

   o  Indicating the application or network function on a destination
      device or at a specific location; or enable Service Function
      Chaining (SFC).




Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   o  Providing semantics specific to mobile networks so that a user or
      device may move through the network without disruption to their
      service [CONTENT-RTG-MOBILEref].

   o  Enabling optimized multicast traffic distribution by encoding
      multicast tree and replication instructions within addresses
      [MULTICAST-SRref].

   o  Content-based routing (CBR), forwarding of the packet based on
      message content rather than the destination addresses
      [OPENSRNref].

   o  Identifying hierarchical connectivity so that routing can be
      simplified [EIBPref].

   o  Providing geographic location information within addresses
      [GEO-IPref].

   o  Using cryptographic algorithms to mask the identity of the source
      or destination, masking routing tables within the domain, while
      still enabling packet forwarding across the network
      [BLIND-FORWARDINGref].

   A more comprehensive list of existing implementations and research
   projects can be found in [I-D.king-irtf-semantic-routing-survey].

   Semantic routing, operates to forward packets dependent on
   information carried in the packets and rules present in the routers.
   Those rules could be:

   o  Built into the routers

   o  Configured network-wide in the routers

   o  Configured per-router in a relatively static way

   o  Programmed to the routers in a dynamic way, for example, through
      software defined networking (SDN)

   o  Distributed dynamically through the network using routing or
      signalling protocols

   Semantic routing will also require information about network state
   and capabilities just as existing shortest path first routing systems
   do.  That may require information (such as link delays or other
   qualitative attributes) to be collected by network nodes and
   distributed between routers by routing protocols.  Alternatively,




Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   this information could be collected centrally by a network controller
   and used to derive the rules installed in the routers.

   Forwarding by the router is based on a look-up of the semantic
   routing information carried in the packet (see Section 4) and
   forwarding instructions programmed into the forwarding element.  The
   actions to perform may be derived by the router based on the rules
   and information that the router has collected, or may be programmed
   directly from the network controller.

3.1.  Packet and Service Routing

   Routing is the process of selecting a path for traffic in a network
   or between or across multiple networks.  For example, IP routing uses
   IP addresses for source and destination identification and is
   typically used for packet networks, such as the Internet.  IP routing
   assumes that network addresses are structured and facilitates routing
   entries in a routing table entry to represent a group of IP capable
   devices.

   Service routing and information-centric networking (ICN) use an
   overlay approach that creates a layer on top of the IP network.
   Control of the overlay necessitates augmentation of existing routing
   mechanisms, or entirely new discovery, propagation and resource
   management protocols and procedures.

   IP Routing and service routing are not the same thing.

4.  Semantic Routing Information

   The subsections below describe some of the common techniques to
   enable semantic routing in more detail.  The sections are unordered
   and no meaning should be assigned to how one approach is presented
   before another.  They are not a complete list of possible approaches.

   The approaches described here have many advantages and disadvantages.
   The purpose here is not to determine which approach is best or most
   appropriate, and so those advantages and disadvantages are not
   discussed.  The reader will inevitably have a preference and see
   drawbacks.

4.1.  Address Space Partitioning

   In some cases, an address prefix is assigned a special purpose and
   meaning.  When such an address appears in the packet's address field,
   a router can know from the prefix that particular routing/forwarding
   actions are required.  An example of this approach is seen in
   multicast addressing.



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


4.2.  Prefix-based Contextual Address Usage

   The owner of a prefix to use the low-order bits of an address for
   their own purposes.

   The semantics of such an approach might be coordinated between prefix
   owners, or could be indicated through information that is part of the
   encoding, and is standardised.

4.3.  Semantic Addressing

   Semantic addressing is a term applied to any approach that adds
   semantics to IP addresses.  This includes the mechanisms described in
   Section 4.1 and Section 4.2.  Other semantic addressing proposals
   suggest variable address lengths, hierarchical addresses, or a
   structure to addresses so that they can carry additional information
   in a common way.

   In any case, semantic addressing intends to facilitate routing
   decisions based solely on the address and without the need to find
   and process information carried in other fields within the packets.

4.4.  Flow Marking

   Flow marking is a way of indicating, in a simple field in the packet
   header, the treatment that the packet should receive in the network.
   In IPv4 the six-bit DSCP field is commonly used for this purpose.  In
   IPv6, while the Traffic Class field could be used, it is generally
   recommended that the Flow Label field should serve this and a more
   general purpose.

4.5.  Deep Packet Inspection

   The term "deep packet inspection" (DPI) is used here to mean that the
   router examines various packet fields, including those beyond the IP
   packet header.  For example, many router processes may look at the
   "five-tuple" consisting of:

   o  source address

   o  destination address

   o  next protocol

   o  transport protocol source port

   o  transport protocol destination port




Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


4.6.  Semantic Field Overloading

   "Overloading" is a term applied to placing additional semantics on
   the contents of a field beyond how it is specified.  This is
   relatively hard to do in an IPv6 header because the number of fields
   is small, and all fields have specific meanings that are needed in
   all cases.  In IPv4 there may be more opportunity to use some fields
   in very controlled situations to carry additional semantics that can
   be used for semantic routing.

4.7.  IPv6 Extension Headers

   IPv6 defines extension headers explicitly for carrying information
   that may be used by routers along the path.  This information can be
   used to instruct all routers, only the router indicated by the
   destination address, or by the ultimate destination of the packet.

   Extension headers may carry any information to enable semantic
   routing.

4.8.  New Extensions

   Another approach is to define a new protocol extension to carry
   information on which semantic routing can be performed.  Such an
   extension could be in the form of a new extension header (see
   Section 4.7) or as a new shim encapsulation immediately after the IP
   header.

5.  Architectural Considerations

   Some semantic routing proposals are intended to be deployed in
   limited domains [RFC8799] (networks) that are IP-based, while other
   proposals are intended for use across the Internet.  The impact the
   proposals have on routing systems may require clean-slate solutions,
   hybrid solutions, extensions to existing routing protocols, or
   potentially no changes at all.

   Semantic data may be applied in a number of ways to integrate with
   existing routing architectures.  The most obvious is to build an
   overlay such that IP is used only to route packets between network
   nodes that utilize the semantics at a higher layer.  An overlay may
   be achieved in a higher protocol layer, or may be performed using
   tunneling techniques (such as IP-in-IP) to traverse the areas of the
   IP network that cannot parse additional semantics thereby joining
   together those nodes that use the semantic data.

   The application of semantics may also be constrained to within a
   limited domain.  In some cases, such a domain will use IP, but be



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   disconnected from Internet (see Section 5.1).  In other cases,
   traffic from within the domain is exchanged with other domains that
   are connected together across an IP-based network using tunnels or
   via application gateways (see Section 5.2).  And in still another
   case traffic from the domain is routed across the Internet to other
   nodes and this requires backward-compatible routing approaches (see
   Section 5.3).

5.1.  Isolated Domains

   Some IP network domains are entirely isolated from the Internet and
   other IP-based networks.  In these cases, there is no risk to
   external networks from any semantic routing schemes carried out
   within the domain.

   Many approaches in isolated domains will utilize environment-specific
   routing protocols.  For example, those suited to constrained
   environments (for IoT) or mobile environments (for smart vehicles).
   Such routing protocols can be optimized for the exchange of
   information specific to semantic routing.

5.2.  Bridged Domains

   In some deployments, it will be desirable to connect together a
   number of isolated domains to build a larger network.  These domains
   may be connected (or bridged) over an IP network or even over the
   Internet.

   Ideally, the function of the bridged domains should not be impeded by
   how they are connected, and the operation of the IP network providing
   the connectivity should not be compromised by the act of carrying
   traffic between the domains.  This can generally be achieved by
   tunneling the packets between domains using any tunneling technique,
   and this will not require the IP network to know about the semantic
   routing used by the domains.

   An alternative to tunneling is achieved using gateway functionality
   where packets from a domain are mapped at the domain boundary to
   produce regular IP packets that are sent across the IP network to the
   boundary of the destination domain where they are mapped back into
   packets for use within that domain.

5.3.  Semantic Prefix Domains

   A semantic prefix domain [I-D.jiang-semantic-prefix] is a portion of
   the Internet over which a consistent set of semantic-based policies
   are administered in a coordinated fashion.  This is achieved by
   assigning a routable address prefix (or a set of prefixes) for use



Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   with semantic addressing and routing so that packets may be routed
   through the regular IP network (or the Internet) using the prefix and
   without encountering or having to use any semantic addressing.  Once
   delivered to the semantic prefix domain, a packet can be subjected to
   whatever semantic routing is enabled in the domain.

6.  Security Considerations

   Semantic routing must give full consideration to the security and
   privacy issues that are introduced by these mechanisms.  Placing
   additional information into packet header fields might reveal details
   of what the packet is for, what function the user is performing, who
   the user is, etc.  Furthermore, in-flight modification of the
   additional information might not directly change the destination of
   the packet, but might change how the packet is handled within the
   network and at the destination.

   It should also be considered how packet encryption techniques that
   are increasingly popular for end-to-end or edge-to-edge security may
   obscure the semantic information carried in some fields of the packet
   header or found deeper in the packet.  This may render some semantic
   routing techniques impractical and may dictate other methods of
   carrying the necessary information to enable semantic routing.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests for IANA action.

8.  Acknowledgements

   TBD

9.  Contributors


               TBD


10.  Informative References

   [BLIND-FORWARDINGref]
              Simsek, I., "On-Demand Blind Packet Forwarding",
              Paper 30th International Telecommunication Networks and
              Applications Conference (ITNAC), 2020, 2020,
              <https://www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/
              itnac/2020/09315187/1qmfFPPggrC>.





Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   [CONTENT-RTG-MOBILEref]
              Liu, H. and W. He, "Rich Semantic Content-oriented Routing
              for mobile Ad Hoc Networks", Paper The International
              Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN2014), 2014,
              2014, <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6799682>.

   [EIBPref]  Shenoy, N., "Can We Improve Internet Performance? An
              Expedited Internet Bypass Protocol", Presentation 28th
              IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols, 2020,
              <https://icnp20.cs.ucr.edu/Slides/NIPAA/D-3_invited.pptx>.

   [GEO-IPref]
              Dasu, T., Kanza, Y., and D. Srivastava, "Geotagging IP
              Packets for Location-Aware Software-Defined Networking in
              the Presence of Virtual Network Functions", Paper 25th ACM
              SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in
              Geographic Information Systems (ACM SIGSPATIAL 2017),
              2017, <https://about.att.com/ecms/dam/sites/labs_research/
              content/publications/
              AI_Geotagging_IP_Packets_for_Location.pdf>.

   [I-D.jiang-semantic-prefix]
              Jiang, S., Sun, Q., Farrer, I., Bo, Y., and T. Yang,
              "Analysis of Semantic Embedded IPv6 Address Schemas",
              draft-jiang-semantic-prefix-06 (work in progress), July
              2013.

   [I-D.king-irtf-challenges-in-routing]
              King, D. and A. Farrel, "Challenges for the Internet
              Routing Infrastructure Introduced by Changes in Address
              Semantics", draft-king-irtf-challenges-in-routing-03 (work
              in progress), June 2021.

   [I-D.king-irtf-semantic-routing-survey]
              King, D. and A. Farrel, "A Survey of Semantic Internet
              Routing Techniques", draft-king-irtf-semantic-routing-
              survey-02 (work in progress), June 2021.

   [MULTICAST-SRref]
              Jia, W. and W. He, "A Scalable Multicast Source Routing
              Architecture for Data Center Networks", Paper  IEEE
              Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no.
              1, pp. 116-123, January 2014, 2014,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6799682>.







Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   [OPENSRNref]
              Ren, P., Wang, X., Zhao, B., Wu, C., and H. Sun, "OpenSRN:
              A Software-defined Semantic Routing Network Architecture",
              Paper IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
              (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Hong Kong, 2015, 2015,
              <https://www.researchgate.net/
              publication/308827498_OpenSRN_A_software-
              defined_semantic_routing_network_architecture>.

   [RFC6282]  Hui, J., Ed. and P. Thubert, "Compression Format for IPv6
              Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based Networks", RFC 6282,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6282, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6282>.

   [RFC8799]  Carpenter, B. and B. Liu, "Limited Domains and Internet
              Protocols", RFC 8799, DOI 10.17487/RFC8799, July 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8799>.

   [SEMANTICRTG]
              Strassner, J., Sung-Su, K., and J. Won-Ki, "Semantic
              Routing for Improved Network Management in the Future
              Internet", Book Chapter Springer, Recent Trends in
              Wireless and Mobile Networks, 2010, 2010,
              <https://link.springer.com/
              chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-14171-3_14>.

   [TERASTREAMref]
              Zaluski, B., Rajtar, B., Habjani, H., Baranek, M., Slibar,
              N., Petracic, R., and T. Sukser, "Terastream
              implementation of all IP new architecture", Paper 36th
              International Convention on Information and Communication
              Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO),
              2013, 2013,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6596297>.

Authors' Addresses

   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting
   UK

   Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk









Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              November 2021


   Daniel King
   Lancaster University
   UK

   Email: d.king@lancaster.ac.uk














































Farrel & King             Expires May 12, 2022                 [Page 14]

