Dublin Core Workshop Series                                     S. Weibel
Internet-Draft                                                   J. Kunze
draft-kunze-dc-01.txt                                           C. Lagoze
27 August 1997
Expires in six months


          Dublin Core Metadata for Simple Resource Discovery


1. Status of this Document

This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and
its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Distribution of this document is unlimited.  Please send comments
to weibel@oclc.org, or to the discussion list meta2@mrrl.lut.ac.uk.


2. Introduction

Finding relevant information on the World Wide Web has become
increasingly problematic in proportion to the explosive growth of
networked resources.  Current Web indexing evolved rapidly to fill the
demand for resource discovery tools, but that indexing, while useful,
is a poor substitute for richer varieties of resource description.

An invitational workshop held in March of 1995 brought together
librarians, digital library researchers, and text-markup specialists
to address the problem of resource discovery for networked resources.
This activity evolved into a series of related workshops and ancillary
activities that have become known collectively as the Dublin Core Metadata
Workshop Series.  

The goals that motivate the Dublin Core effort are:

    - Simplicity of creation and maintenance
    - Commonly understood semantics
    - International scope and applicability
    - Extensibility
    - Interoperability among collections and indexing systems

These requirements work at cross purposes to some degree, but all are
desirable goals.  Much of the effort of the Workshop Series has been
directed at minimizing the tensions among these goals.

One of the primary deliverables of this effort is a set of elements
that are judged by the collective participants of these workshops
to be the core elements for cross-disciplinary resource discovery.
The term ``Dublin Core'' applies to this core of descriptive elements.

Early experience with Dublin Core deployment has made clear the need
to support additional qualification of elements for some applications.
Thus, Dublin Core elements may be expressed in simple unqualified ways
that minimal discovery and retrieval tools can use, or they may be
expressed with additional structure to support semantics-sharpening
qualifiers that minimal tools can safely ignore but that more complex
tools can employ to increase discovery precision.

The broad agreements about syntax and semantics that have emerged from
the workshop series will be expressed in a series of five Informational
RFCs, of which this document is the first.  These RFCs (currently they
are Internet-Drafts) will comprise the following documents.

2.1. Dublin Core Metadata for Simple Resource Discovery

An introduction to the Dublin Core and a description of the intended
semantics of the 15-element Dublin Core element set without qualifiers.
This is the present document.

2.2. Encoding Dublin Core Metadata in HTML  

A formal description of the convention for embedding unqualified Dublin
Core metadata in HTML.

2.3. Qualified Dublin Core Metadata for Simple Resource Discovery

The principles of element qualification and the semantics of Dublin Core
metadata when expressed with a recommended qualifier set known as the
Canberra Qualifiers.

2.4. Encoding Qualified Dublin Core Metadata in HTML 

A formal description of the convention for embedding qualified Dublin
Core metadata in HTML.

2.5. Dublin Core on the Web:  RDF Compliance and DC Extensions

A formal description for encoding Dublin Core metadata with qualifiers
in HTML compliant metadata, and how to extend the core element set.


3. Description of Dublin Core Elements  

The following is the reference definition of the Dublin Core Metadata
Element Set.  It is expected that practice will evolve to include
qualifiers for certain of the elements.  The reference description of
the elements resides at [1]:

	http://purl.org/metadata/dublin_core_elements

Note that elements have a descriptive name intended to convey a common
semantic understanding of the element.  To promote global interoperability,
a number of the element descriptions suggest a controlled vocabulary for
the respective element values.  It is assumed that other controlled
vocabularies will be developed for interoperability within certain local
domains.

In the element descriptions below, a formal single-word label is
specified to make the syntactic specification of elements simpler
for encoding schemes.  Each element is optional and repeatable.

3.1. Title				Label: TITLE

     The name given to the resource by the CREATOR or PUBLISHER.

3.2. Author or Creator			Label: CREATOR

     The person or organization primarily responsible for creating
     the intellectual content of the resource.  For example, authors
     in the case of written documents, artists, photographers,
     or illustrators in the case of visual resources.

3.3. Subject and Keywords		Label: SUBJECT

     The topic of the resource.  Typically, subject will be expressed
     as keywords or phrases that describe the subject or content of the
     resource.  The use of controlled vocabularies and formal
     classification schemas is encouraged.
   
3.4. Description			Label: DESCRIPTION

     A textual description of the content of the resource, including
     abstracts in the case of document-like objects or content
     descriptions in the case of visual resources. 
     
3.5. Publisher				Label: PUBLISHER

     The entity responsible for making the resource available in its
     present form, such as a publishing house, a university department,
     or a corporate entity.   
     
3.6. Other Contributor 			Label: CONTRIBUTOR

     A person or organization not specified in a CREATOR element who
     has made significant intellectual contributions to the resource
     but whose contribution is secondary to any person or organization
     specified in a CREATOR element (for example, editor, transcriber,
     and illustrator).
     
3.7. Date				Label: DATE

     The date the resource was made available in its present form.  
     Recommended best practice is an 8 digit number in the form
     YYYY-MM-DD as defined in [2], a profile of ISO 8601.  In this
     scheme, the date  element 1994-11-05 corresponds to November 5,
     1994.  Many other schema are possible, but if used, they should
     be identified in an unambiguous manner.

3.8. Resource Type 			Label: TYPE

     The category of the resource, such as home page, novel, poem,
     working paper, technical report, essay, dictionary.  For the sake
     of interoperability, TYPE should be selected from an enumerated
     list that is under development in the workshop series at the time
     of publication of this draft.
 
3.9. Format  				Label: FORMAT

     The data format of the resource, used to identify the software
     and possibly hardware that might be needed to display or operate
     the resource.  For the sake of interoperability, FORMAT should
     be selected from an enumerated list that is under development
     in the workshop series at the time of publication of this draft.

3.10. Resource Identifier 		Label: IDENTIFIER

     String or number used to uniquely identify the resource.  Examples
     for networked resources include URLs and URNs (when implemented).
     Other globally-unique identifiers, such as International Standard
     Book Numbers (ISBN) or other formal names are also candidates
     for this element.

3.11. Source				Label: SOURCE

     A string or number used to uniquely identify the work from which
     this resource was derived, if applicable.  For example, a PDF
     version of the novel ``Gone with the Wind'' might have a SOURCE
     element containing an ISBN number for the physical book from which
     the PDF version was derived.

3.12. Language 				Label: LANGUAGE

     Language(s) of the intellectual content of the resource.  Where
     practical, the content of this field should coincide with the
     NISO Z39.53 three character codes for written languages. 

3.13. Relation (experimental)		Label: RELATION 

     The relationship of this resource to other resources.  The intent of
     this element is to provide a means to express relationships among
     resources that have formal relationships to others, but exist as
     discrete resources themselves.  For example, images in a document,
     chapters in a book, or items in a collection.  Formal specification
     of RELATION is currently under development.  Users and developers
     should understand that use of this element is currently considered
     to be experimental.

3.14. Coverage (experimental)		Label: COVERAGE

     The spatial and/or temporal characteristics of the resource.
     Formal specification of COVERAGE is currently under development.
     Users and developers should understand that use of this element
     is currently considered to be experimental.

3.15. Rights Management (experimental)	Label: RIGHTS

     A link to a copyright notice, to a rights-management statement, or
     to a service that would provide information about terms of access
     to the resource.  Formal specification of RIGHTS is currently under
     development.  Users and developers should understand that use of
     this element is currently considered to be experimental.


4. Security Considerations

The Dublin Core element set poses no risk to computers and networks.
It poses minimal risk to searchers who obtain incorrect or private
information due to careless mapping from rich data descriptions to
simple Dublin Core scheme.  No other security concerns are likely
to be raised by the element description consensus documented here.


5. References

   [1] Dublin Core Metadata Element Set: Reference Description,
       http://purl.org/metadata/dublin_core_elements
       
   [2] ISO 8601 Profile for the Dublin Core,
       http://purl.org/metadata/dublin_core_date_formats


7. Authors' Addresses

Stuart L. Weibel
OCLC Online Computer Library Center, Inc.
Office of Research
6565 Frantz Rd.
Dublin, Ohio, 43017, USA
Email: weibel@oclc.org
Voice: +1 614-764-6081
Fax:   +1 614-764-2344

John A. Kunze
Center for Knowledge Management
University of California, San Francisco
530 Parnassus Ave, Box 0840
San Francisco, CA  94143-0840, USA
Email: jak@ckm.ucsf.edu
Voice: +1 415-502-6660
Fax:   +1 415-476-4653

Carl Lagoze
Digital Library Research Group
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY  14853, USA
Email: lagoze@cs.cornell.edu
Voice: +1-607-255-6046
Fax:   +1-607-255-4428

