Internet Engineering Task Force             William Dutcher
Internet-Draft                              VeriSign, Inc.
February 15, 2002                           Kevin McCandless
                                            Illuminet, Inc.
Expires:   August 15, 2002  
Category:  Informational


                     ENUM Root Domain
              <draft-dutcher-enum-root-domain-00.txt>

1. Status of this Memo

This  document  is  an Internet-Draft and is in full confor-
mance with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet  Engi-
neering  Task  Force  (IETF),  its  areas,  and  its working
groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute  working
documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts  are  draft documents valid for a maximum of
six months and may be updated,  replaced,  or  obsoleted  by
other  documents  at  any  time.  It is inappropriate to use
Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them  other
than as "work in progress".

The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/lid-abstracts.html.

The  list  of  Internet-Draft  Shadow  Directories  can   be
accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


2. Abstract

RFC  2916  specifies  that  the domain e164.arpa is the root
domain for the DNS storage  for  NAPTR  records  for  ENUMs.
This  document  proposes  that the root domain referenced in
RFC 2916 be changed from e164.arpa to a generic domain, such
as  e164.foo.   This  would give developers of ENUM applica-
tions a greater degree of  flexibility  in  configuring  DNS
structures for ENUM.


3. Discussion

RFC  2916 specifies that the domain e164.arpa be used as the
root domain for the DNS storage hierarchy for NAPTR  records
for ENUMs.  However, several contributions have been made to
the ITU-T Study Group 2 proposing alternative roots, as well









                             -2-


as alternative DNS hierarchies.

This  document  proposes  that the root domain referenced in
RFC 2916 be changed from  e164.arpa  to  a  generic  domain.
This  would  allow  the  developers of ENUM applications, as
well as the providers of DNS  infrastructures  that  support
ENUM,  a  greater  degree  of flexibility in configuring DNS
structures that will be used by ENUM.  This change will also
allow the RFC to guide the technical specifications of ENUM,
rather than describe policy.

According to RFC 2916, the only DNS  domain  in  which  ENUM
NAPTR records should be stored is the e164.arpa domain.  The
RFC is specific in this regard, as indicated in the  Section
2 of the RFC:

"2. E.164 Numbers and DNS

The  domain  "e164.arpa" is being populated in order to pro-
vide the infrastructure in DNS for storage of E.164 numbers.
In  order  to facilitate distributed operations, this domain
is divided into subdomains.  Holders of E.164 numbers, which
want  to  be  listed  in DNS, should contact the appropriate
zone administrator in order to be listed, by  examining  the
SOA  resource record associated with zone, just like in nor-
mal DNS operations."

In specifying the use of the e164.arpa domain for  ENUM  DNS
records,  the  RFC  may force designers of ENUM applications
and systems into using a DNS root domain that does not  meet
the  operational  requirements  of an ENUM application.  For
example, it may be more practical for an ENUM application to
be  in a different root-level domain.  Several contributions
to the ENUM Forum and to ITU-T Study Group 2 have  suggested
various  tiered  architectures,  each  of  which may be more
efficient and more practical if they are not tied by the RFC
to the e164.arpa domain.

Since  RFC 2916 specifies .arpa as the TLD, it has created a
policy decision rather than  a  technical  decision.   As  a
result, policy agencies are struggling with the .arpra issue
instead of deciding whether or not global ENUM is an  appro-
priate  approach.   If this policy recommendation is removed
from RFC 2916, these agencies will be able  to  address  the
TLD  for  ENUM without the burden of the TLD decision having
been presupposed.

Furthermore, the U.S. government supports  a  domain-neutral
approach  to  ENUM implementation. Removing the reference to
the e164.arpa domain for ENUM  DNS  systems  will  create  a
domain-neutral  position  in  the  RFC, and remove a mandate
that may inhibit the flexibility of the design and  develop-
ment of ENUM systems.










                             -3-


4. Recommendation

The  recommendation  is that the references to the e164.arpa
domain in RFC 2916 be changed to refer to a generic  domain,
such as "e164.foo".


5. IANA Considerations

There are no IANA issues to consider in this draft.  This is
an informational draft.


6.  Security Considerations

There are no security considerations in this draft.  This is
an informational draft.


7. References

RFC  2915 - M. Mealling and R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority
Pointer (NAPTR) DNS Resource Record", September 2000.

RFC 2916 - P.Faltstrom, "E.164 number  and  DNS",  September
2000.


8. Authors' Addresses

William Dutcher 
VeriSign, Inc.  
21355 Ridgetop Circle 
Sterling, VA 20166 
United States

Phone:   +1-703-948-4457   
Fax:   +1-703-450-7978    
Email:   bdutcher@verisign.com

Kevin McCandless  
Illuminet, Inc.   
7400 West 129th Street
Overland Park, KS 66213 
United States

Phone:   +1-913-814-6397  
Fax:   +1-913-814-6505  
Email:   kmccandless@illuminet.com



A.  Full Copyright Statement

Copyright   (C)  The  Internet  Society  2002.   All  Rights
Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and  fur-
nished  to  others,  and derivative works that comment on or
otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may  be
prepared,  copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
part, without restriction of any  kind,  provided  that  the









                             -4-


above  copyright  notice  and this paragraph are included on
all such copies and derivative works.  However,  this  docu-
ment  itself  may  not  be  modified  in any way, such as by
removing the copyright notice or references to the  Internet
Society  or  other  Internet organizations, except as needed
for the purpose of developing Internet  standards  in  which
case  the  procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
Standards process must be followed, or as required to trans-
late it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors  or
assigns.

This  document  and the information contained herein is pro-
vided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY  AND  THE
INTERNET  ENGINEERING  TASK  FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED  TO  ANY  WAR-
RANTY  THAT  THE  USE  OF  THE  INFORMATION  HEREIN WILL NOT
INFRINGE ANY  RIGHTS  OR  ANY  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES  OF  MER-
CHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by
the Internet Society.
