



INTERNET-DRAFT                                  S. Santesson (Microsoft)
Updates: 3280
Intended Category: Standards track
Expires April 2007                                          October 2006


        Validation Certificates in Certificate Revocation Lists
                  <draft-santesson-pkix-vccrl-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than a "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract

   This specification specifies a Certificate Revocation List (CRL)
   Extension for storage of X.509 certificates defined in RFC 3280.
   Certificates stored in this extension may be used to construct a
   valid certificate path from a CRL to an appropriate trust anchor.











Santesson                                                       [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT       Validation Certificates in CRLs        October 2006


1.  Introduction

   This specification addresses the issue of how to access certificates
   necessary to construct a valid certificate path from a CRL to an
   appropriate trust anchor in cases where the certificate being checked
   for revocation and the associated CRL being used is signed by
   different keys.

   This situation may occur when indirect CRLs, as specified in RFC 3280
   [N2], are used or when a CA due to key-change provides revocation
   services by issuing CRLs signed with a new key that covers revocation
   of certificates signed with an older CA key.

   In these cases the certificate path for the certificate being checked
   for revocation does not provide all certificates needed to validate
   the signature of the CRL.

   One solution to this problem is provided in RFC 4325 which specifies
   use of the Authority Information Access extension in CRLs. RFC 4325
   enables a CRL checking application to use the access method (id-ad-
   caIssuers) to locate certificates that may be useful in the
   construction of a valid CRL issuer certification path to an
   appropriate trust anchor.

   The solution specified in RFC 4325 optimizes the problem with respect
   to CRL size, as the certificates are referenced by an access location
   pointer rather than stored in the CRL.

   This specification optimizes the problem with respect to the number
   of network access cycles needed to obtain necessary certificates by
   specifying a way to include complete validation certificates in the
   CRL.

   Which solution that is optimal depends on many properties such as CRL
   size, revocation checking frequency, caching, network speed, network
   latency and network load.

   Storing validation certificates in the CRL will in some situations
   provide important advantages such as:

      1. Eliminate the second wire retrieval to obtain missing
      validation certificates for a CRL. This reduces the client time
      for doing the first revocation verification as network retrievals
      often dominate this time. In high latency networks the number of
      retrievals adds substantially more time to the verification
      process than expanding the size of the CRL with a few
      certificates.




Santesson                                                       [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT       Validation Certificates in CRLs        October 2006


      2. CRL packaging for offline and historical revocation checking
      scenarios. CRLs can be pre-fetched (previously pulled/pushed to
      client machines prior to validation) to reduce validation time and
      to support offline revocation checking. Including the certificates
      in the CRL makes it easier to manage this scenario. Otherwise, it
      requires another layer to package the CRL plus certificates within
      the local environment.

   These benefits can in some cases be substantial as the added
   verification time due to extra network retrieval can cause timeouts
   in network protocols and since introduction of new packaging of CRLs
   for internal processing makes it harder to adapt some more advance
   CRL checking scenarios in existing application infrastructures.


1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [N1].































Santesson                                                       [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT       Validation Certificates in CRLs        October 2006


2  Validation Certificates CRL extension

   This section defines the Validation Certificates CRL extension. This
   extension MAY be included in Certificate Revocation Lists defined in
   RFC 3280 [N2].

   The Validation Certificates CRL extension has the following syntax:

      id-pe-validationCerts OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pe nn }

      ValidationCertificates  ::= SEQUENCE of Certificate


   This extension MUST NOT be marked critical.

   The CRL issuer MAY include certificates in this extension that can be
   useful to construct a valid certificate path from the CRL to a
   trusted root.


3  Security Considerations

   Any use of certificates provided in the Validation Certificates CRL
   extension, to validate signatures on a CRL, MUST be done according
   rules and conventions defined in RFC 3280. As such, relevant security
   considerations of RFC 3280 apply.


4  Normative References

   [N1]      S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [N2]      Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet
             X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
             Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
             April 2002.



7 IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any actions by IANA.

Author's Address

   Stefan Santesson
   Microsoft



Santesson                                                       [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT       Validation Certificates in CRLs        October 2006


   Finlandsgatan 30
   164 93 KISTA
   Sweden

   EMail: stefans(at)microsoft.com














































Santesson                                                       [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT       Validation Certificates in CRLs        October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.


Expires April 2007








Santesson                                                       [Page 6]
