

   IPR WG                                                               
   Internet Draft                                       V. See (editor) 
   Document: draft-ietf-ipr-template-00.txt                   Microsoft 
   Expires: November 1, 2003                                May 1, 2003 
    
    
     A Template for IETF Patent Disclosures and Licensing Declarations 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i]. <Editorial comment - 
   insert updated boilerplate in conformance with Bradner submission-
   rights document.> 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a template for IETF patent disclosures and 
   licensing declarations. Such a template may be used to inform the 
   IETF of patent information for all IETF documents, and licensing 
   information regarding IETF standards-track documents. The optional 
   use of this template is meant to simplify the process of such 
   disclosures and to assist disclosers in providing the necessary 
   information to meet the obligations documented in <insert pointer to 
   Bradner technology-rights RFC here>.  
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ii]. 
    
 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 1] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template.......2 
   3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template.......................5 
   Security Considerations...........................................5 
   References........................................................6 
   Acknowledgments...................................................6 
   Authors' Addresses................................................6 
   Full Copyright statement..........................................7 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   RFC XXXX [iii] <RFC Editor - please substitute Bradner technology-
   rights RFC number here> documents the current IETF policies and 
   obligations with respect to disclosure of patents and patent 
   applications containing patent claims that a patent holder believes 
   would be necessary to implement the technology required in an 
   Internet-Draft or RFC. It also documents the information requested in 
   licensing declarations for IETF Standards, Proposed Standards, and 
   Draft Standards. In the interest of making these disclosure processes 
   simpler for patent holders, this document proposes a patent 
   disclosure and licensing declaration template that may be optionally 
   used as one method for patent holders to fulfill their obligations 
   under RFC XXXX. For the latest information on how to submit a patent 
   disclosure or licensing declaration, please see <insert URL for 
   submission information here - same as in technology-rights (RFC 
   XXXX)>. 
    
    
2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template 
    
   <START OF TEMPLATE> 
    
   This document is an IETF Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration 
   Template and is submitted to inform the IETF of patent information 
   for all IETF documents, and licensing information regarding IETF 
   Standards Track documents. No actual license is implied by submission 
   of this document. Please complete and submit a separate template for 
   each IETF document. 
    
   I. Patent Holder/Organization ("Patent Holder") 
    
   Legal Name:  
    
   II. Patent Holder∆s Contact for License Application 
    
   Name:  
 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 2] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
    
   Department:  
    
   Address:  
    
    
   Telephone:  
    
    
   Fax:  
    
    
   Email:  
    
   III. IETF Document 
    
    
   Title:  
    
    
   RFC Number or I-D Tag:  
    
    
   Other Designations:  
    
    
   IV. Disclosure of Patent Information (i.e., patents or patent 
   applications required to be disclosed by Section 6 of RFC XXXX 
   [insert reference to Bradner's technology-rights document.] 
    
   A. For granted patents or published pending patent applications, 
   please provide the following information: 
    
   Patent, Serial, Publication, Registration, or Application/File 
   numbers: 
    
    
   Date(s) granted or applied for:  
    
    
   B. Does your disclosure relate to an unpublished pending patent 
   application? 
    
   Select one:  Yes  ______  No ______ 
    
   C. Please check here to acknowledge that, if requested by an IETF 
   working group or the IESG, the Patent Holder will file a new copy of 
   this template to provide an update (if any) in the status of the 
   disclosed patent application or patent, such as whether the patent 
 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 3] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
   application or patent has been published, granted, abandoned, or is 
   no longer applicable to the IETF Document.     ______ 
    
   D. If an Internet-Draft or RFC includes multiple parts and it is not 
   reasonably apparent which part of such Internet-Draft or RFC is 
   alleged to be covered by the information disclosed in IV(A) or IV(B), 
   the discloser should identify here the sections of the Internet-Draft 
   or RFC that are alleged to be so covered.  
    
    
    
   V. Licensing Declaration for IETF Standards, Proposed Standards, or 
   Draft Standards: 
    
   If the IETF Document referenced in III above is or becomes an IETF 
   Standards Track document, the Patent Holder states that its position 
   with respect to licensing any patent claims contained in the 
   patent(s) or patent application(s) disclosed above that the Patent 
   Holder believes would be necessary to implement the technology 
   required by the IETF Standard, Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard 
   ("Patent Claims") is as follows (select one option only): 
    
   ___   No License Required for Implementers 
    
   ___   Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All  
         Implementers  
    
   ___   Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All Implementers  
         with Possible Royalty/Fee 
    
   ___   Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later (implies a  
         willingness to license in some form to all implementers;  
         otherwise, "Unwilling to License to All Implementers" must be  
         selected) 
    
   ___   Unwilling to License to All Implementers 
    
    
   VI. Other Notes: 
    
    
    
    
    
    
   <END OF TEMPLATE> 
    
    

 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 4] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template 
    
   Section VI in the template, "Other Notes," may be used for any 
   additional information a discloser wishes to provide. 
    
   Here is an explanation of the licensing declaration options in 
   Section V of the template: 
    
   a) No License Required for Implementers: The Patent Holder does not 
   require parties to acquire any license to its Patent Claims in order 
   to implement the IETF Standard, Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard.  
     
   b) Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All 
   Implementers: The Patent Holder will, upon request, grant a license 
   to its Patent Claims to all implementers of the IETF Standard, 
   Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard on a royalty-free basis (i.e., 
   no royalty or other fee) and under reasonable and non-discriminatory 
   terms.  
     
   c) Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All Implementers with 
   Possible Royalty/Fee: The Patent Holder will, upon request, grant a 
   license to its Patent Claims to all implementers of the IETF 
   Standard, Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard under reasonable and 
   non-discriminatory terms (which may include a royalty/fee). 
    
   d) Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later (implies a willingness 
   to license in some form to all implementers): The Patent Holder is 
   willing to license its Patent Claims in some form to all implementers 
   of the IETF Standard, Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard, but wants 
   to defer the declaration of its licensing type until a later point in 
   time (or when asked for this information by the IESG). This option 
   may not be selected if the Patent Holder is unwilling to license its 
   Patent Claims. 
    
   e) Unwilling to License to All Implementers: The Patent Holder 
   refuses to license its Patent Claims to all implementers of the IETF 
   Standard, Proposed Standard, or Draft Standard, except on an 
   implementer-by-implementer basis, in its sole discretion. 
    
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document relates to IETF process, not any particular technology. 
   There are security considerations when adopting any particular 
   technology, regardless of whether patents and patent applications or 
   licensing disclosures are implicated by such technology. A working 
   group should take those security considerations into account as one 

 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 5] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
   part of evaluating the technology, but there are no security 
   considerations per se with these IETF processes. 
    
    
References 
    
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   ii  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   iii  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", 
      RFC XXXX, <month> 2003. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors acknowledge the thoughtful contributions of Harald 
   Alvestrand and Scott Bradner to this document. 
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Valerie See 
   Microsoft Corporation 
   One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
   Email: vsee@microsoft.com 
    
   Robert Barr 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: rbarr@cisco.com 
    
   Scott Brim 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   146 Honess Lane, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA 
   Email: sbrim@cisco.com 
    
   Paul Gleichauf 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: phg@cisco.com 
    
   Allen Lo 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 North Mathilda Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA 
   Email: alo@juniper.net 
    

 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 6] 
         Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template May 1 2003 
 
 
Full Copyright statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  Except as set forth 
   below, authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for rights 
   in submissions defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    



















 
 
See                   Expires - November 1, 2003              [Page 7] 

