
 Internet Engineering Task Force                          Olivier Duroyon
                                                             Rudy Hoebeke
                                                             Hans De Neve
 Internet Draft                                                   Alcatel
 Document: draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt                   July 2000



   Triggering and advertising lightpaths in an IP over optical network
                    <draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt>


 Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
    progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

 1. Abstract

    The objective of this draft is to propose an IP service model where
    lightpaths are dynamically triggered by the IP layer and
    subsequently advertised for IP routing. The network model assumes
    that several IP service domains, some of which represent different
    administrative entities, share the same optical backbone and
    focuses therefore primarily on an overlay model. Therefore, this
    draft intends to complement the IP over optical framework with
    respect to the overlay model.

 2. Conventions used in this document

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
    this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119.

 3. Introduction



 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 1



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    This draft introduces an end-to-end IP service model enabling the
    dynamic management of optical lightpaths by means of MPLS
    signaling.

    For reasons of definiteness, the optical devices are always
    referred to as optical cross-connects (OXCs) and the IP devices as
    routers. The terminology used in the draft attempts to be in line
    with the definitions found in [ip-optical].

    Service model issues raised in this draft apply mainly to an
    overlay/peer model although some of them equally pertain to an
    integrated model.

    An overlay model is appropriate for an untrusted environment where
    several IP service domains, representing different administrative
    entities, share the same optical backbone. Moreover it seems well
    suited for a network architecture including non-IP devices, e.g.,
    legacy TDM or ATM equipment, that interface with the same optical
    backbone. This is however beyond the scope of this draft.

    The concept of an overlay/peer model has been introduced in [ip-
    optical] but allows for several diverse interpretations. Our
    understanding of the overlay model is based on the following
    characteristics, which are largely defined in other contributions
    (ODSI, OIF and IETF drafts):

    - Typical for an overlay model is that any addressing scheme may be
    used within the optical domain, even non-IP based. However, in this
    draft, public IP addressing is assumed for any addressable entity
    (OXC, control channels and lightpaths or bundle of lightpaths when
    lit up).

    - One (or more) IP interface(s) used as control channel(s), called
    Optical-User Network Interface(s) (O-UNIs), are defined for each
    router interfacing with an OXC. These devices are hereafter
    respectively referred to as boundary router and boundary OXC.

    - These control channels can be associated with one (or more) of
    the boundary router's physical ports, interconnecting with the
    boundary OXC (when sub-rate bandwidth connections are supported on
    a physical interface, this association could be at the level of
    sub-rate channels, e.g., SONET containers). These ports (or sub-
    rate channels) are hereafter generically referred to as IP-capable
    end-points. A lightpath is defined as the entity formed by two IP-
    capable end-points and their interconnecting path across the
    optical domain.

    - In the optical domain, the control channels are terminated on an
    OXC-Controller (OXC-C). An OXC-C is a device processing any kind of
    control channel messages and controls the lightpath setup in an

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 2



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    OXC. An OXC-C can be integrated in a single OXC or remotely control
    one or more OXCs.

    - Routing protocol messages (such as IGP or EGP) are not exchanged
    across the O-UNI.

    - Boundary router reachability across the optical domain is
    achieved via a service discovery mechanism across the O-UNI in
    conjunction with either a directory service or an IGP across the
    optical domain, denoted as optical IGP (O-IGP).

    - A boundary router (or some other device connected to the boundary
    OXC) can issue a lightpath request through extended RSVP or CR-LDP
    across the O-UNI. Fundamental lightpath requests are the
    establishment of a new lightpath or the tear down of an existing
    lightpath, although other requests can be envisioned (e.g.,
    requests to change some attribute of a lightpath). We refer to all
    these as lightpath requests.

    - In case of an untrusted O-UNI, any lightpath request coming from
    the boundary router has to be authenticated and validated by the
    optical domain.

    - A lit-up lightpath is advertised as an IP link in the IP service
    domains or is added to an existing IP link (forming a bundle).

    - IP destination reachability is subsequently achieved by
    exchanging IP routing messages across lightpaths.

    - Traffic Engineering-Label Switched Paths (TE-LSPs) for the
    purpose of IP traffic engineering may be created on top of
    lightpaths.

    Our service model further assumes that a decision point in the IP
    service domain, e.g., a Traffic Engineering (TE) tool, will trigger
    a boundary router to issue a lightpath request towards the optical
    domain. The decision point determines the need for a lightpath on
    the basis of IP Service Level Agreements (IP-SLAs) and related
    information, such as for instance load measurements in the IP
    service domain.

    In the remainder of the document, the terms TE tool or decision
    point are used interchangeably and refer to the IP service domain
    device, capable of triggering lightpath requests.

 4. IP service model description

    This section outlines the sequence of events that characterize our
    proposed IP service model.


 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 3



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    (1) Provisioning

    Provisioning consists of installing and configuring interfaces
    between boundary OXC and boundary routers. At this stage, an
    association is configured between the control channels and one (or
    more) of the boundary router's IP-capable end-points.

    In case of our overlay model, the control channel is identified by
    a numbered IP address and forms an IP link with an OXC-C. This IP
    link is not announced into the IGP routing realm of the IP service
    domain but is only advertised into the optical domain.

    (2) Optical Service Level Agreements

    Next, the service model consists of negotiating Optical SLAs (O-
    SLA) at optical domain-IP service domain boundaries. In case of an
    untrusted peering relationship, each lightpath request is
    authenticated and validated against the O-SLA.

    (3) Service Discovery

    A service discovery mechanism across the O-UNI, as defined for
    example in ODSI, provides the necessary reachability information to
    the IP service domain for the authorized Closed User Groups (CUGs).
    In addition, specific optical characteristics of the IP-capable
    end-point are learned, such as, e.g., sub-channel size or O-UNI
    restoration capabilities.

    (4) Lightpath request

    The decision point of the IP service domain determines the required
    connectivity through the optical domain based on service
    requirements as per the IP SLAs. It then triggers the boundary
    routers to launch a lightpath request towards the associated
    boundary OXCs, using MPLS-based signaling. This process is dynamic
    and may involve, amongst others, the set-up of additional
    lightpaths, release of existing lightpaths or redirection of
    existing lightpaths.

    (5) Optical path selection

    In case an O-IGP is used inside the optical transport network, each
    boundary OXC learns the complete topology of the optical domain. A
    Constraint-based Shortest Path First (CSPF) algorithm can then be
    implemented in the boundary OXCs to calculate a route for the
    lightpath in line with the constraints specified in the request. As
    an example, the route of a lightpath may depend on the
    protection/restoration requirements or routing constraints
    specified in the lightpath request. The latter may indicate that
    the requested lightpath should be routed diversely from other

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 4



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    lightpaths. This CSPF algorithm is expected to be quite different
    from an IP CSPF algorithm because of optical considerations.

    (6) Lightpath advertisement to the IP layer

    As soon as the lightpaths are lit up, they are advertised to the IP
    layer. The involved boundary routers will either create a new IP
    link and start to exchange routing information (using IGP or eBGP)
    or modify the characteristics of the existing IP link.

    (7) Traffic engineering for optimization of the optical domain

    Optionally, the optical domain may have its own off-line Optical
    Traffic Engineering (O-TE) tool. This tool may be used for
    optimization of resource utilization in the optical domain by
    rearranging some lightpaths.

 5. Optical Service Level Agreements

    As mentioned before, lightpath requests issued by a boundary router
    are only accepted within the constraints of an O-SLA. An optical
    domain-IP service domain boundary coincides with an O-UNI with its
    associated O-SLA. Similarly, if there are multiple optical
    subnetworks in the optical domain, there will be O-SLAs negotiated
    at each optical subnetwork boundary. An optical subnetwork boundary
    then corresponds to an Optical Network to Network Interface (O-
    NNI). In this draft, we limit the discussion to O-SLAs at the level
    of O-UNIs.

    Additionally, we only discuss the technical aspects of an O-SLA.
    Borrowing from the terminology introduced in [diffserv-framework],
    we refer to the technical part of an O-SLA as an Optical Service
    Level Specification (O-SLS). An O-SLS is considered to be
    unidirectional and to specify performance expectations (i.e., the
    service level) for the IP service domain as well as imposed
    reachability constraints, e.g., CUG.

    O-SLS parameters could for example include:

    1. Capacity constraints

    An ingress O-SLS may contain limits on the maximum number of
    lightpaths that can be established from a specific ingress point,
    possibly as a function of time of day, as well as bandwidth
    constraints (OC-48, OC-192, etc.).
    An egress O-SLS may put capacity constraints on the lightpaths that
    the receiving IP service domain is willing to terminate.

    2. Service performance parameters


 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 5



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    Examples are lightpath latency, supported protection/restoration
    options, reliability, availability, supported routing constraints,
    accessibility (i.e., lightpath request blocking probability),
    responsiveness (specifying upper limits on the processing time of
    lightpath requests), etc.

    3. Constraints on the 'scope' of lightpath request

    This may be viewed as an extension to the concept of CUGs, which by
    nature already exhibit reachability limitations. Scope constraints
    are intended to additionally restrict the topological extent of
    lightpaths. In its simplest form, the O-SLS offers to accept any
    lightpath request issued by the IP service domain over a specific
    O-UNI up to a maximum capacity without any scope constraint within
    the CUG (so-called hose O-SLS). Conversely, the agreement may be
    constrained by the egress point of a lightpath. For example, the
    optical domain service provider might agree to the setup of
    lightpaths, up to a certain maximum capacity, but only if these
    lightpaths are destined to a specific set of egress points within
    the CUG.

    Part of the purpose of O-SLSs is to protect resources in the
    optical domain by validation of submitted lightpath requests. If
    the optical domain and the IP service domain are under control of
    the same administrative authority, then there is likely to be a
    trusted peering relationship between both domains. Conversely, in
    case of an untrusted peering relationship, the optical domain
    service provider validates incoming lightpath requests as per the
    O-SLS. This validation process can be implemented in the OXC-C. In
    this case, there exist several mechanisms to install an O-SLS in an
    OXC-C, e.g., CLI, SNMP, LDAP or COPS. Alternatively, the O-SLS
    enforcement may be outsourced to another policy entity.

    An O-SLS offers to accept lightpath requests at the service level
    agreed with the IP service domain. The optical domain service
    provider will provision the optical domain accordingly. A broad
    range of optical services could be envisioned. As an example,
    services could be defined with different levels of accessibility,
    depending on the probability that a lightpath establishment request
    is blocked. Moreover, services could also be categorized as
    protected or non-protected, depending on the offered protection
    level. All of these service level characteristics influence the
    resource provisioning process in the optical backbone.

    For each lightpath request, the optical domain service provider may
    also need to identify the O-SLS for which the request is submitted.
    Some authentication may be included in the request in order to
    verify that the rightful IP service provider issued the request. In
    some cases, this customer might be implicitly derived from the


 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 6



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    control channel on which the lightpath request was received. The
    authentication mechanism must be specified in the O-SLS.

    Although it can be assumed that O-SLSs will be static for the
    foreseeable future, this draft does not preclude dynamic O-SLSs.
    These would necessitate some automated form of interaction between
    the IP service domain and the optical domain. In case of an O-SLS
    at the O-UNI, this may for instance require the interaction between
    a Bandwidth Broker (BB) in the IP service domain and a Lambda
    Broker (LB) in the optical domain. At the level of an O-NNI, this
    would be between different LBs, acting on behalf of the different
    optical subnetworks. This automated (re-)negotiation of O-SLSs
    would in turn call for an automated O-SLS admission control
    function. Note that this admission control function is different
    from the validation of lightpath requests as per the negotiated O-
    SLS, referred to as O-SLS enforcement.

 6. Lightpath triggers

    As stated in [ip-optical], the lightpath request triggering process
    should be part of a stable traffic engineering tool in the IP
    service domain as opposed to a data-driven shortcut approach,
    similar to the schemes proposed for IP over ATM networks.
    Henceforth, an integrated TE-LSP and lightpath triggering process
    is proposed at the end of this section to alleviate the
    shortcomings of the former method and is elaborated below.

 6.1 Data-driven shortcut approach for lightpaths

    The data-driven shortcut model would imply that the boundary
    routers use traffic measurements to autonomously control the number
    of lightpaths that connect them with a set of remote boundary
    routers across the optical domain. For example, boundary router A
    could detect that some of its traffic is reaching boundary router B
    in a multi-hop way. If this traffic trunk is large enough, boundary
    router A might decide to set-up a lightpath to boundary router B,
    relieving the IP forwarding at all intermediate routers on the
    multi-hop path. In an overlay model, once a lightpath has been
    established to a new destination, it should be announced as a (new)
    IP link in the IP service domain routing database. As such, it can
    be used by any TE entity in the IP service domain and this IP link
    may carry several TE-LSPs. This means that the TE entity in the IP
    service domain would then be constantly reacting to decisions of
    the boundary routers that are continuously changing the IP
    topology.

    Such a layered scheme of lightpath requests and TE-LSP requests is
    inefficient and could also break the TE service model, when the
    only available lightpath between two boundary routers would be torn
    down. Such a decision might be based on the valid observation that

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 7



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    the traffic pattern has changed such that the existing lightpath is
    under-utilized and may be re-directed towards another boundary
    router. However, the lightpath might still carry TE-LSPs. Turning
    off the lightpath has the effect of a link failure and will hence
    trigger the TE entity in the IP service domain to recover from this
    failure. Depending on whether the TE-LSP was protected or not, one
    of the following scenarios will take place.

 6.1.1 Protected TE-LSPs

    TE-LSPs can be used to carry mission critical traffic requiring a
    fast recovery scheme in case of link failures. Upon such an event,
    the traffic of the working TE-LSP can be switched to a protect TE-
    LSP that has been pre-configured along a node- and link-disjoint
    path.

    - Protected lightpath: if the turned-off lightpath was protected
    within the optical domain, the TE-LSP path calculation might have
    selected this IP link for both the working and the protect path of
    the TE-LSP. In that case, the TE-LSP protect path will not be
    available and connectivity will be lost.

    - Unprotected lightpath: in this case the problem would not arise
    since the route diversity TE-LSP protect scheme would have selected
    another IP link for the protect path.

 6.1.2 Unprotected TE-LSPs

    If the TE-LSP was not protected, the source nodes of the TE-LSPs
    running over the turned-off lightpath will start a CSPF calculation
    to find an alternative path. As all source nodes will be competing
    for the same resources, some LSP requests will be blocked and it
    might take a while before all LSPs have been restored.

    The above scenario equally pertains to the case of any link failure
    in an IP service domain. However, link failures in an IP service
    domain may be considered as rare events. This is however not the
    case when this link failure behavior is the result of a data-driven
    shortcut approach across an optical backbone.

 6.2 Integrated TE-LSP and lightpath triggering process

    Given the above shortcoming, boundary routers should not
    autonomously decide to tear down a lightpath. Yet, it may not
    always be appropriate to maintain an under-utilized lightpath.
    However, a lightpath should not be turned off until the TE-LSPs it
    carries have been re-routed along an alternative path. This might
    even require that a new lightpath is set up between two other
    boundary routers. All of this calls for a co-ordinated TE-LSP and
    lightpath triggering process, integrated in the same decision

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 8



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    point. This is possible since both responsibilities reside within
    the IP service domain.

    The ability to dynamically establish lightpaths adds an extra
    dimension to the TE capabilities of an IP service domain. In
    addition to forwarding packets along non-shortest paths, it is now
    also possible to (re-)configure the topology of the IP service
    domain by means of adding, deleting or changing lightpaths across
    the optical backbone.

    This integrated decision point will use the set of IP SLAs and the
    derived traffic trunk requirements across the IP service domain
    (possibly complemented with traffic measurements) to determine the
    optimal set of lightpaths and TE-LSPs. Optionally, the explicit
    path calculation for the TE-LSPs could still be left to the routers
    running a CSPF algorithm within the topology, as determined by the
    decision point.

 7. Lightpath advertisement to the IP layer

    The decision point may thus trigger the set-up of an additional
    lightpath to an already connected boundary router. Alternatively,
    it may trigger a rearrangement of existing lightpaths, or the
    establishment of a lightpath to a boundary router that could
    previously not be reached through the optical domain. It might very
    well be that the decision point triggers a boundary router to drop
    a lightpath if its capacity is no longer needed to meet the
    requirements of the IP SLAs.

    In order to make efficient use of the dynamicity of lightpath
    requests, the routing protocol parameters should be dynamically
    configurable as well. This section outlines a proposal to achieve a
    seamless integration of a new lightpath within the IP service
    domain for the overlay model by means of automatic configuration.

    As soon as a lightpath to a particular boundary router has been lit
    up, it is assumed that it is promoted to an operational IP link. In
    case of, e.g., regular SONET framing, this is achieved by running
    PPP on the newly established lightpath.

 7.1. Lightpath set-up to a previously unreachable boundary router

    The draft [kompella] defines the different facets of the creation
    of an IP link in case of an integrated model and proposes to use
    the newly established IP link as a forwarding adjacency in the IP
    service domain.

    The overlay model imposes different requirements on the IP layer of
    the boundary routers. Indeed, once the first lightpath is
    established between two boundary routers and promoted as IP link,

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001              Page 9



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    it is to be advertised as a point-to-point link for IP routing in
    order to initiate the IP connectivity between the two boundary
    routers. And subsequently it will allow IP reachability between the
    associated IP service domains.

    Two cases must be considered. The lightpath is promoted to an IP
    link connecting:

    - two boundary routers of the same Autonomous System (IGP peering),
    or,

    - two boundary routers of different Autonomous Systems (eBGP
    peering).

    The IGP and BGP peering cases do not require the same kind of
    configuration and are described separately.

    Note that in case of an IGP peer, it is necessary that the
    lightpath be bi-directional, because IGP protocols require a bi-
    directional transport layer. However, this is for further study
    [saha-rsvp].

    From an addressing point of view, the IP-capable end-points can be
    unnumbered (and, e.g., identified by the Router Id of the boundary
    router), or numbered through provisioning, but different from the
    control channel IP address.

    It has to be noticed again that the control channel identification
    is neither known nor advertised throughout the IP service domain.

 7.1.1. IGP support

    Once the first IP link is established between two boundary routers
    and configured to support an IGP peer, the boundary routers need to
    get the proper information:

    - The first requirement is to select IS-IS or OSPF for the newly
    formed IP link.

    - In addition, link routing parameters such as timers and area
    numbers might have to be specified. For instance, timers in OSPF
    should be consistent at both ends of the IP link.

    - Also, link metrics (e.g., resource classes, etc.) need to be
    inherited or configured for use by IP routing.

    - Finally, the IGP protocol is enabled and the IP link is
    advertised.



 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001             Page 10



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    These parameters have to be accessible and are automatically
    configured (prior to or at the time of lightpath establishment) by
    the decision point of the IP service domain to efficiently deploy
    the IP service on top of the lightpath.

    However, some of the routing parameters (e.g., OSPF timers) may be
    defaulted to pre-determined values. Those values must be defined
    network-wide and be consistent between all possible boundary router
    pairs. The decision point should be allowed to overwrite those
    parameters at the setup time of the lightpath.

 7.1.2. eBGP peering

    In the case of an inter-AS lightpath, static route configuration
    specifying the BGP peer (most probably a virtual interface of the
    remote boundary router) should be configured in the local boundary
    router in order to set up the TCP session used in BGP.

    In addition, an IP SLA is going to be negotiated between the
    autonomous systems and routing policies are going to be configured
    on both ends of the lightpaths.

    As opposed to the IGP peering case, triggering of inter-AS
    lightpaths will very likely not arise from an automated process
    because of the BGP peering negotiation procedure.

 7.2. Set-up of an additional lightpath

    In addition to the option described in 7.1 (creation of a new
    stand-alone IP link with the new lightpath and advertisement to the
    routing protocol), a second option is now possible, which is to add
    a supplementary lightpath to an existing IP link that forms a
    bundled link [kompella-bundle]. In this case there is no new
    configuration necessary for the IGP or BGP routing layer but only
    interactions internal to the boundary routers.

    This bundle is advertised as a single IP link. The lightpath in
    itself may be unidirectional, and hence the bundle could have an
    asymmetric bandwidth.

    - The boundary router upgrades the bandwidth of the bundle link
    based on the characteristics of this new lightpath.

    - The new lightpath is included in the load balancing mechanism
    that distributes the traffic amongst the component lightpaths of
    the bundled link, e.g., proportional to their bandwidth.

    - The addition of a new lightpath to a bundle does not impact the
    routing topology. Only the new bandwidth of the IP link is


 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001             Page 11



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    advertised within the IP service domain. The other characteristics
    of the IP link, e.g., the resource classes, remain unchanged.

    In the case described in this section, the only mandatory
    information to be automatically configured by the decision point is
    the bundle identifier to which the lightpath is to be added.

 7.3. Rearrangement of an existing lightpath

    This case is the straightforward combination of lightpath tear-down
    followed by a new lightpath set-up.

 8. References

    [diffserv-framework] Y.Bernet et al, "A Framework for
    Differentiated Services", draft-ietf-diffserv-framework-03.txt,
    Internet Draft, Work in Progress, February 1999.

    [ip-optical] James Luciani et al., " IP over Optical Networks _ A
    Framework", draft-ip-optical-framework-00.txt, Internet draft, Work
    in Progress, February 2000.

    [kompella] K. Kompella et al., "Extensions to IS-IS/OSPF and RSVP
    in support of MPL(ambda)S", draft-kompella-mpls-optical-
    00.txt,Internet Draft, Work in Progress, February 2000.

    [kompella-bundle] K. Kompella et al., "Link bundling in MPLS
    traffic engineering", draft-kompella-mpls-bundle-01.txt, Internet
    Draft, Work in Progress, June 2000.

    [saha-rsvp] D. Saha et al., "RSVP extensions for Signaling Optical
    Paths", draft-saha-rsvp-optical-signaling-00.txt, Internet Draft,
    Work in Progress, March 2000.

 9. Acknowledgments

    The authors would like to thank Emmanuel Desmet, Sitaram
    Kalipatnapu and Gert Grammel for their constructive comments.

 10. Author's Addresses

    Olivier Duroyon
    Alcatel USA
    45195 Business Court
    Dulles
    Phone: (703) 654 8605
    Email: olivier.d.duroyon@usa.alcatel.com

    Rudy Hoebeke
    Alcatel Bell

 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001             Page 12



 Internet Draft    draft-duroyon-te-ip-optical-00.txt         July 2000


    Francis Wellesplein 1
    2018 Antwerp, Belgium
    Phone: (32) 3/240.84.39
    Email: rudy.hoebeke@alcatel.be

    Hans De Neve
    Alcatel Bell
    Francis Wellesplein 1
    2018 Antwerp, Belgium
    Phone: (32) 3/240.76.94
    Email: hans.de_neve@alcatel.be








































 Duroyon, Hoebeke, De Neve    Expires: January 2001             Page 13


