Extended Incident Handling Working Group            Kathleen M. Moriarty
draft-ietf-inch-rid-04.txt                        MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Expires: March 19, 2006                               September 19, 2005


                   Incident Handling:
              Real-time Inter-network Defense

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   Months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract
    Network security incidents, such as system compromises, worms,
    viruses, phishing incidents, and denial of service (DoS), typically
    result in the loss of service, data, and resources both human and
    system.  Network Providers (NPs) need to be equipped and ready to
    assist in communicating and tracing security incidents with tools
    and procedures in place before the occurrence of an attack.  This
    paper outlines a proactive inter-network communication method to
    facilitate sharing incident handling data and integrate existing
    tracing mechanisms across NP boundaries to identify the source(s)
    of an attack. The various methods implemented to detect and trace
    attacks must be coordinated on the NPs' network as well as provide
    a communication mechanism across network borders.  It is imperative
    that NPs have quick communication methods defined to enable
    neighboring NPs to assist in reporting or tracking a security
    incident across networks.  A complete solution integrating incident
    detection, source identification, reporting and communication
    capabilities, and methods to stop attack traffic is necessary to 
    attain higher security levels on networks.  Policy guidelines for
    handling incidents are recommended and can be agreed upon by a
    consortium using the security recommendations and considerations.

Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005



                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


Status of this Memo ................................................   1

Abstract ...........................................................   1

1. Introduction ....................................................   4
    1.1 Overview of Attack Types ...................................   5

2. Recommended Network Provider (NP) Technologies ..................   7

3. Characteristics of Attacks ......................................   8
    3.1 Tracing a Distributed Attack ...............................  10
        3.1.1 Tracing Security Incidents ...........................  10
    3.2 Trace Approaches ...........................................  11
        3.2.1 Trace Approach via Traffic Flow Analysis .............  11
        3.2.2 Trace Approach via Hash-Based IP Traceback ...........  12
        3.2.3 IP Marking ...........................................  13
        3.2.4 Superset of Packet Information for Traces ............  14

4. Communication Between Network Providers .........................  15
    4.1 Inter-Network Provider RID Messaging .......................  16
    4.2 RID Network Topology .......................................  18
    4.3 Message Formats ............................................  19
        4.3.1 RID Messages and Transport ...........................  19
        4.3.2 RID Data Types .......................................  20
        4.3.3 IODEF-Document  ......................................  20
        4.3.4 IODEF-RID Schema .....................................  20
            4.3.4.1 NPPath Class ...................................  23
            4.3.4.2 TraceStatus Class ..............................  24
            4.3.4.3 IncidentSource Class ...........................  25
            4.3.4.4 RIDPolicy  .....................................  26
    4.4 RID Documents Defined by Message Type Derived from IODEF ...  29
        4.4.1 TraceRequest .........................................  31
        4.4.2 TraceAuthorization Message ...........................  32
        4.4.3 Result Message .......................................  33
        4.4.4 Investigation Message Request ........................  35
        4.4.5 Report Message .......................................  36
        4.4.6 IncidentQuery ........................................  37
    4.5 RID Communication Exchanges ................................  38
        4.5.1 Upstream Trace Communication Flow ....................  38
            4.5.1.1 RID TraceRequest Example .......................  39
        4.5.2 Investigation Request Communication Flow .............  43
            4.5.2.1 Example Investigation Request ..................  44
        4.5.3 Report Communication .................................  45
            4.5.3.1 Report Example .................................  45
        4.5.4 IncidentQuery Communication Flow .....................  46
            4.5.4.1 IncidentQuery Example ..........................  46

5. RID Schema Definition ...........................................  48


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005



6. Message Transport ...............................................  52
    6.1 Message Delivery Protocol - Integrity and Authentication ...  52
    6.2 Transport Communication ....................................  53
    6.3 Authentication of RID Protocol .............................  53
    6.4 Authentication Considerations for a Multi-hop TraceRequest .  54
        6.4.1 Public Key Infrastructures and Consortiums ...........  55
    6.5 Privacy Concerns and System Use Guidelines .................  56

7. Security Considerations .........................................  60

8. Summary .........................................................  62

9. References ......................................................  63
    9.1 Acknowledgements ...........................................  66
    9.2 Author Information .........................................  66

Intellectual Property Statement ....................................  66

Disclaimer of Validity .............................................  67

Copyright Statement ................................................  67

Sponsor Information ................................................  67






























Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


1. Introduction

    Incident handling involves the detection and identification of the
    source of an attack, whether it be a system compromise, socially
    engineered phishing attack, or a denial of service attack.  In
    order to identify the source of an attack, there must be a way to
    trace the attack traffic iteratively upstream through the network
    to the source.  In cases in which accurate records of an active
    session between the victim system and the attacker or source
    system are available, the source is easy to identify.  The problem
    of tracing incidents becomes more difficult when the source is
    obscured or spoofed, logs are deleted, and the number of sources
    is overwhelming.


    Current approaches to mitigating the effects of security incidents
    are aimed at identifying and filtering or rate-limiting packets
    from attackers who seek to hide the origin of their attack by
    source address spoofing from multiple locations.  Measures can be
    taken at network provider (NP) edge routers providing ingress,
    egress, and broadcast filtering as a recommended best practice in
    RFC2827.

    Network providers have devised solutions, in-house or commercial,
    to trace attacks across their backbone infrastructure to either
    identify the source on their network or on the next upstream
    network in the path to the source.  Techniques, such as collecting
    packets as traffic traverses the network, have been implemented to
    provide the capability to trace attack traffic after an incident
    has occurred.  Other methods use packet-marking techniques or flow-
    based traffic analysis to trace traffic across the network in real
    time.  The single-network trace mechanisms use similar information
    across the individual networks to trace traffic.  Problems may
    arise when an attempt is made to have a trace continued through the
    next upstream network since the trace mechanism and management may
    vary.

    In the case in which the traffic traverses multiple networks, there
    is currently no established communication mechanism for continuing
    the trace.  If the next upstream network has been identified, a
    phone call might be placed to contact the network administrators in
    an attempt to have them continue the trace.  A communication
    mechanism is needed to facilitate the transfer of information to
    continue traces accurately and efficiently to upstream networks.
    The communication mechanism described in this paper, Real-time
    Inter-network Defense (RID), takes into consideration the
    information needed by various single network trace implementations
    and the requirement for network providers to decide if a trace
    request should be permitted to continue.  The data in RID messages
    will be represented in an Extensible Markup Language (XML) document
    and is an extension of the Incident Data Exchange Format (IODEF)
    model.  By following this model, integration with other aspects of


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    the network for incident handling is simplified.  Finally, methods
    are incorporated into the communication system to indicate what
    actions need to be taken closest to the source in order to halt or
    mitigate the effects of the attack at hand.  RID is intended to
    provide a method to communicate the relevant information between
    NPs while being compatible with a variety of existing and possible
    future detection tracing and response approaches.

    Security and privacy considerations are of high concern since
    potentially sensitive information may be passed through RID
    messages.  RID messaging will take advantage of XML security,
    security, and privacy policy information set in the RID schema.  The
    RID schema acts as an XML envelope to support the communication of
    IODEF documents for exchanging or tracing information security
    incidents.  RID messages will be encapsulated in a SOAP wrapper.
    The authentication, integrity, and authorization features each
    layer has to offer will be used to achieve the level of security
    that is necessary.  SOAP is used as a message wrapper to direct
    messages appropriately, and the SOAP binding will be used with a
    specific transport protocol with HTTPS set as the mandatory to
    implement protocol and others are optional such as BEEP, S/MIME,
    XML SNMP, and others.

1.1 Overview of Attack Types

    RID messaging is intended for use in coordinating incident handling
    to locate the source of an attack and stop or mitigate the effects
    of the attack.  The attack types include system or network
    compromises, denial of service attacks, or other malicious network
    traffic.  RID is essentially a messaging system coordinating attack
    detection, tracing mechanisms, and the incident handling responses
    to locate the source of traffic.  If a source address is spoofed, a
    more detailed trace of a packet (RID TraceRequest) would be

    required to locate the true source.  If the source address is
    valid, the incident handling may only involve the use of routing
    information to determine what network provider is closest to the
    source (RID Investigation request) and can assist with the
    remediation.  The type of RID message used to locate a source is
    determined by the validity of the source address.  RID message
    types are discussed in section 4.3.

    The CERT Coordination Center published a paper in October 2001
    entitled, "Trends in Denial of Service Attack Technology"[19].  The
    paper outlined the behavior of denial-of-service attacks of both
    single-source and multiple-source origins.  Denial-of-service (DoS)
    attacks attempt to consume bandwidth, processing power, or system
    resources for the purposes of denying use by normal users.
    Bandwidth or processing power-based attacks may use variations on
    these packets, such as altering the source address, port numbers,
    or TCP options.



Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    DoS attacks are characterized by large amounts of traffic destined
    for particular Internet locations and can originate from a single
    or multiple sources.  An attack from multiple sources is known as a
    distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS).  Because DDoS attacks
    can originate from multiple sources, tracing such an attack can be
    extremely difficult or nearly impossible.  Many TraceRequests may
    be required to accomplish the task and may require the use of
    dedicated network resources to communicate incident handling
    information to prevent a DoS against the RID system and network
    used for tracing and remediation.  Provisions are suggested to
    reduce the load and prevent the same trace from occurring twice on
    a single-network backbone discussed in section 4 on communication
    between NPs.  The attacks can be launched from systems across the
    Internet unified in their efforts or by compromised systems
    enlisted as "zombies" that are controlled by servers, thereby
    providing anonymity to the controlling server of the attack.  This
    scenario may require multiple RID traces, one to locate the zombies
    and an additional one to locate the controlling server.  DDoS
    attacks do not necessarily spoof the source of an attack since
    there are a large number of source addresses, which make it
    difficult to trace anyway.  DDoS attacks can also originate from a
    single system or a subset of systems that spoof the source address
    in packet headers in order to mask the identity of the attack
    source.  In this case, an iterative trace through the upstream
    networks in the path of the attack traffic may be required.

    RID traces may also be used to locate a system used in an attack
    to compromise another system.  Compromising a system can be
    accomplished through one of many attack vectors, using various
    techniques from a remote host or through local privilege
    escalation attempts.  The attack may exploit a system or
    application level vulnerability that may be the result of a design
    flaw or a configuration issue.  A compromised system, as described
    above, can be used to later attack other systems.  A single RID
    Investigation Request may be used in this case since it is probable
    that the source address is valid.  Identifying the sources of
    system compromises may be difficult since an attacker may access
    the compromised system from various sources.  The attacker may also
    take measures to hide their tracks by deleting log files or by
    accessing the system through a series of compromised hosts.
    Iterative RID traces may be required for each of the compromised
    systems used to obscure the source of the attack.  If the source
    address is valid, an Investigation request may be used in lieu of a
    full RID TraceRequest.

    System compromises may result from other security incident types
    such as worms, Trojans, or viruses.  It is often the case that an
    incident goes unreported even if valid source address information
    is available because it is difficult to take any action to mitigate
    or stop the attack.  Incident handling is a difficult task for an
    NP and even at some client locations due to network size and
    resource limitations.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


2. Recommended Network Provider (NP) Technologies

    For the purpose of this document, a network provider (NP) shall be
    defined as a backbone infrastructure manager of a network.  The
    network provider's Computer Security Incident Response Team shall
    be referred to as the CSIRT.  The backbone may be that of an
    organization providing network (Internet or private) access to
    commercial, personal, government, or educational institutions, or
    the backbone provider of the connected network.  The connected
    network provider is an extension meant to include Intranet and
    Extranet providers as well as instances such as a business or
    educational institute's private network.

    NPs typically manage and monitor their networks through a
    centralized network management system (NMS).  The acronym NMS will
    be used to generically represent management servers on a network
    used for the management of network resources and the integration of
    RID messaging with other components of the network.  This system
    may provide functions such as trend analysis for bandwidth
    utilization, report communication problems, and trigger a RID trace
    across the network or communicate with a RID system that can
    initiate a trace.  The RID messaging system may be the same or a
    system separate from the NMS that communicates with various aspects
    of the network to coordinate incident response.  The components of
    the network that may be integrated through the RID messaging system
    include attack or event detection, network tracing, and network
    devices to stop the effects of an attack.

    The detection of security incidents may rely on manual reporting,
    automated intrusion detection tools, and variations in traffic
    types or levels on a network.  Intrusion detection systems (IDS)
    may be integrated into the incident-handling systems to create
    IODEF documents or RID messages to facilitate security incident
    handling.  IDSs monitor network traffic, analyzing packets to
    determine if the traffic might be classified as malicious.  If an
    IDS detects malicious traffic, an analyst would determine the
    validity and severity of the attack traffic and if a trace is
    necessary.  If the analyst determines a trace should be initiated,
    an IODEF document with RID extensions could be created or the
    necessary information sent to the RID messaging system in order to
    create and track the attack traffic.  Detection of a security
    incident is outside the scope of this paper; however, it should be
    possible to integrate detection methods with RID messaging.

    Once a security incident has been identified, the information is
    put into a RID message to integrate with the NP's single network
    trace mechanism.  RID messaging is intended to be flexible in order
    to accommodate various trace systems currently in use as well as
    those that may evolve with technology.  RID is intended to
    communicate the necessary information needed by a trace mechanism
    to the next upstream NP in the path of a trace.  Therefore, a RID
    message must carry the superset of data required for all tracing


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    systems.  If possible, the trace may need to inspect packets to
    determine a pattern, which could assist reverse path
    identification.  This may be accomplished by inspecting packet
    header information such as the source and destination IP addresses,
    ports, and protocol flags to determine if there is a way to
    distinguish the packets being traced from other packets.  A
    description of the incident along with any available automated
    trace data should trigger an alert to the NP's security team for
    further investigation.  The various technologies used to trace
    traffic across a network are described in section 3.2.

    Another area of integration is the ability to mitigate or stop
    attack traffic once a source has been located.  Any automated
    solution should consider the possible side effects to the network.
    A change control process or a central point for configuration
    management might be used to ensure that the security of the network
    and necessary functionality are maintained and that equipment
    configuration changes are documented.  Automated solutions may
    depend upon the capabilities and current configuration management
    solutions on a particular network.  The solutions may be based on
    authenticated and encrypted Simple Network Management Protocol
    (SNMP) or Network Configuration Protocol (NETConf) access to
    devices over an out-of-band connection or other similar
    technologies.

3. Characteristics of Attacks

    The goal of tracing a security incident may be to identify the
    source or to find a point on the network as close to the origin of
    the incident as possible.  A security incident may be defined as a
    system compromise, a worm or Trojan infection, or a single- or
    multiple-source denial-of-service attack.  Incident tracing can be
    used to identify the source(s) of an attack in order to halt or
    mitigate the undesired behavior.  The communication system,
    RID, described in this paper can be used to trace any type of
    security incident and allows for actions to be taken when the
    source of the attack or a point closer to the source has been
    identified.  The purpose of tracing an attack would be to halt or
    mitigate the affects of the attack through methods such as
    filtering or rate-limiting the traffic close to the source or
    by using methods such as taking the host or network offline.
    Care must also be taken to ensure the system is not abused and to
    use proper analysis in determining if attack traffic is, in fact,
    attack traffic at each NP along the path of a trace. 

    Tracing security incidents can be a difficult task since attackers
    go to great lengths to obscure their identity.  In the case of a
    security incident, the true source might be identified through an
    existing established connection to the attacker's point of origin.
    However, the attacker may not connect to the compromised system for
    a long period of time after the initial compromise or may access
    the system through a series of compromised hosts spread across the


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    network.  Other methods of obscuring the source may include
    targeting the host with the same attack from multiple sources using
    both valid and spoofed source addresses.  This tactic can be used
    to compromise a machine and leave a difficult task of locating the
    true origin for the administrators.  DDoS attacks are also
    difficult or nearly impossible to trace because of the nature of
    the attack.  Some of the difficulties in tracing these attacks
    include the following:

      O the attack originates from multiple sources;

      O the attack may include various types of traffic meant to
        consume server resources, such as a SYN flood attack without a
        significant increase in bandwidth utilization;

      O the type of traffic could include valid destination services,
        which cannot be blocked since they are essential services to
        business, such as DNS servers at an NP or HTTP requests sent to
        an organization connected to the Internet;

      O the attack may utilize varying types of packets including TCP,
        UDP, ICMP, or other IP protocols;

      O the attack may use a very small number of packets from any
        particular source, thus making a trace after the fact nearly
        impossible.

    If the source(s) of the attack cannot be determined from IP address
    information or tracing the increased bandwidth utilization, it may
    be possible to trace the traffic based on the type of packets seen
    by the client.  In the case of packets with spoofed source
    addresses, it is no longer a trivial task to identify the source of
    an attack.  In the case of an attack using valid source addresses,
    methods such as the traceroute utility can be used to fairly
    accurately identify the path of the traffic between the source and
    destination of an attack.  If the true source has been identified,
    actions should be taken to halt or mitigate the effects of the
    attack by reporting the incident to the NP or the upstream NP
    closest to the source.  In the case of a spoofed source address,
    other methods can be used to trace back to the source of an attack.
    The methods include packet filtering, packet hash comparisons, IP
    marking techniques, ICMP traceback, and packet flow analysis.  As
    in the case of attack detection, tracing traffic across a single
    network is a function that can be used with RID in order to provide
    the networked ability to trace spoofed traffic to the source, while
    RID provides all the necessary information to accommodate the
    approach used on any single network to accomplish this task.  RID
    can also be used to report attack traffic close to the source where
    the IP address used was determined to be valid.





Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


3.1 Tracing a Distributed Attack

    Tracing a DDoS attack is a very difficult problem.  Since DDoS
    attacks may involve multiple sources with spoofed addresses, there
    may only be a small amount of traffic from each of the originating
    hosts.  This makes it difficult to trace back to the sources.  The
    sources may also alternate the type of traffic and the master may
    vary the sources from within the pool of sources launching the
    attack.  Because of the dynamic nature of the DDos attack,
    immediate action would need to be taken to have any hope of
    locating the origin(s) of the attack with a near real-time trace.

    In order to identify a DoS attack or DDoS, a client may notify its
    NP that it is currently under attack.  Automated methods might
    include statistical traffic analysis, which looks for
    unexpected fluctuations in bandwidth or in the size and types of
    packets sent between networks, hosts, or an IDS.  There is
    ongoing research in the area of detecting DoS and DDoS, and any
    effective techniques could be integrated with the tracing
    techniques described in this paper.  Some research approaches
    include methods that detect backscatter traffic [9], using a data
    structure for bandwidth attack detection [10], and monitoring
    congestion through packet retransmission information [11].

    Once an attack is suspected, traces would have to quickly identify
    the various sources of the attack.  A generalized approach should
    be used to trace back connections using packet header information
    such as the destination IP address and any distinguishing header
    values of the traffic seen during the attack.  The information
    collected, along with an example packet, would be used in a RID
    message to communicate incident handling information between NPs.

3.1.1 Tracing Security Incidents

    If a trace can identify the sources of a distributed attack,
    blocking the sources at the NP level close to the attacker could
    be an immediate action to stop the attack.  In the case of a DDoS
    attack, further information may be obtained from the attacking
    computers as to the controller of the attack sending the zombies'
    control information to carry out the attack.  A similar example of
    attack traffic with the possibility of multiple traces required
    would be one in which an attacker compromised a series of systems
    and accomplished hiding their source by logging into a string of
    systems to launch the attack. This additional trace is beyond the
    scope of this paper, but may use additional tracing mechanisms such
    as sniffing the network to locate the controllers of the attack.

    Finding a faster and more efficient way to trace multiple sources
    of an attack is essential to mitigating DDoS attacks.  The ability
    to quickly relay and act upon the trace information gathered is
    imperative to stopping attack traffic.  Tracing multiple attack
    paths can also cause additional stress on the network and does not


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    scale well.

    A CSIRT report might be generated in the form of an IODEF document
    and then fed into a RID message or document to facilitate a trace
    or multiple traces of attack traffic.

3.2 Trace Approaches

    There have been many separate research initiatives to solve the
    problem of tracing upstream packets to detect the true source of
    attack traffic.  Upstream packet tracing is currently confined to
    the borders of a network or an NP's network.  Traces require access
    to network equipment and resources, thus potentially limiting a
    trace to a specific network.  Once a trace reaches the boundaries
    of a network, the network manager or NP adjacent in the upstream
    trace must be contacted in order to continue the trace.  NPs have
    been working on individual solutions to accomplish upstream tracing
    within their own network environments.  The tracing mechanisms
    implemented thus far have included proprietary or custom solutions
    requiring specific information such as IP packet header data, hash
    values of the attack packets, or marked packets.  Hash values are
    used to compare a packet against a database of packets that have
    passed through the network in the case of "Hash Based IP 
    Traceback"[7].  Other research solutions involve marking packets as
    explained in "ICMP Traceback Messages"[8], "Practical Support for
    IP Traceback" [14], and IP Marking [1].  The following sections
    outline some available solutions for implementing traceback within
    the confines of a network managed by a single entity.  The single
    network traceback solutions are discussed to determine the
    information needed to accomplish an inter-network trace where
    different solutions may be in place.

3.2.1 Trace Approach via Traffic Flow Analysis

    Traffic flow analysis is used to monitor individual network traffic
    streams, such as a single TCP session beginning with the SYN packet
    and ending with the final FIN ACK in a session.  There have been a
    few efforts to standardize flow analysis for network management,
    one through the traffic flow management MIB and another through
    the IP Flow Information eXport (IPFIX) protocol.  The "Traffic Flow
    Management" RFC [RFC2720] was designed to provide management
    information such as behavior models, capacity planning, network
    performance, quality of service, and attribution of network usage
    to system administrators.  IPFIX is an IETF standard intended to
    provide a uniform method of extracting flow information from
    network devices.  There are several competing standardized methods
    for flow analysis; however, since they differ from each other, it
    is difficult to generate standardized analysis tools.  NetFlow
    from Cisco [5] provides similar capabilities to the traffic flow
    mib, except that it is specific to IP traffic and has already been
    implemented for traffic management in commercial-off-the-shelf
    equipment.  Although NetFlow was developed by Cisco, it is also an


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    open standard.  The flow analysis in both implementations can
    monitor with a capture filter on source and destination addresses
    the number of packets and the count of bytes in each flow, the
    originating interface of the traffic, and the upstream peer
    information.  The upstream peer information is essential to tracing
    a spoofed packet back to the true origin.
    
    There are several differences in the implementations and the 
    monitor and capture capabilities of the two flow analysis 
    implementations.  NetFlow collects all packets and maintains the
    following information on packet flows for later analysis:

    O  Source and destination IP address
    O  Source and destination TCP/User Datagram Protocol (UDP) ports
    O  Type of service (ToS)
    O  Packet and byte counts
    O  Start and end timestamps
    O  Input and output interface numbers
    O  TCP flags and encapsulated protocol (TCP/UDP)
    O  Routing information (next-hop address, source autonomous system
       (AS) number, destination AS number, source prefix mask,
       destination prefix mask) 

    Based on the information listed above, a spoofed packet can be
    traced upstream through a network to either identify the true
    source or the upstream peer.  Various flow-based solutions have
    been developed and implemented for use on a single backbone based
    on flow analysis, and RID messaging must be able to support
    existing and future solutions to trace attacks across multiple
    networks.  The AS number listed associated with a source IP address
    is only valid if the source IP address is valid.  The AS number in
    this case cannot be trusted until the true source has been
    identified.
 
3.2.2 Trace Approach via Hash-Based IP Traceback

    BBN implemented a traceback solution that collects hashes of IP
    packets across the network.  The Hash-Based IP Traceback was
    designed specifically to trace attack traffic and achieve the
    following objectives:

    O  Trace attacks after specific flows of the attack have completed
    O  Reduce storage requirements needed to save traceable packet data
    O  Provide a secure method to store packet captures on the Internet

    Hash-based IP traceback is another solution to provide the ability
    to trace attack traffic.  By capturing all packets across the
    network and saving hash values for the IP header information that
    does not get altered as it traverses the network, attacks can be
    traced after the fact.  Since hashes of IP header information are
    stored instead of the actual header information, privacy
    concerns are no longer an issue as might be the case with packet


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    captures across the Internet.  If a system used to store the
    packet captures was compromised, the data could not be used to
    identify which entities are "talking" to each other on the 
    Internet.

    BBN also considered how traces could be performed across a single
    network, for example an NP's backbone.  The solution divides the
    network up into regions, each with its own collection station.
    The trace might be initiated at a particular collection station
    where data for a specific router is stored.  When the collection
    station traces through its database for the matches of particular
    hashes of IP packets, it follows the trace through the network
    equipment for its own region.  The collection station then
    determines which bordering region was the next upstream source of
    the attack, and the trace is continued at the next collection
    agent.  The trace continues until the source is identified or a
    neighboring network is identified as the upstream source of the
    attack.  The upstream network must then be notified in some way in
    order to continue the trace.  The upstream network will require the
    IP packet information in order to continue the trace.  The
    upstream provider will want to look at its network and resources
    and decide if it would like to initiate a trace across its
    network.  A limited number of packets can be stored based on
    resources and network traffic loads.  RID is a possible solution
    for communicating the upstream TraceRequest between bordering
    networks.

3.2.3 IP Marking

    The technique of IP Marking can be used more efficiently than 
    iterative trace mechanisms to trace attacks in which the source 
    address has been spoofed.  This technique has been proposed 
    specifically in terms of tracing DoS attacks across a network.  
    All information is correlated at the end node or the target 
    where the packets received would have been marked probabilistically
    along the path of the traffic.  This method requires that routers
    and other infrastructure equipment have the ability to mark packets
    so that the path they took can be derived at the destination
    address for the packets.  Since all packets are not marked,
    depending on the IP Marking scheme used, a number of similar
    packets would have to be sent from a single source in order for it
    to be identified.  IP Marking alone may not be a complete answer
    for tracing traffic, since an attacker could switch methods to send
    very little data from any one host used in a DDoS attack, thus
    making it unlikely that enough packets will be marked to find the
    source of each stream.  Integrating IP Marking with other
    techniques may be the best answer to ensure the efficiency and
    robustness of the system as a whole.  

    There are several ways in which the IP Marking approach may be 
    useful in integrating with RID.  IP Marking may be used to
    gather information about the path of the trace up to and including


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    identifying the actual source.  A peer closer to the source might
    be identified if the IP Marking technique were not able to fully
    reconstruct the path of the trace.  In this instance, the trace
    information could be sent to the closest point identified in the
    path from the IP Marking technique, thus shortening the length of
    time required to trace the traffic through the network.  If a
    source was identified, a RID Investigation Request might be used in
    order to trigger a specific action to take place close to the
    source to mitigate or stop the effects of the attack. 

3.2.4 Superset of Packet Information for Traces

    In order for network traffic to be traced across a network, an
    example packet from the attack must be sent along with the
    TraceRequest or Investigation request.  According to the research
    for Hash-based IP Traceback, all of the non-changing fields of an
    IP header along with 8 bytes of payload are required to provide
    enough information to uniquely trace the path of a packet.  The
    non-changing fields of the packet header and the 8 bytes of payload
    are the superset of data required by most single-network tracing 
    systems used; limiting the shared data to the superset of the
    packet header and 8 bytes of payload prevents the need for sharing
    potentially sensitive information that may be contained in the
    data portion of a packet.  

    The RecordItem class in the IODEF will be used to store a
    hexadecimal formatted packet including all packet header
    information plus 8 bytes of payload or the entire packet contents.
    The above trace systems do not require a full packet, but it may be
    useful in some cases, so the option is given to allow a full packet
    to be included in the data model.  Note: Previously, the packet
    data was contained in a RID class called IPPacket.  The IODEF data
    model was extended in August 2005 to accomodate a packet of type
    hexidecimal.

    If a subset of a packet is used, the following guidelines should be
    used to provide compatibility between RID systems.  The complete
    header MUST be provided so that all systems expect a full packet
    header and can be properly parsed.  The full content may be
    provided, but at least 8 bytes must be included to conduct a
    network trace.  RID requires the first 28 bytes of an IP v4 packet
    in order to perform a trace.  The required number of bytes provides
    the IP header in an IP v4 packet, which is 10 bytes long; the TCP/
    UDP/ICMP header is also 10 bytes long, plus an additional 8 bytes
    of payload to distinguish the packet for tracing purposes.  RID
    requires 48 bytes for an IP v6 packet in order to distinguish the
    packet in a trace.  The input mechanism should be flexible enough
    to allow intrusion detection systems or packet sniffers to provide
    the information.  The system creating the RID message should also
    use the packet information to populate the Incident class
    information in order to avoid human error and also allow a system
    administrator to override the automatically populated information.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 14]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


4. Communication Between Network Providers

    Expediting the communication between NPs is essential when
    responding to a security-related incident, which may cross network
    access points (Internet backbones) between providers.  As a result
    of the urgency involved in this inter-NP security incident
    communication, there must be an effective system in place to
    facilitate the interaction.  This communication policy or system
    should involve multiple means of communication to avoid a single
    point of failure.  Email is one way to transfer information about
    the incident, packet traces, etc.  However, e-mail may not be
    received in a timely fashion or be acted upon with the same urgency
    as a phone call or other communication mechanism.

    Each NP should dedicate a phone number to reach a member of the
    security incident response team. The phone number could be
    dedicated to inter-NP incident communications and must be a
    hotline that provides a 24x7 live response.  The phone line should
    reach someone who would have either the authority and expertise or
    the means to expedite the necessary action to investigate the
    incident.  This may be a difficult policy to establish at smaller
    NPs due to resource limitations, so another solution may be
    necessary.  An outside group may be able to serve this function if
    given the necessary access to the NPs network.  The outside
    resource should be able to mitigate or alleviate the financial 
    limitations and any lack of experienced resource personnel.

    A technical solution to trace traffic across a single NP may
    include homegrown or commercial systems in which RID messaging
    must accommodate the input requirements.  The network management
    systems used on the NP's backbone to coordinate the trace across
    the single network requires a method to accept and process RID
    messages and relay trace requests to the system, as well as to wait
    for responses from the system to continue the RID request process
    as appropriate.  In this scenario, each NP would maintain its own
    RID system and integrate with a management station used for network
    monitoring and analysis. An alternative for NPs lacking sufficient
    resources may be to have a neutral third party with access to the
    NP's network resources who could be used to perform the trace
    functions.  This could be a function of a central organization
    operating as a computer response team for the Internet as a whole
    or within a consortium that may be able to provide centralized
    resources.  Consortiums would consist of a group of NPs that agree
    to participate in the RID communication protocol with an agreed-
    upon policy and communication protocol facilitating the secure
    transport of RID XML documents.  Transport for RID messages will be
    specified in a separate document.

    The first method described prevents the need to permit access to
    other network's equipment through the use of a standard messaging
    mechanism to enable RID or NMSs to communicate trace information
    to other networks in a consortium or in neighboring networks.  The


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 15]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    third party mentioned above may be used in this technical solution
    to assist in facilitating traces through smaller NPs.  The
    messaging mechanism may be a logical or physical out-of-band
    network to ensure the communication is secure and unaffected by the
    state of the network under attack.  The two management methods
    would accommodate the needs of larger NPs to maintain full
    management of their network, and the third party option could be
    available to smaller NPs who lack the necessary human resources to
    perform a trace.  The first method enables the individual NPs to
    involve their network operations staff to authorize the continuance
    of a trace through their network via a notification and alerting
    system.  The out-of-band logical solution for messaging may be
    permanent virtual circuits configured with a small amount of
    bandwidth dedicated to RID communications between NPs.

    The network used for the communication, out-of-band or protected
    channels, would be direct communication links dedicated to the
    transport of RID messages. The communication links would be direct 
    connections between network peers who have agreed upon use and
    abuse policies through the use of a consortium.  Consortiums might
    be linked through policy comparisons and additional agreements to
    form a larger web or iterative network of peers that correlates to
    the traffic paths available over the larger web of networks.  The
    maintenance of the individual links will be the responsibility of
    the two network peers hosting the link.  Contact information, IP
    addresses of RID systems and other information must be coordinated
    between bilateral peers by a consortium and may use existing
    databases, such as the Routing Arbitor. The security,
    configuration, and confidence rating schemes of the RID messaging
    peers must be negotiated by peers and must meet certain overall
    requirements of the fully connected network (Internet, government,
    education, etc.) through the peering and/or a consortium-based
    agreement.

    RID messaging established with clients of an NP may be negotiated
    in a contract as part of a value-added service or through a service
    level agreement.  Further discussion is beyond the scope of this
    document and may be more appropriately handled in network peering
    or service level agreements.

    Procedures for incident handling need to be established and well
    known by anyone that may be involved in incident response.  The
    procedures should also contain contact information for internal
    escalation procedures, as well as for external assistance groups 
    such as a CSIRT, CCCERT, GIAC, and the FBI.

4.1 Inter-Network Provider RID Messaging

    In order to implement a messaging mechanism between RID
    communication or NMS systems, a standard protocol and format is
    required to ensure inter-operability between vendors.  The messages
    would have to meet several requirements in order to be meaningful


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 16]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    as they traverse multiple networks.  Real-time Inter-network
    Defense (RID) provides the framework necessary for communication
    between networks involved in the traceback and mitigation of a
    security incident.  Several message types described in section 4.3
    are necessary to facilitate a trace across multiple networks.  The
    message types include the Report, IncidentQuery, TraceRequest,
    TraceAuthorization, Result, and the Investigation request message.
    The  Report message is used when an incident is to be filed on a
    RID system or associated database, where no further action is
    required.  An IncidentQuery message is used to request information
    on a particular incident.  A TraceRequest message is used when the
    source of the traffic may have been spoofed.  In that case, each
    network provider in the upstream path who receives a trace request
    will issue a trace across the network to determine the upstream
    source of the traffic.  The TraceAuthorization and Result messages
    are used to communicate the status and result of a trace.  The
    Investigation request message would only involve the RID
    communication systems along the path to the source of the traffic
    and not the use of network trace systems.  The Investigation
    Request leverages the bilateral relationships or a consortium's
    inter-connections to mitigate or stop problematic traffic close to
    the source.  Routes could determine the fastest path to a known
    source IP address in the case of a Investigation Request.  A
    message sent between RID systems for a TraceRequest or an
    Investigation Request to stop traffic at the source through a
    bordering network would require the information enumerated below:

    1. Enough information to enable the network administrators
       to make a decision about the importance of continuing the trace.
    2. The incident or IP packet information needed to carry out
       the trace or investigation.
    3. Contact information of the origin of the RID communication. The
       contact information could be provided through the autonomous
       system number [RFC1930] or NIC handle information listed in the
       Registry for Internet Numbers or other Internet databases.
    4. Network path information to help prevent any routing loops
       through the network from perpetuating a trace.  If a RID system
       receives a TraceRequest containing its own information in the
       path, the trace must cease and the RID system should generate an
       alert to inform the network operations staff that a tracing loop
       exists.
    5. A unique identifier for a single attack should be used to
       correlate traces to multiple sources in a DDoS attack.

    Use of the communication network and the RID protocol must be
    for pre-approved, authorized purposes only.  It is the
    responsibility of each participating party to adhere to guidelines
    set forth in both a global use policy for this system and
    one established though the peering agreements for each bilateral
    peer or agreed-upon consortium guidelines.  The purpose of such
    policies is to avoid abuse of the system; the policies shall be 
    developed by a consortium of participating entities.  The global


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 17]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    policy may be dependent on the domain it operates under; for
    example, a government network or a commercial network such as the
    Internet would adhere to different guidelines to address the
    individual concerns.  Privacy issues must be considered in public
    networks such as the Internet.  Privacy issues are discussed in the
    security section along with other requirements that must be agreed
    upon by participating entities.

    Traces must be legitimate security-related incidents and not used
    for purposes such as sabotage or censorship.  An example of such
    abuse of the system would include a request to rate-limit
    legitimate traffic to prevent information from being shared between
    users on the Internet (restricting access to online versions of
    papers) or restricting access from a competitor's product in order
    to sabotage a business.

    The RID system should be configurable to either require user input
    or automatically continue traces.  This feature would enable a
    network manager to assess the available resources before continuing
    a trace.  A trace may cause adverse effects on a network.  If the
    confidence rating is low, it may not be in the Network Provider's
    best interest to continue the trace.  The confidence ratings must
    adhere to the specifications for selecting the percentage used to
    avoid abuse of the system.  TraceRequests must be issued by
    authorized individuals from the initiating network, set forth in
    policy guidelines established through peering or SLA.

4.2 RID Network Topology

    The most basic topology for communicating RID systems would be a
    direct connection or a bilateral relationship as illustrated below.

    __________                                   __________
    |         |                                  |        |
    |  RID    |__________-------------___________|  RID   |
    |_________|          | NP Border |           |________|
                         -------------

                     Figure 1: Direct Peer Topology

    Within the consortium model, several topologies might be agreed
    upon and used.  One would leverage bilateral network peering
    relationships of the members of the consortium.  The peers for RID
    would match that of routing peers and the logical network borders
    would be used.  This approach may be necessary for an iterative
    trace where the source is unknown.  The model would look like the
    above diagram; however, there may be an extensive number of inter-
    connections of bilateral relationships formed.  Also within a
    consortium model, it may be useful to establish an integrated mesh
    of networks to pass RID messages.  This may be beneficial when the
    source address is known, and an interconnection may provide a
    faster route to reach the closest upstream peer to the source of


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 18]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    the attack traffic.  An example is illustrated below.

      _______                     _______                     ______ 

      |     |                     |     |                     |     |
    __| RID |____-------------____| RID |____-------------____| RID |__
      |_____|    | NP Border |    |_____|    | NP Border |    |_____|
         |       -------------               -------------       |
         |_______________________________________________________|
     Direct connection to network that is not an immediate network peer

                     Figure 2: Mesh Peer Topology

    By using a fully meshed model in a consortium, broadcasting RID
    requests would be possible, but not advisable.  By broadcasting a
    request, RID peers that may not have carried the attack traffic on
    their network would be asked to perform a trace for the potential
    of deceasing the time in which the true source was identified.  As
    a result, many networks would have utilized unnecessary resources
    for a TraceRequest that may have also been unnecessary.

4.3 Message Formats

    The following section describes the six RID message types which
    are based on the IODEF model.  The messages are generated and
    received on RID communication systems on the NP's network.  The
    messages may originate from IODEF messages from intrusion detection
    servers, CSIRTS, analysts, etc. A RID message uses the IODEF
    framework with the RID extension, which is encapsulated in a SOAP
    wrapper.  Each RID message type, along with an example, is
    described in the following sections.

4.3.1 RID Messages and Transport

    The six RID message types follow:

    1. TraceRequest.  This message is sent to the RID system next in
    the upstream trace.  It is used to initiate a TraceRequest or to
    continue a TraceRequest to an upstream network closer to the
    source of the origin of the security incident.

    2. TraceAuthorization.  This message is sent to the initiating RID
    system from each of the upstream NPs' RID systems to provide
    information on the trace status in the current network.

    3. Result.  This message is sent to the initiating RID system
    through the network of RID systems in the path of the trace as
    notification that the source of the attack was located.

    4. Investigation.  This message type is used when the source of the
    traffic is believed to be valid.  The purpose of the Investigation
    message request is to leverage the existing peer relationships in


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 19]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    order to notify the network provider closest to the source of the
    valid traffic of a security-related incident.

    5. Report.  This message is used to report a security incident,
    for which no action is requested.  This may be used for the purpose
    of correlating attack information by CSIRTS, statistics and
    trending information, etc.

    6. IncidentQuery.  This message is used to request information
    about an incident or incident type from a trusted RID system.  The
    response is provided through the Report message.

    When a system receives a RID message, it must be able to
    determine the type of message and parse it accordingly.  The
    message type is specified in the RIDPolicy class.  The RIDPolicy
    class is also presented in the SOAP header to facilitate the
    communication of security incident data to trace, investigate,
    query, or report information security incident information.  The
    details of the SOAP wrapper are discussed in the SOAP document for
    transport communications.

4.3.2 RID Data Types

    RID is derived from the IODEF data model and inherits all of the
    data types defined in the IODEF model.  

4.3.3 IODEF-Document 

    The IODEF model will be followed as specified in RFCXXXX for each
    of the RID message types. (The RFC number will replace the XXXX when
    a number has been assigned for the document.) The RID schema
    is used to define an XML envelope for IODEF documents to facilitate
    RID communications.  Each message type varies slightly in format
    and purpose; hence, the requirements vary and will be specified for
    each.  All classes, elements, attributes, etc., that are defined in
    the IODEF-Document are valid in the context of a RID message;
    however, some listed as optional in IODEF are mandatory for RID as
    defined in section 4.4.  The IODEF model MUST be fully implemented
    to ensure proper parsing of all RID messages.

    Please see RFCxxxx for specific information on the IODEF-Document
    requirements.  (The RFC number will be defined when the document
    becomes an RFC.)

4.3.4 IODEF-RID Schema

    There are four classes included in the RID extension required to
    facilitate RID communications.  The NPPath class is used to list
    out the path a trace has taken at the RID system or NP level; the
    TraceStatus class is used to indicate the approval status of a
    TraceRequest or Investigation request; the IncidentSource class is 
    used to report whether or not a source was found and to identify


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 20]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    the source host(s) or network(s); and the RIDPolicy class provides
    information on the agreed policies and specifies the type of
    communication message being used.

    The RID schema acts as an envelope for the IODEF schema to
    facilitate RID communications.  The intent in maintaining a
    separate schema and not using the AdditionalData extension of IODEF
    is the flexibility of sending messages between RID hosts.
    Since RID is a separate schema that includes the IODEF schema, the
    RID information acts as an envelope, and then the RIDPolicy
    class can be easily extracted for use in the SOAP header for
    transport.  The security requirements of sending incident
    information across the network require the use of encryption.  The
    RIDPolicy information is not required to be encrypted, so
    separating out this data from the IODEF extension removes the need
    for decrypting and parsing the entire IODEF and RID document to
    determine how it should be handled at each RID host. 

    The purpose of the RIDPolicy class is to specify the message type
    for the receiving host, facilitate the policy needs of RID, and
    provide routing information in the form of an IP address of the
    destination RID system.

    The policy information and guidelines are discussed in section 6.5.
    The policy is defined between RID peers and within or between
    consortiums.  The RIDPolicy is meant to be a tool to facilitate the
    defined policies.  This MUST be used in accordance with policy set
    between clients, peers, consortiums, and/or regions.  Security,
    privacy, and confidentiality MUST be considered as specified in
    this document.
























Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 21]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    The RID Schema is defined as follows:

    +------------------+
    |        RID       |
    +------------------+
    | ANY              |
    |                  |<>-------------[ RIDPolicy      ]
    | ENUM restriction |
    | ENUM type        |<>---{1..*}----[ NPPath         ]
    | STRING meaning   |
    |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ TraceStatus    ]
    |                  |
    |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ IncidentSource ]
    +------------------+

            Figure 3: The RID Schema

    The aggregate classes that constitute the RID schema in the
    iodef-rid namespace are as follows:

    NPPath
      One or many.  The contact information for the NPs involved in a
      trace, which includes information on the actual RID or NMS
      systems involved in the trace.

    TraceStatus
      Zero or One.  This is used only in Trace Authorization messages
      to report back to the originating RID system if the trace will be
      continued by each RID system that received a TraceRequest in the
      path to the source of the traffic.

    IncidentSource
	Zero or One.  The IncidentSource class is used in the Result message
      only.  The IncidentSource provides the information on the
      identified source host or network of an attack trace or
      investigation.

    RIDPolicy
       One.  The RIDPolicy class is used by all message types to
       facilitate policy agreements between peers, consortiums or
       federations as well as to properly route messages.













Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 22]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


4.3.4.1 NPPath Class

   The NPPath information is represented in the aggregate RID class.

   +------------------+
   | NPPath           |
   +------------------+
   | ENUM restriction |<>---{0..1}----[ name           ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{0..*}----[ RegistryHandle ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>-------------[ Node           ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{0..*}----[ Email          ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{0..*}----[ Telephone      ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ Fax            ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ Timezone       ]
   |                  |
   |                  |<>---{1..*}----[ NPPath         ]
   +------------------+

                      Figure 4: The NPPath Class

   The aggregate classes that constitute the NPPath class are as
   follows:

   name
      Zero or one.  NAME.  The name of the contact.  The contact may
      either be an organization or a person.  The type attribute
      dictates the semantics (organization or person).

   RegistryHandle
      Zero or many.  The handle name in a registry.  Care must be taken
      to ensure that a handle is meaningful to the recipient.
      Intra-organizational handles are of not much use for
      extra-organizational communication.  The base definition is from
      IODEF section 3.7.1.

   Node
      One.  The Node class is used to identify a host or network
      device, in this case to identify the system communicating RID
      messages or the NP's RID system.

      The base definition of the class is reused from the IODEF
      specification section 3.16.

   Email
      Zero or many.  EMAIL.  The email address of the contact formatted
      according to IODEF section 2.2.13.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 23]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


   Telephone
      Zero or many.  PHONE.  The telephone number of the contact
      formatted according to documentation in section 5.21 of RFC2256.


   Fax
      Zero or one.  PHONE.  The facsimile telephone number of the
      contact formatted according to documentation in section 5.21 of
      RFC2256.

   Timezone
      Zero or one.  STRING. The timezone in which the contact resides.

   NPPath
      One or many.  Recursive definition of NPPath, allowing for
      grouping of data.  This is necessary in order to provide the
      complete list of systems communicating in the RID Trace,
      Investigation, or Report messages.  The first NPPath definition
      is used for the originating host and NP information; the second
      listing is for the first NP that receives a request or message.
      All subsequent entries are used to list the information for each
      RID system for the NPs involved.


4.3.4.2 TraceStatus Class

   The TraceStatus class is an aggregate class in the RID class.  

   +-------------------+
   | TraceStatus       |
   +-------------------+
   |                   |
   | ENUM restriction  |<>-------[ AuthorizationStatus ]
   |                   |
   +-------------------+

                      Figure 5: The TraceStatus Class

  The aggregate elements that constitute the TraceStatus class are as
  follows:

   AuthorizationStatus
     One. Required. STRING. The listed values are used to provide a
     response to the requesting CSIRT of the status of a TraceRequest
     in the current network.

     Approved.  The trace was approved and will begin in the current
        NP.
     Denied.  The trace was denied in the current NP.  The next
        closest NP can use this message to filter traffic from the
        upstream NP using the example packet to help mitigate the
        effects of the attack as close to the source as possible.  The


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 24]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


        TraceAuthorization message must be passed back to the
        originator and a Result message used from the closest NP to the
        source to indicate actions taken in the IODEF HistoryItem
        class.
     Pending.  Awaiting approval and a time-out period has been
        reached which resulted in this pending status and
        TraceAuthorization message being generated.


4.3.4.3 IncidentSource Class

   The IncidentSource class is an aggregate class in the RID class.  

   +-------------------+
   | IncidentSource    |
   +-------------------+
   |                   |
   | ENUM restriction  |
   |                   |<>-------------[ SourceFound    ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>---{0..*}----[ Node           ]
   |                   |
   +-------------------+

              Figure 6: The IncidentSource Class

  The elements that constitute the IncidentSource class follow:

   SourceFound
     One.  Boolean.  The Source class indicates if a source was
     identified.  If the source was identified, it will be listed in
     the Node element of this class.

    True. Source of incident was identified.
    False. Source of incident was not identified.

   Node
      One.  The Node class is used to identify a host or network
      device, in this case to identify the system communicating RID
      messages.

      The base definition of the class is reused from the IODEF
      specification IODEF 3.16.











Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 25]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


4.3.4.4 RIDPolicy 

   The RIDPolicy class facilitates the delivery of RID messages and is
   also referenced in the SOAP header.  

   +-------------------+
   | RIDPolicy         |
   +-------------------+
   |                   |
   | ENUM restriction  |<>-------------[ MsgType        ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>---{1..*}----[ PolicyRegion   ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>-------------[ MsgDestination ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>-------------[ Node           ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>---{1..*}----[ TrafficType    ]
   |                   |
   |                   |<>---{0..1)----[ IncidentID     ]
   +-------------------+

                      Figure 7: The RIDPolicy Class

  The aggregate elements that constitute the RIDPolicy class are as
  follows:

   MsgType
     One. Required. STRING. The type of RID Message sent.  The six
     types of messages are described in Section 4.3.1 and can be noted
     as one of the six selections below.

     TraceRequest.  This message may be used to initiate a
       TraceRequest or to continue a TraceRequest to an upstream
       network closer to the source of the origin of the security
       incident.

     TraceAuthorization.  This message is sent to the initiating RID
       system from each of the upstream RID systems to provide
       information on the trace status in the current network.

     Result.  This message indicates that the source of the
       attack was located and the message is sent to the initiating RID
       system through the RID systems in the path of the trace.

     Investigation.  This message type is used when the source of the
       traffic is believed to be valid.  The purpose of the
       Investigation request is to leverage the existing peer or
       consortium relationships in order to notify the network provider
       closest to the source of the valid traffic that some event 
       occurred, which may be a security-related incident.



Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 26]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


     Report. This message is used to report a security incident,
       for which no action is requested in the IODEF expectation class.
       This may be used for the purpose of correlating attack
       information by CSIRTS, statistics and trending information, etc.

     IncidentQuery.  This message is used to request information
       from a trusted RID system about an incident or incident type.

   MsgDestination
     One. Required. STRING. The destination of the RID message will
     also appear in the NPPath class, but may be encrypted in some
     cases.  The destination required at this level may either be the
     RID messaging system intended to receive the request or the source
     of the incident in the case of an Investigation request where the
     RID system that can assist to stop or mitigate the traffic may not
     be known and the message has to traverse RID messaging systems by
     following the routing path to the closest RID system to the source
     of the attack traffic.  The Node element lists either the RID
     system or the IP of the source, and the meaning of the value in
     the Node element is determined by the MsgDestination element. 

       RIDSystem.  The address listed in the Node element of the
       RIDPolicy class is the next upstream RID system that will receive
       the RID message. 

       SourceOfIncident.  The address listed in the Node element of
       the RIDPolicy class is the incident source.  The IP address will
       be used to determine the path of RID systems that will be used
       to find the closest RID system to the source of an attack in
       which the IP used by the source is believed to be valid and an
       Investigation message is used.  This is not to be confused with
       the IncidentSource class as the defined value here is from an
       initial trace or investigation request, not the source used in a
       Result message.

   Node
      One.  The Node class is used to identify a host or network
      device, in this case to identify the system communicating RID
      messages.

      The base definition of the class is reused from the IODEF
      specification IODEF 3.16.

   PolicyRegion
     One or many. Required. STRING. The listed values are used to
     determine what policy area may require consideration before a
     trace can be approved.  The PolicyRegion may include multiple
     selections from the list in order to fit all possible policy
     considerations when crossing regions, consortiums, or networks.

     ClientToNP.  An enterprise network initiated the request.
     NPToClient.  An NP passed a RID request to a client or an


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 27]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


        enterprise attached network to the NP based on the service
        level agreements.
     Inter-Consortium.  A trace that should have no restrictions
        within the boundaries of a consortium with the agreed-upon use
        and abuse guidelines.
     PeerToPeer.  A trace that should have no restrictions between
        two peers but may require further evaluation before
        continuance beyond that point with the agreed-upon use and
        abuse guidelines.
     Between-Consortiums.  A trace that should have no restrictions
        between consortiums that have established agreed-upon use and
        abuse guidelines.
     AcrossNationalBoundaries.  This selection must be set if the
        trace type is anything but a trace of attack traffic with
        malicious intent.  This must also be set if the traffic request
        is based upon regulations of a specific nation that would not
        apply to all nations.  This is different from the inter-
        consortium since it may be possible to have multiple nations as
        members of the same consortium, and this option must be
        selected if the traffic is of a type that may have different
        restrictions in other nations.

   TrafficType
     One or many. Required. STRING. The listed values are meant to
     assist in determining if a trace is appropriate for the NP
     receiving the request to continue the trace.  Multiple values may
     be selected for this element; however, where possible, it should
     be restricted to one value which would most accurately describe
     the traffic type.

     Attack.  This option should only be selected if the traffic is
        related to a network-based attack.  The type of attack MUST
        also be listed in more detail in the IODEF Method and Impact
        classes for further clarification to assist in determining if
        the trace can be continued.  (IODEF sections 3.10 and 3.11)
     Network.  This option MUST only be selected when the
        trace is related to NP network traffic or routing issues.
     Content.  This category MUST be used only in the case in which the
        request is related to the content and regional restrictions on
        accessing that type of content exist.  This is not malicious
        traffic but may include determining what sources or
        destinations accessed certain materials available on the
        Internet, including, but not limited to, news, technology, or
        inappropriate content.
     OfficialBusiness.  This option MUST be used if the traffic
        being traced is requested or affiliated with any government or
        other official business request.  This would be used during
        an investigation by government authorities or other government
        traces to track suspected criminal or other activities.
     Other.  If this option is selected, a description of the trace
        type MUST be provided so that policy decisions can be made to
        continue or stop the trace.  The information should be provided


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 28]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


        in the IODEF message in the History Class using a HistoryItem
        log.

  IncidentID
      Zero or one.  Global reference pointing back to the IncidentID
        defined in the IODEF data model. The IncidentID includes the
        name of the CSIRT, an incident number, and an instance of that
        incident.  The instance number is appended with a dash
        separating the values and is used in cases for which it may be
        desirable to group incidents.  Examples of incidents that may
        be grouped would be botnets, DDoS attacks, multiple hops
        of compromised systems found during an investigation, etc.

4.4 RID Documents Defined by Message Type Derived from IODEF

    This section includes the mandatory IODEF information used in all
    RID messages. Since RID is a wrapper for an IODEF document, the
    full IODEF specifications MUST be implemented, and the following
    section identifies the IODEF fields that must be filled in when
    a RID message or document is generated.  Other fields may
    optionally be filled in to provide further information to an
    incident handler and thus must be implemented for proper parsing of
    a RID message wrapping an IODEF document.  This section will
    reference the IODEF model and the sections of the IODEF RFC where
    each IODEF class can be located.

    IODEF Schema Classes

    Incident Class (IODEF 3.2)
      Purpose: The Purpose will be set according to the purpose of the
        message type, for instance, incident handling or statistics.
      Restriction: Sender can select from the IODEF specifications for
        this value and fill in as appropriate.
    IncidentID (IODEF 3.3)
      GUID: Name of CSIRT or NP that created the document.
    AlternativeID (IODEF 3.4)
      This incident ID is one set by another CSIRT that is tracking the
      same or a similar incident.  This value should not be set in the
      initial request, but may be set in a request passed forward by an
      NP in the path of a trace, investigation, or report.

    RelatedActivity Class (IODEF 3.5)
      This class is optional if an AlternateID is specified.
    AdditionalData Class (IODEF 3.6)
      This class is optional and may be used if an extended schema is
      necessary to describe the incident.
    Contact:    Mandatory for RID (IODEF 3.7)
      The required aggregate classes for the contact class in RID
      messages include Name, RegistryHandle (IODEF 3.7.1), Email,
      Telephone.  The attributes in the contact class are required in
      the IODEF document and thus are required in RID messages and
      include Restriction, Role, and Type.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 29]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    StartTime:  Mandatory for RID (IODEF 3.8.1)
    EndTime: Optional for RID, incident may still be in process in
      which no end time can be listed (IODEF 3.8.2).
    DetectTime: Mandatory for RID (IODEF 3.8.3)
    ReportTime: Mandatory for RID (IODEF 3.8.4)
    Expectation: Mandatory for RID (IODEF 3.9)
      The StartTime and EndTime, as well as the accuracy required, can
      be used to determine the type of trace that would be used on a
      network with multiple choices.  StartTime and EndTime to stop the
      trace would indicate if a fast or slower and more accurate method
      should be used for each TraceRequest.
      The following attributes are required in RID messages:
          Priority and Category.  The category attribute is used to
          place a request for a specific action to be taken close to
          the source.
          Note: Although category is required in a request, the NP
          closest to the source of the attack decides upon the
          ultimate response.
      Method: Techniques used in attack - Mandatory for RID to determine
        the type of traffic for RIDPolicy information (IODEF 3.10)
      Assessment: Characterization of the impact - Mandatory for RID,
        (reference IODEF section 3.11)
      Impact aggregate class (IODEF 3.11) MUST be used along with
        the Confidence class (IODEF 3.11.4) in the Assessment Class.
        The other impact classes are optional and may depend on the
        Incident type to determine if the additional classes are
        appropriate.
      History: Required for upstream trace requests, investigations,
        and report messages but not for original request. (IODEF 3.12)
        The HistoryItem class specifies the actions taken to stop or
        mitigate the effects of a security incident. It may also be
        used to further describe actions taken along the NP Path of a
        trace as well as to describe the incident handling in a
        report message.
    EventData: Required for RID (IODEF 3.13)
      Much of the EventData Class is a duplicate for the aggregate
      IncidentData class and the proper uses of this class are defined
      in the IODEF RFC.
    Flow Class: Optional for RID (IODEF 3.14)
    System class: (IODEF 3.15) 
      The System class is required and the information listed in this
      class can be automatically entered into this class from the
      packet used in the incident trace by the RID implementation.
      Information must be reviewed by the submitter and the additional
      required classes and attributes filled in for proper processing
      of a request.  The system class MUST be used to list the
      source and the target or intermediate system(s) and MUST note if
      the system was spoofed through the use of the Node class (IODEF
      3.18).  A separate instance of the System class (and Node Class)
      is used for each type of system listed in the document.  The
      spoof section MUST be used in the System EventData Class of all
      RID messages and is set to the value of spoofed for all 


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 30]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


      TraceRequests that require an actual trace of network traffic.
      In an Investigation request, the source is believed to be valid.
      All other classes of the System Class are optional as in the
      IODEF document.
    Node Class and Service class are embedded within other listed
      classes or the IODEF definitions are reused in the RID
      specification (IODEF 3.16 and 3.17).
    Record Class:  Optional for RID (IODEF 3.19)
      Required for messages types that must include a sample packet.
      The RecordItem Class (IODEF 3.19.2) allows for various packet
      types to be included in an IODEF document.  This replaced the
      need for the IPPacket class in RID and must be used to represent
      packet data for incident handling.

    RID Schema Classes:  RID messages require that the NP Path and the
      RecordItem (including an example packet) class are used to
      provide adequate information for an upstream peer to perform a
      trace.  The information contained in the NPPath and RecordItem
      classes must remain and be maintained in each type of RID
      message document.  The TraceStatus class is used in the
      TraceAuthorization message only since its purpose is to let the
      downstream NP know if the trace was approved and will begin in
      the next upstream network.  The RIDPolicy class is used in
      routing RID messages and providing policy information between
      participating RID hosts.
        NPPath (Original Request should contain originator plus the
          next peer in the upstream request, the host that is receiving
          the request)
        TraceStatus (Approval status for the trace in the current
          network)
        IncidentSource (Source information for Result message)
        RIDPolicy (Policy information to support RID communications)

    Restriction
      Optional.  ENUM.  The IODEF restriction should be used in
        addition to the RID privacy and security guidelines since this
        is optional on the part of the receiving end of an IODEF
        message and is not enforced.

    Note: The implementation of the RID system may obtain some of the
    information needed to fill in the content required for each message
    type automatically from packet input to the system or default
    information such as that used in the NPPath class. 

4.4.1 TraceRequest

    Description: This message or document is sent to the Network
    Management Station next in the upstream trace once the upstream 
    source of the traffic has been identified.  

    The following information is required for TraceRequest messages and
    will be provided through:


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 31]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


       RID Information:
       RIDPolicy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            policy information
       Path information of RID systems used in the trace
            NPPath in RID schema

       IODEF Information:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of security incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System Class is used to list both the Source and Destination 
            Information used in the attack and must note if the traffic
            is spoofed, thus requiring an upstream TraceRequest in RID.
       Expectation class should be used to request any specific actions
            to be taken close to the source.
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident.
       [Free-form text area for any additional information on
            justification for Investigation message request, IODEF
            IncidentData Description]

       W3C standards for Encryption and Digital Signatures: 
            Digital signature from initiating RID system, passed to all
            systems in upstream trace using XML digital signature.

    A DDoS attack can have many sources, resulting in multiple traces
    to locate the sources of the attack.  It may be valid to continue
    multiple traces for a single attack.  The path information would
    enable the administrators to determine if the exact trace had
    already passed through a single network.  The incident identifier 
    must also be used to identify multiple TraceRequests from a
    single incident.

4.4.2 TraceAuthorization Message

    Description: This message is sent to the initiating RID system from
    the next upstream NP's RID system to provide information on the
    trace status in the current network.

    The following information is required for TraceAuthorization
    messages and will be provided through:

       RID Information:
       RIDPolicy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            policy information
       Status of TraceRequest 
            TraceStatus class in RID schema


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 32]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


       Path information of RID systems used in the trace
            NPPath class in RID schema
            The last NP listed is the NP sending this
            TraceAuthorization message.  All previous NPs listed in the
            NPPath must be retained.

       IODEF Information:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of security incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System class information
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident [optional].
       [Additional free-form text information on the attack,
            History Class]

       W3C standards for Encryption and Digital Signatures: 
       Digital signature of responding NP for authenticity of Trace
            Status Message, from the NP creating this message using
            XML digital signature. 

    A message is sent back to the initiating RID system of the trace as
    status notification.  This message verifies that the next RID
    system in the path has received the message from the previous
    system in the path.  This message also verifies that the trace is
    now continuing, has stopped, or is pending in the next upstream.
    The pending status would be automatically generated after a
    2-minute timeout without system predefined or administrator action

    taken to approve or disapprove the trace continuance.

4.4.3 Result Message

    Description: This message indicates that the trace or investigation
    has been completed and provides the result.  The Result message
    includes information on whether or not a source was found and the
    source information through the IncidentSource class.  The Result
    information MUST go back to the originating RID system that began
    the investigation or trace.

    The following information is required for Result messages and will
    be provided through:

       RID Information:
       RIDPolicy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            policy information
       Path information of RID systems used in the trace
            NPPath class in RID schema


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 33]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


            The last NP listed is the NP, which located the source of
            the traffic (the NP sending the Result message)
       Incident Source
            The IncidentSource class of the RID schema is used to
            note if a source was identified and the source(s) address.

       IODEF Information:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of Security Incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System Class is used to list both the Source and Destination 
            Information used in the attack and must note if the traffic
            is spoofed, thus requiring an upstream TraceRequest in RID.
       Action Taken (HistoryItem Class IODEF 3.12.1)
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident [optional]
       [Free-form text area for any additional information on
            the identified source of the attack traffic, IODEF
            Description, Incident Class.]
       [True Source address and other information on the attack;
            NULL IP address signifies that the source was not found,
            History Class.]

       W3C Encryption and Digital Signature standards:
       Digital signature of source NP for authenticity of Result
            Message, the NP creating this message using XML digital
            signature. 

    A message sent back to the initiating RID system to notify the
    associated CSIRT that the source has been located.  The actual
    source information may or may not be included, depending on the
    policy of the network in which the client or host is attached.
    Any action taken by the NP to act upon the discovery of the source
    of a trace should be included.  The NP may be able to automate the
    adjustment of filters at their border router to block outbound
    access for the machine(s) discovered as a part of the attack.  The
    filters may be comprehensive enough to block all Internet access
    until the host has taken the appropriate action to resolve any
    security issues or to rate-limit the ingress traffic as close to
    the source as possible.

    Security and privacy considerations discussed in sections 6 and 7
    must be taken into account. 

    Note: The History Class has been expanded in IODEF to accommodate
    all of the possible actions taken as a result of a RID TraceRequest
    or Investigation request using additional identifiers for the
    HistoryItem type.  The History class should be used to note all
    actions taken close to the source of a trace or incident using the


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 34]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    most appropriate option for the type of action along with a
    description.  The category attribute of the Expectation class can
    be used to request an appropriate action when a TraceRequest or
    Investigation request is made.

4.4.4 Investigation Message Request

    Description: This message type is used when the source of the
    traffic is believed to be valid.  The purpose of the Investigation
    message request is to leverage the existing bilateral peer
    relationships in order to notify the network provider closest to
    the source of the valid traffic that some event occurred,
    which may be a security-related incident.  

    The following information is required for Investigation messages
    and will be provided through:

       RID Information:
       RID Policy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            policy information
       Path information of RID systems used in the trace
            NPPath class in RID schema

       IODEF Information:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of security incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System Class is used to list both the Source and Destination 
            Information used in the attack and must note if the traffic
            is spoofed, thus requiring an upstream TraceRequest in RID.
       Expectation class should be used to request any specific actions
            to be taken close to the source.
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident.
       [Free-form text area for any additional information on
            justification for Investigation message request, IODEF
            Description.]

       W3C Encryption and Digital Signature standards:
       Digital signature from initiating RID system, passed to all
            systems in upstream trace using XML digital signature. 

     Security considerations would include the ability to encrypt the
     contents of the Investigation message request using the public key
     of the destination RID system.  The incident number would increase
     as if it were a TraceRequest message in order to ensure
     uniqueness within the system.  The relaying peers would also
     append their AS or RID system information as the request message


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 35]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


     was relayed along the web of network providers so that the Result
     message could utilize the same path as the set of trust
     relationships for the return message, thus indicating any actions
     taken.  The request would also be recorded in both the state table
     of the initiating and destination NP RID system.  The destination
     NP is responsible for any actions taken as a result of the request
     in adherence to any service level agreements or internal policies.
     The NP should confirm the traffic actually originated from the
     suspected system before taking any action and confirm the reason
     for the request.  The request may be sent directly to a known
     RID System or routed by the source address of the attack using
     the message destination of RIDPolicy, SourceOfIncident.

     Note: All intermediate parties must be able to view RIDPolicy
     information in order to properly direct RID messages.

4.4.5 Report Message

     Description: This message or document is sent to a RID system to
     provide a report of a security incident.  This message does not
     require any actions to be taken, except to file the report on the
     receiving RID system or associated database.

     The following information is required for Report messages and will
     be provided through:

       RID Information:
       RID Policy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            Policy information

       IODEF Information:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of security incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System Class is used to list both the Source and Destination 
            Information used in the attack.
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident [optional].
       [Free-form text area for any additional information on
            incident, IODEF IncidentData Description.]

       W3C Encryption and Digital Signature standards:       
       Digital signature from initiating RID system, passed to all
            systems receiving the report using XML digital signature.

     Security considerations would include the ability to encrypt the
     contents of the Report message request using the public key
     of the destination RID system.  Senders of a Report message should


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 36]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


     note that the information may be used to correlate security
     incident information for the purpose of trending, pattern
     detection, etc., and may be shared with other parties unless
     otherwise agreed upon with the receiving RID system.  Therefore,
     sending parties of a report message may obfuscate or remove
     destination addresses or other sensitive information before
     sending a report message.  A Report message may be sent either to
     file an incident report or in response to an IncidentQuery and
     data sensitivity must be considered in both cases.  The NPPath
     information is not necessary for this message as it will be
     communicated directly between two trusted RID systems.

4.4.6 IncidentQuery

    Description: The IncidentQuery message is used to request incident
    information from a trusted RID system.  The request can include the
    incident number, if known, or detailed information about the
    incident.  If the incident number is known, the report message
    containing the incident information can easily be returned to the
    trusted requestor using automated methods. If an example packet or 
    other unique information is included in the IncidentQuery, the
    return report may be automated; otherwise, analyst intervention may
    be required.

    The following information is required for an IncidentQuery message
    and will be provided through:
    
       RID Information:
       RID Policy
            RID message type, IncidentID, and destination
            Policy information
       IODEF Information [optional]:
       Time Stamps (DectectTime, StartTime, EndTime, ReportTime)
       Incident Identifier (Incident Class, IncidentID)
            Trace number - used for multiple traces of a single
            incident, must be noted.
       Confidence rating of security incident (Impact and Confidence
            Class)
       System Class is used to list both the Source and Destination 
            Information used in the attack.
       Event, Record, and RecordItem Classes to include example packets
            and other information related to the incident [optional].
       [Free-form text area for any additional information on
            justification for IncidentQuery, IODEF IncidentData
            Description.]

       W3C Encryption and Digital Signature standards:
       Digital signature from initiating RID system, passed to all
            systems receiving the IncidentQuery using XML digital
            signature.  If a packet is not included, the signature

            may be based on the RIDPolicy class.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 37]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    The proper response to the IncidentQuery message is a Report
    message.  Multiple reports may be returned for a single query if an
    incident type is requested.  In this case, the transport would
    notify the sending system of the expected number of replies for
    proper handling.  The Confidence rating may be used in the Incident
    Query message to select only incidents with an equal or higher
    confidence rating than what is specified.  This may be used for
    cases when information is gathered on a type of incident but not 
    on specifics about a single incident.  Source and destination
    information may not be needed if the IncidentQuery is intended to
    gather data about a specific type of incident as well.

4.5 RID Communication Exchanges

   The following section outlines the communication flows for RID and
   also provides examples of messages.

4.5.1 Upstream Trace Communication Flow

    The diagram below outlines the RID TraceRequest communication flow
    between RID systems on different networks tracing an attack.


  Attack Dest      NP-1              NP-2        NP-3        Attack Src

  1. Attack    |  Attack
     reported  |  detected
  2.              Initiate trace
  3.              Locate origin
                  through
                  upstream NP
  4.              o---TraceRequest----->
  5.                              Trace
                                  Initiated
  6.              <-TraceAuthorization-o
  7.                              Locate origin
                                  through
                                  upstream NP.
  8.                              o---TraceRequest--->        
  9.                                             Trace Initiated
  10.             <------------TraceAuthorization----o
  11.                                            Locate attack
                                                 source on network   X
  12.             <------------Result----------------o
                     
                     Figure 8: TraceRequest Communication Flow

    The NP that detected the attack initiates the trace. The attack
    is traced to the source or the next upstream NP.  This process
    continues until the trace identifies the source of the attack.  Any
    Trace Authorization and Result messages must pass through all
    RID systems in the path back to the trace initiator because of the


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 38]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    secure connections established between RID systems of bordering
    networks.  The involved systems in the path for Trace Authorization
    and Result messages would then have the ability to see and
    acknowledge the trace status before sending the messages back along
    the RID communication path to the originating RID system.

    Before a trace can be initialized, the originating RID system must
    check an internal database to determine if a trace to the same IP
    address or network address has occurred within a specified period
    of time, no less than 1 day.  The trace may have been initiated by
    the same RID system or this RID system may have been in the path of
    the trace.  The previous filter must be maintained for a minimum of
    one week in order to retrieve the filter for comparison
    before initiating a TraceRequest or allowing a trace continuance
    to occur.  If the network administrator justifies a similar trace,
    a note might be added to the Description element of the document to
    provide an additional confidence indication to the upstream NPs in
    the path of the trace.

    A single-network trace may be constrained using factors determined
    by the associated NP's network trace system in the path of the
    trace.  The trace system may either trace a packet in real time or
    search through stored packet data for evidence that the packet had
    traversed the network.  In the case of a real-time trace, the
    traffic needs to be active on the network for the trace to be
    successful or the trace will cease.  A message is sent to indicate
    the status, that the trace cannot continue, to the originating RID
    system through the consortium's trust relationships formed by the
    RID systems in the path of the trace.  The packet trace may also be
    limited due to the lack of storage space on networks for saving
    traffic data.  A TraceAuthorization message is sent, in this case
    as well, to provide the path information up to the point at which
    the trace could no longer be continued to the originator of the
    trace through the RID systems in the path of the trace.  This
    information could also be used to block or mitigate the traffic at
    the participating NP closest to the source.

4.5.1.1 RID TraceRequest Example

    The example listed is of a TraceRequest based on the incident
    report example from the IODEF document.  The RID extension classes
    were included as appropriate for a TraceRequest message using the
    RIDPolicy and NPPath classes.  The example given is that of a CSIRT
    reporting a DoS attack in progress to the upstream NP.  The request
    asks the next NP to continue the trace and have the traffic
    mitigated closer to the source of the traffic.

   	 <iodef-rid:RID
   	    xmlns:iodef-rid="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef-rid.html"
          xmlns:iodef="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html">
            <iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
             <iodef-rid:MsgType>TraceRequest</iodef-rid:MsgType>


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 39]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


             <iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>Inter-Consortium
             </iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>
             <iodef-rid:MsgDesination>RIDSystem
             </iodef-rid:MsgDestination>
                <iodef:Node>
                   <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.20.1.2
                   </iodef:Address>
                </iodef:Node>
             <iodef-rid:TrafficType>RIDSystem</iodef-rid:TrafficType>
             <iodef:IncidentID
              name="CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#207-1
             </iodef:IncidentID>
   	    <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT123</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-our-domain@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.17.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
          </iodef-rid:NPPath>
          <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-UPSTREAM-NP</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT345</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-upstream-np@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.20.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
          </iodef-rid:NPPath>
   </iodef-rid:RID>

    <IODEF-Document version="1.0">
      <iodef:Incident restriction="need-to-know" purpose="traceback">
         <iodef:IncidentID
           name="CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#207-1
         </iodef:IncidentID>
         <iodef:IncidentData>
            <iodef:Description>Host involved in DOS attack
            </iodef:Description>
            <iodef:StartTime>2004-02-02T22:19:24+00:00
            </iodef:StartTime>
            <iodef:DetectTime>2004-02-02T22:49:24+00:00
            </iodef:DetectTime>
            <iodef:ReportTime>2004-02-02T23:20:24+00:00
            </iodef:ReportTime>
            <iodef:Expectation priority="high" category="other">
               <iodef:Description>Rate limit traffic close to 
                   source</iodef:Description>
            </iodef:Expectation>
            <iodef:Assessment>
               <iodef:Impact severity="low" completion="failed"


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 40]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


                type="none"></iodef:Impact>
            </iodef:Assessment>
            <iodef:Contact role="creator" role="irt"
             type="organization">
               <iodef:name>CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN</iodef:name>
               <iodef:Email>csirt-for-our-domain@ourdomain
               </iodef:Email>
            </iodef:Contact>
            <iodef:Contact role="tech" type="organization">
               <iodef:name>Constituency-contact for 10.1.1.2
               </iodef:name>
               <iodef:Email>Constituency-contact@10.1.1.2</iodef:Email>
            </iodef:Contact>
            <iodef:History>
               <iodef:HistoryItem type="notification">
                  <iodef:IncidentID
                 name="CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#207-1
        </iodef:IncidentID>CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN
                  <iodef:Description>Notification sent to next upstream
                   NP closer to 10.1.1.2</iodef:Description>
                  <iodef:DateTime>2001-09-14T08:19:01+00:00
                  </iodef:DateTime>
               </iodef:HistoryItem>
            </iodef:History>
            <iodef:EventData>
               <iodef:System category="source">
                  <iodef:Service>
                     <iodef:port>38765</iodef:port>
                  </iodef:Service>
                  <iodef:Node>
                     <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">10.1.1.2
                     </iodef:Address>
                  </iodef:Node>
               </iodef:System>
               <iodef:System category="target">
                  <iodef:Service>
                     <iodef:port>80</iodef:port>
                  </iodef:Service>
                     <iodef:Node>
                   <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">192.168.1.2
                   </iodef:Address>
                     </iodef:Node>
               </iodef:System>
               <iodef:Record>
               <iodef:RecordData>
                 <iodef:RecordItem type="ipv4-packet">450000522ad9
                  0000ff06c41fc0a801020a010102976d0050103e020810d9
                  4a1350021000ad6700005468616e6b20796f7520666f7220
                  6361726566756c6c792072656164696e6720746869732052
                  46432e0a
                 </iodef:RecordItem>
                 <iodef:Description>"The IPv4 packet included


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 41]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


                      was used in the described attack"
                 </iodef:Description>
               </iodef:RecordData>
              </iodef:Record>
            </iodef:EventData>
         </iodef:IncidentData>
      </iodef:Incident>
   </iodef:IODEF-Document>

    <-- Digital Signature applied to the RecordItem class using the
        XML Digital Signature W3C Recommendations.                -->

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><Envelope xmlns="urn:envelope">
<iodef xmlns="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html" 
              xmlns:RID="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html">
<iodef:IODEF-Document>
<iodef:Incident>
<iodef:EventData>
  <iodef:Record>
    <iodef:RecordData>
       <iodef:RecordItem type="ipv4-packet">450000522ad9
             0000ff06c41fc0a801020a010102976d0050103e020810d9
             4a1350021000ad6700005468616e6b20796f7520666f7220
             6361726566756c6c792072656164696e6720746869732052
             46432e0a
    </iodef:RecordItem>
  </iodef:Record>
</iodef:EventData>
</iodef:Incident>
</iodef:IODEF-Document>

<Signature xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#">
  <SignedInfo>
  <CanonicalizationMethod Algorithm=
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/REC-xml-c14n-20010315#WithComments"/>
  <SignatureMethod Algorithm=
    "http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#dsa-sha1"/>
  <Reference URI="">
<Transforms>
  <Transform Algorithm=
    "http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#enveloped-signature"/>
</Transforms>
  <DigestMethod Algorithm="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#sha1"/>
    <DigestValue>KiI5+6SnFAs429VNwsoJjHPplmo=
  </DigestValue>
</Reference>
</SignedInfo>
  <SignatureValue>
    VvyXqCzjoW0m2NdxNeToXQcqcSM80W+JMW+Kn01cS3z3KQwCPeswzg==
  </SignatureValue>
<KeyInfo>
  <KeyValue>


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 42]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


   <DSAKeyValue>
     <P>/KaCzo4Syrom78z3EQ5SbbB4sF7ey80etKII864WF64B81uRpH5t9j
        QTxeEu0ImbzRMqzVDZkVG9xD7nN1kuFw==</P>
     <Q>li7dzDacuo67Jg7mtqEm2TRuOMU=</Q>
     <G>Z4Rxsnqc9E7pGknFFH2xqaryRPBaQ01khpMdLRQnG541Awtx/XPaF5
        Bpsy4pNWMOHCBiNU0NogpsQW5QvnlMpA==</G>
     <Y>VFWTD4I/aKni4YhDyYxAJozmj1iAzPLw9Wwd5B+Z9J5E7lHjcAJ+bs
        HifTyYdnj+roGzy4o09YntYD8zneQ7lw==</Y>
   </DSAKeyValue>
  </KeyValue>
</KeyInfo>
</Signature>
</Envelope>
    -->

4.5.2 Investigation Request Communication Flow

    The diagram below outlines the RID Investigation Request
    communication flow between RID systems on different networks for a
    security incident with a known source address.

  Attack Dest      NP-1              NP-2        Attack Src

  1. Attack    |  Attack
     reported  |  detected
  2.              Determine source
                  of security incident
  3.              o---Investigation---->
  4.                              Research
                                  incident and
                                  determine appropriate
                                  actions to take
  5.              <-------Result-------o

             Figure 9: Investigation Communication Flow



















Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 43]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


4.5.2.1 Example Investigation Request

    The following example will only include the RID-specific details.
    The IODEF and security measures are similar to the TraceRequest
    information, with the exception that the source is known and the
    receiving RID system is known to be close to the source.  The
    source known is indicated in the IODEF document, which allows for
    incident sources to be listed as spoofed, if appropriate.

   	 <iodef-rid:RID
   	    xmlns:iodef-rid="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef-rid.html"
          xmlns:iodef="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html">
            <iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
             <iodef-rid:MsgType>Investigation</iodef-rid:MsgType>
             <iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>PeertoPeer
             </iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>
             <iodef-rid:MsgDesination>SourceOfIncident
             </iodef-rid:MsgDestination>
                <iodef:Node>
                   <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.25.1.33
                   </iodef:Address>
                </iodef:Node>
             <iodef-rid:TrafficType>RIDSystem</iodef-rid:TrafficType>
             <iodef:IncidentID
              name="CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#208-1
             </iodef:IncidentID>
           </iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
     	     <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT123</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-our-domain@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.17.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
           <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-UPSTREAM-NP</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT345</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-upstream-np@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.20.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
   	 </iodef-rid:RID>
  <-- IODEF and XML digital signature follow -->







Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 44]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


4.5.3 Report Communication

    The diagram below outlines the RID Report communication flow
    between RID systems on different networks.

     NP-1                           NP-2        
  1. Generate incident information
     and prepare report message
  2.              o-------Report------->
  3.                              File report in database
  
             Figure 10: Report Communication Flow
  
  
    The Report communication flow is used to provide information on
    specific incidents detected on the network.  Incident information
    may be shared between CSIRTS or participating RID hosts using this
    format.  When a report is received, the RID system must verify that
    the report has not already been filed.  The incident number and
    incident data, such as the hexidecimal packet and incident class
    information, can be used to compare with existing database entries.

4.5.3.1 Report Example

    The following example will only include the RID-specific details.
    This report is an unsolicited report message that includes an
    IPv4 packet.  The IODEF document and digital signature would be
    similar to the first example provided for this case.


   	 <iodef-rid:RID
   	    xmlns:iodef-rid="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef-rid.html"
          xmlns:iodef="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html">
            <iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
             <iodef-rid:MsgType>Report</iodef-rid:MsgType>
             <iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>PeertoPeer
             </iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>
             <iodef-rid:MsgDesination>RIDSystem
             </iodef-rid:MsgDestination>
                <iodef:Node>
                   <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.17.1.2
                   </iodef:Address>
                </iodef:Node>
             <iodef-rid:TrafficType>RIDSystem</iodef-rid:TrafficType>
             <iodef:IncidentID
              name="CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#209-1
             </iodef:IncidentID>
           </iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
   	    <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT123</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-our-domain@ourdomain</iodef:Email>


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 45]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.20.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
           <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-REQUESTING-NP</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT345</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-requesting-np@ourdomain
             </iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.17.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
   	 </iodef-rid:RID>
  <-- IODEF and XML digital signature follow -->

4.5.4 IncidentQuery Communication Flow

    The diagram below outlines the RID IncidentQuery communication flow
    between RID systems on different networks.

     NP-1                           NP-2        
  1. Generate a request for
     information on a specific
     incident number or incident type
  2.              o---IncidentQuery--->
  3.                              Verify policy information
                                  and determine if matches exist
                                  for requested information
  4.              <-------Report------o
  5.  Associate report to request
      by incident number or type
      and file report(s).
  
             Figure 11: IncidentQuery Communication Flow
  
    The IncidentQuery message communication receives a response of a
    Report message.  If the Report message is empty, the responding
    host did not have information available to share with the
    requestor. The incident number and responding RID system, as well
    as the transport, assist in the association of the request and
    response since a report can be filed and is not always solicited.

4.5.4.1 IncidentQuery Example

    The IncidentQuery request may be received in several formats as a
    result of the type of query being performed.  If the incident
    number is the only information provided, the IODEF document and IP
    packet data may not be needed to complete the request.  However, if
    a type of incident is requested, the incident number will remain


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 46]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    null and the IP packet data will not be included in the IODEF
    RecordItem class and the other incident information will be the
    main source for comparison.  In the case in which an incident
    number may not be the same between CSIRTS, either or both the
    incident number and/or IP packet information can be provided and
    used for comparison on the receiving RID system to generate a
    Report message(s).

   	 <iodef-rid:RID
   	    xmlns:iodef-rid="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef-rid.html"
          xmlns:iodef="http://www.ietf.org/iodef/iodef.html">
            <iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
             <iodef-rid:MsgType>IncidentQuery</iodef-rid:MsgType>
             <iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>PeertoPeer
             </iodef-rid:PolicyRegion>
             <iodef-rid:MsgDesination>RIDSystem
             </iodef-rid:MsgDestination>
                <iodef:Node>
                   <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr>172.20.1.2
                   </iodef:Address>
                </iodef:Node>
             <iodef-rid:TrafficType>RIDSystem</iodef-rid:TrafficType>
             <iodef:IncidentID
              name="CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN">CERT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN#210-1
             </iodef:IncidentID>
           </iodef-rid:RIDPolicy>
   	    <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-OUR-DOMAIN</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT123</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-our-domain@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.17.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
           <iodef-rid:NPPath>
             <iodef:Name>CSIRT-FOR-UPSTREAM-NP</iodef:Name>
             <iodef:RegistryHandle>CSIRT345</iodef:RegistryHandle>
             <iodef:Email>csirt-for-upstream-np@ourdomain</iodef:Email>
             <iodef:Node>
                <iodef:Address category="ipv4-addr">172.20.1.2
                </iodef:Address>
             </iodef:Node>
           </iodef-rid:NPPath>
     </iodef-rid:RID>









Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 47]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


5. RID Schema Definition

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- edited with XMLSPY v2004 rel. 3 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by
     Kathleen M Moriarty (MIT Lincoln Laboratory) -->
<xs:schema xmlns:iodef-rid="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-rid-05.xsd"
 xmlns:iodef="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-042.xsd"
 xmlns:xs=http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema
 xmlns:ds=http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#
 xmlns:ns1="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-rid-05.xsd"
 targetNamespace="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-rid-05.xsd"
 elementFormDefault="qualified" attributeFormDefault="unqualified">
<xs:import namespace="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-042.xsd"
 schemaLocation="draft-ietf-inch-iodef-042.xsd"/>

<xs:import namespace=http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#
 schemaLocation=
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core/xmldsig-core-schema.xsd"/>
<!-- ****************************************************************
*********************************************************************
*** Incident Object Description and Exchange Format XML Schema    ***
***               Version 043,   August 2005                      ***
*********************************************************************
***  Real-time Inter-network Defense - RID XML Schema             ***
***    Namespace - iodef-rid, August 2005                         ***
***    The namespace is defined to support transport of IODEF     ***
***     documents for exchanging incident information.            ***
*********************************************************************
-->
<!--RID acts as an envelope for IODEF documents to support the exchange
    of messages-->
<!--
====== Real-Time Inter-network Defense - RID ======
====  Suggested definition for RID messaging ======
 -->
<xs:annotation>
  <xs:documentation>XML Schema wrapper for IODEF</xs:documentation>
</xs:annotation>
<xs:element name="RID" type="iodef-rid:RIDType"/>
  <xs:complexType name="RIDType">
    <xs:sequence>
       <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:NPPath" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:TraceStatus"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:IncidentSource" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:RIDPolicy"/>
    </xs:sequence>
    <xs:attribute ref="iodef:dtype" use="required"/>
    <xs:attribute name="meaning" type="xs:string"/>
  </xs:complexType>
<!--Path of the RID trace includes information on each NP
        involved in the upstream trace-->
<xs:element name="NPPath" type="iodef-rid:NPPathType"/>


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 48]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


  <xs:complexType name="NPPathType">
    <xs:sequence>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:name" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:RegistryHandle" minOccurs="0"
          maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:Email" minOccurs="0"
          maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:Telephone" minOccurs="0"
          maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:Fax" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:TimeZone" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:NPPath" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
    </xs:sequence>
    <xs:attribute name="restriction" type="xs:NMTOKEN"/>
    <xs:attribute name="NPPath" type="xs:NMTOKEN" use="required"/>
  </xs:complexType>
  <xs:element name="TimeZone"/>
<!--Used in Trace Authorization Message for RID-->
<xs:element name="TraceStatus" type="iodef-rid:TraceStatusType"/>
  <xs:complexType name="TraceStatusType">
    <xs:sequence>
      <xs:element name="AuthorizationStatus" default="Approved">
        <xs:simpleType>
          <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
          <xs:whiteSpace value="collapse"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="Approved"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="Denied"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="Pending"/>
          </xs:restriction>
        </xs:simpleType>
      </xs:element>
    </xs:sequence>
    <xs:attribute name="restriction" type="xs:NMTOKEN"/>
  </xs:complexType>
  <xs:element name="AuthorizationStatus" type="xs:decimal"/>
  <!--Values for the NPPath.type attribute-->
  <xs:attribute name="NPPath" type="xs:NMTOKEN"/>
  <xs:attribute name="vlan-name" type="xs:string"/>
  <xs:attribute name="vlan-num" type="xs:string"/>
<!--Incident Source Information for Result Message-->
<xs:element name="IncidentSource" type="iodef-rid:IncidentSourceType"/>
  <xs:complexType name="IncidentSourceType">
    <xs:sequence>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:SourceFound"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:Node" minOccurs="0"
          maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
    </xs:sequence>
  </xs:complexType>
  <xs:element name="SourceFound" type="xs:boolean"/>
<!--
====== Real-Time Inter-network Defense Policy - RIDPolicy ======
====  Suggested definition for RIDPolicy for messaging    


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 49]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


 -->
<xs:annotation>
 <xs:documentation>RID Policy used in SOAP header for transport of
     messages</xs:documentation>
</xs:annotation>
<!-- RidPolicy information with setting information listed in RID
     documentation -->
<xs:element name="RIDPolicy" type="iodef-rid:RIDPolicyType"/>
  <xs:complexType name="RIDPolicyType">
    <xs:sequence>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:MsgType"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:MsgDestination"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:Node"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:PolicyRegion" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef-rid:TrafficType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xs:element ref="iodef:IncidentID"/>
    </xs:sequence>
    <xs:attribute ref="iodef:dtype" use="required"/>
  </xs:complexType>
  <xs:element name="MsgType" default="Report">
    <xs:simpleType>
      <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
      <xs:whiteSpace value="collapse"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="TraceRequest"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="TraceAuthorization"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Result"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Investigation"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Report"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="IncidentQuery"/>
      </xs:restriction>
    </xs:simpleType>
  </xs:element>
  <xs:element name="MsgDestination" default="RIDSystem">
    <xs:simpleType>
      <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
      <xs:whiteSpace value="collapse"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="RIDSystem"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="SourceOfIncident"/>
      </xs:restriction>
    </xs:simpleType>
  </xs:element>
  <xs:element name="PolicyRegion">
    <xs:simpleType>
      <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
      <xs:whiteSpace value="collapse"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="ClientToNP"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="NPToClient"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="InterConsortium"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="PeerToPeer"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="BetweenConsortiums"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="AcrossNationalBoundaries"/>
      </xs:restriction>


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 50]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    </xs:simpleType>

  </xs:element>
  <xs:element name="TrafficType" default="Attack">
    <xs:simpleType>
      <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
      <xs:whiteSpace value="collapse"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Attack"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Network"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Content"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="OfficialBusiness"/>
        <xs:enumeration value="Other"/>
      </xs:restriction>
    </xs:simpleType>
  </xs:element>
</xs:schema>






































Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 51]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


6. Message Transport

    The transport specifications will be fully defined in a separate
    document.  The specified transport protocols must use encryption to
    provide an additional level of security, integrity, and
    authentication through bi-directional certificate usage.  SOAP [15]
    will be used as a wrapper for the RID messages, then a protocol
    binding will be used for the overlying transport.  Any transport 
    method defined will take advantage of existing standards for ease
    of implementation and integration of RID systems.  Session
    encryption for the transport RID messages will be enforced in the
    transport specification.  The privacy and security considerations
    are addressed fully in RID and do not rely on the security provided
    by the transport layer.  The encryption requirements and
    considerations for RID are discussed in the Security section of
    this document.

    XML security functions such as digital signature and encryption
    provide a standards-based method to encrypt and digitally sign RID
    messages.  RID messages specify system use and privacy guidelines
    through the RIDPolicy class.  Public key infrastructure (PKI)
    provides the base for authentication and authorization, encryption,
    and digital signatures to establish trust relationships between 
    members of a RID consortium or a peering consortium.  

    XML security functions such as the digital signature and encryption
    can be used within the contents of the message for privacy and
    security in cases for which certain elements must remain encrypted
    or signed as they traverse the path of a trace.  For example, the
    digital signature on a TraceRequest can be used to verify the
    identity of the trace originator.  The use of the XML security
    features in RID messaging will be in accordance with the
    specifications for the IODEF model; however, the use requirements
    may differ since RID also incorporates communication of security
    incident information.

6.1 Message Delivery Protocol - Integrity and Authentication

    The RID protocol must be able to guarantee delivery and meet
    the necessary security requirements of a state-of-the-art protocol.
    In order to guarantee delivery, TCP should be considered as the
    underlying protocol within the current network standard practices.

    Security considerations must include the integrity, authentication,
    privacy, and authorization of the messages sent between RID
    communication or NMS systems.  The communication between RID
    systems must be authenticated and encrypted to ensure the integrity
    of the messages and the RID systems involved in the trace.  Another
    concern that needs to be addressed is authentication for a request
    that traverses multiple networks.  In this scenario, systems in the
    path of the multi-hop TraceRequest need to authorize a trace from
    not only their neighbor network, but also from the initiating RID


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 52]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    system as discussed in section 6.3.  Several methods can be used to
    ensure integrity and privacy of the communication.
 
    The transport mechanism selected (HTTPS, S/MIME, BEEP, etc.) may be
    agreed upon by a consortium using RID messaging to ensure
    consistency among the peers.  Consortiums may vary their selected
    transport mechanisms and thus must decide upon a mutual protocol
    to use for transport when communicating with peers in a neighboring
    consortium using RID.  RID systems MUST support HTTPS and
    optionally support other protocols such as S/MIME and BEEP.  RID,
    the XML security functions, and transport protocols must properly
    integrate with a public key infrastructure (PKI) managed by the
    consortium. Consortiums are discussed in the security and privacy
    sections.

6.2 Transport Communication

    Out-of-band communications dedicated to NP interaction for RID
    messaging would provide additional security as well as guaranteed
    bandwidth during a denial-of-service attack.  For example, an
    out-of-band channel may consist of logical paths defined over the
    existing network.  Out-of-band communications may not be possible
    between all network providers, but should be considered to protect
    the network management systems used for RID messaging.

    In order to address the integrity and authenticity of messages,
    transport encryption MUST be used to secure the traffic sent
    between RID systems with pre-defined trust relationships.  Systems
    with predefined relationships for RID would include those who peer
    within a consortium with agreed-upon appropriate use regulations
    and for peering consortiums.

    Systems used to send authenticated RID messages between networks
    MUST use a dedicated and secured interface to connect to a border
    Network's RID systems.  Each connection to a RID system must meet
    the security requirements agreed upon through the consortium
    regulations, peering, or SLAs.  The RID system interface must only
    listen for and send RID messages, which also must be over an
    encrypted tunnel meeting the minimum requirement of algorithms and
    key lengths established by the consortium, peering, or SLA.  The
    selected algorithm must meet minimum security levels of the times;
    3DES or 128-bit AES are sufficient at the time this document was
    written.  The encryption strength must adhere to import and export
    regulations of the involved countries for data exchange.

6.3 Authentication of RID Protocol

    In order to ensure the authenticity of the RID messages, a
    message authentication scheme using a PKI must be inherent to
    the protocol.  SOAP tied together with TLS used with BEEP or
    HTTP(S) using WS-Security requires a trust center such as a PKI
    or Kerberos key distribution center for the distribution of


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 53]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    credentials to provide the necessary levels of security for this
    protocol.  Public key certificate pairs issued by a trusted
    Certificate Authority (CA) will be used to provide the necessary
    level of authentication and encryption for the RID protocol.  The
    CA used for RID messaging must be trusted by all involved parties
    and may take advantage of similar efforts, such as the Internet2
    federated PKI.  The PKI infrastructure used for authentication
    would also provide the necessary certificates needed for encryption
    via either Transport Layer Security (TLS) used in the HTTPS
    protocol, BEEP profile, or Secure MIME (S/MIME).

    Hosts receiving a RID message, such as a TraceRequest, for
    example, must be able to verify that the sender of the request is
    valid and trusted.  Using digital signatures on a hash of the
    RID message with an X.509 version 3 certificate issued by a
    trusted party can be used to authenticate the request.  The X.509
    version 3 specifications as well as the digital signature
    specifications and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Internet
    standards set forth in RFC2459 must be followed in order to
    interoperate with a PKI designed for similar Internet purposes.
    The IODEF specification must be followed for digital signatures to
    provide the authentication and integrity aspects required for
    secure messaging between network providers.  The use of digital
    signatures in RID XML messages MUST follow the World Wide Web
    Consortium (W3C) recommendations for signature syntax and
    processing when either the XML encryption or digital signature is
    used within a document.  Transport specifications will be detailed
    in a separate document.

    An optional extension to the authentication scheme would be to
    incorporate the use of attribute certificates to provide
    authorization capabilities as described in RFC3281.  This may be
    useful as messages are sent from network peers to determine
    authorization levels based on the attribute information in the
    certificate, which could be used to determine priority of a trace
    request.  The attribute information might be used to determine if
    a TraceRequest should be processed automatically or if human
    intervention is required.

6.4 Authentication Considerations for a Multi-hop TraceRequest

    Bilateral trust relations between network providers ensure the
    authenticity of requests for TraceRequests from immediate peers
    in the web of networks formed to provide the traceback
    capability.  A network provider several hops into the path of the
    RID trace must trust the information from its peer as to the
    confidence rating of the attack and the previous trust
    relationships in the downstream path.  In order to provide a
    higher assurance level of the authenticity of the TraceRequest,
    the originating RID system is included in the TraceRequest along
    with contact information and the information of all RID
    systems in the path the trace has taken.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 54]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    A second measure must be taken to ensure the identity of the
    originating RID system.  The originating RID system MUST include
    a digital signature in the TraceRequest sent to all systems in the
    upstream path.  The digital signature from the RID system is
    performed on the RecordItem class of the IODEF following the XML
    digital signature specifications from W3C [22].  The signature
    MUST be passed to all parties that receive a TraceRequest, and each
    party MUST be able to perform full path validation on the digital
    signature.  Full path validation verifies the chaining
    relationship to a trusted root and also performs certificate
    revocation status.  In order to accommodate that requirement, the
    IP packet in the RecordItem data MUST remain unchanged as a
    request is passed along between providers and is the only element
    for which the signature is applied.  A second benefit to this
    requirement is that the integrity of the filter used is ensured as
    it is passed to subsequent NPs in the upstream trace of the packet.
    The trusted PKI used in section 6.3 will also provide the keys
    used to digitally sign the RecordItem class for TraceRequests to
    meet the requirement of authenticating the original request.
    Since the CA is known and trusted by all parties, any host in the
    path of the trace can verify the digital signature.

    In the case in which an enterprise network using RID sends a trace
    request to its provider, the signature from the enterprise
    network must be included in the initial request.  The NP may
    generate a new request to send upstream to members of the NP
    consortium to continue the trace.  If the original request is sent,
    the originating NP, acting on behalf of the enterprise network
    under attack, must also digitally sign the message to assure the
    authenticity of the trace.  An NP that offers RID as a service may
    be using its own PKI to secure RID communications between its
    RID system and the attached enterprise networks.  NPs participating
    in the trace must be able to determine the authenticity of RID
    requests at the NP level.

6.4.1 Public Key Infrastructures and Consortiums

    Consortiums of NPs are an ideal way to establish a communication
    web of trust for RID messaging.  The consortium could provide
    centralized resources, such as a PKI, and established guidelines
    for use of the RID protocol.  The consortium would also assist in
    establishing trust relationships between the participating NPs to
    achieve the necessary level of cooperation and experience-sharing
    among the consortium entities.  The consortium may also be used for
    other purposes to better facilitate communication among NPs in a
    common area (Internet, region, government, education, private
    networks, etc.).  

    Using a PKI to distribute certificates used by RID systems provides
    an already established method to link trust relationships between
    NPs of consortiums that would peer with NPs belonging to a separate
    consortium.  In other words, consortiums could peer with other


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 55]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    consortiums to enable communication of RID messages between the
    participating NPs.  The PKI along with Memorandums of Agreement
    could be used to link border directories to share public key
    information in a bridge, hierarchy, or a single cross-certification
    relationship.

    Consortiums also need to establish guidelines for each
    participating NP to adhere to.  The guidelines MUST include

    O Physical and logical practices to protect RID systems;
    O Network and application layer protection for RID systems and
      communications;
    O Proper use guidelines for RID systems, messages, and requests; and
    O A PKI to provide authentication, integrity, and privacy.

    The functions described for a consortium's role would parallel
    that of a PKI federation.  The PKI federations that currently exist
    are responsible for establishing security guidelines and PKI trust
    models.  The trust models are used to support applications 
    to share information using trusted methods and protocols.

    PKI can also provide the same level of security for communication
    between an end entity (enterprise, educational, government customer
    network) and the NP.  The PKI may be a subordinate CA or in the CA
    hierarchy from the NP's consortium to establish the trust
    relationships necessary as the request is made to other connected
    networks.

6.5 Privacy Concerns and System Use Guidelines

    Privacy issues raise many concerns when information sharing is
    required to achieve the goal of stopping or mitigating the effects
    of a security incident.  The RIDPolicy class is used to automate
    the enforcement of the privacy concerns listed within this
    document.  The privacy and system use concerns that MUST be
    addressed in the RID system and other integrated components
    include the following:

    Network Provider Concerns:

    o Privacy of data monitored and/or stored on IDS for attack
      detection.
    o Privacy of data monitored and stored on systems used to trace
      traffic across a single network.

    Customer attached networks participating in RID with NP:

    O Customer networks may include enterprise, educational, government
      or other attached network to an NP participating in RID and MUST
      be made fully aware of the security and privacy considerations
      for using RID.
    O Customers MUST know the security and privacy considerations in


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 56]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


      place by their NP and the consortium of which the NP is a member.
    O Customers MUST understand that their data can and will be sent to
      other NPs in order to complete a trace unless an agreement
      stating otherwise is made in the service level agreements between
      the customer and NP. 

    Parties Involved in the Attack:

    o Privacy of the identity of a host involved in an attack.
    o Privacy of information such as the source and destination used
      for communication purposes over the monitored or RID connected
      network(s).
    o Protection of data from being viewed by intermediate parties
      in the path of a Investigation request MUST be considered.

    Consortium Considerations:

    o System use restricted to security incident handling within the
      local region's definitions of appropriate traffic for the network
      monitored and linked via RID in a single consortium also abiding
      by the consortiums use guidelines.
    o System use prohibiting the consortiums participating NPs from
      inappropriately tracing non-attack traffic to locate sources or
      mitigate traffic unlawfully within the jurisdiction or region.

    Inter-consortium Considerations:

    o System use between peering consortiums MUST also adhere to any
      government communication regulations that apply between those two
      regions, such as encryption export and import restrictions.
    o System use between consortiums MUST not request traffic traces
      and actions beyond the scope intended and permitted by law or
      inter-consortium agreements.
    o System use between consortiums MUST respect national boundary
      issues and limit requests to appropriate system use and not to
      achieve their own agenda to limit or restrict traffic that is
      otherwise permitted within the country in which the peering
      consortium resides.

    RID is useful in determining the true source of a packet that
    traverses multiple networks or to communicate security incidents
    and automate the response.

    In order to identify the source and trace multiple networks, the
    packet header information along with 8 bytes of payload are used in
    the packet identification.  The information obtained from the trace
    may determine the identity of the source host or the network
    provider used by the source of the traffic.  It should be noted
    that the trace mechanism used across a single-network provider may
    also raise privacy concerns for the clients of the network.
    Methods that may raise concern include those which involve storing
    packets for some length of time in order to trace packets after the


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 57]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    fact.  Monitoring networks for intrusions and for tracing
    capabilities also raises concerns for potentially sensitive valid
    traffic that may be traversing the monitored network.  IDS and
    single-network tracing is outside of the scope of this document,
    but the concern should be noted and addressed within the use
    guidelines of the network.  Some IDS and single-network trace
    mechanisms attempt to properly address these issues.  RID is
    designed to provide the information needed by any single-network
    trace mechanism.  The provider's choice of a single trace mechanism
    depends on resources, existing solutions, and local legislation.
    Privacy concerns in regard to the single-network trace must be
    dealt with at the client-to-network provide level and are out of
    scope for RID messaging.

    The identity of the true source of an attack packet being traced
    through RID could be sensitive.  The true identity listed in a
    Result message can be protected through the use of encryption
    on the fields containing the identity, using the public encryption
    key for the originating NP.  Alternatively, the action taken may be
    listed without the identity being revealed to the originating NP.
    The ultimate goal of the RID communication system is to stop or
    mitigate attack traffic, not to ensure the identity of the attack
    traffic is known to involved parties.  The NP that identifies the
    source needs to deal directly with the involved parties and proper
    authorities in order to determine the guidelines for the release of
    such information, if it is regarded as sensitive.  In some
    situations, systems used in attacks are compromised by an unknown
    source and, in turn, are used to attack other systems.  In that
    situation, the reputation of a business or organization may be at
    stake, and the action taken may be the only additional information
    reported in the Result message to the originating system.  If
    the security incident is a minor incident, such as a zombie system
    used in part of a large-scale DDoS attack, ensuring the system is
    taken off the network until it has been fixed may be sufficient.
    The textual descriptions should include details of the incident in
    order to protect the reputation of the unknowing attacker and
    prevent the need for additional investigation.  Local, state, or
    national laws may dictate the appropriate reporting action for
    specific security incidents.

    Privacy becomes an issue whenever sensitive data traverses a
    network.  For example, if an attack occurred between a specific
    source and destination, then every network provider in the path of
    the trace would become aware that the cyber attack occurred.  In a
    targeted attack, it may not be desirable for the information that
    two nation states are battling a cyber war to become general
    knowledge to all intermediate parties.  However, it is important to
    allow the traces to take place in order to halt the activity since
    the health of the networks in the path could also be at stake
    during the attack.  This provides a second argument for allowing
    the Result message to only include an action taken and not
    the identity of the offending host.  In the case of an Investigation


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 58]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    request, where the originating NP is aware of the NP that will
    receive the request for processing, the free-form text areas of the
    document could be encrypted using the public key of the destination
    NP to ensure that no other NP in the path can read the contents.
    The encryption would be accomplished through the W3C specifications
    for encrypting an element.

    In some situations, all network traffic of a nation may be granted
    through a single network provider.  In that situation, options must
    support sending Result messages from a downstream peer of
    that network provider.  That option provides an additional level of
    abstraction to hide the identity and the NP of the identified
    source of the traffic.  Legal action may override this technical
    decision after the trace has taken place, but that is out of the
    technical scope of this document.

    Privacy concerns when using an Investigation Request to request
    action close to the source of valid attack traffic needs to be
    considered.  Although the intermediate NPs relay the request to the
    closest NP to the source, the intermediate NPs do not require the
    ability to see the contents of the packet or the text description
    field(s) in the request.  This message type does not require any
    action by the intermediate RID systems, except to relay the packet
    to the next NP in the path.  Therefore, the contents of the request
    may be encrypted.  The intermediate NPs would only need to know how
    to direct the request to the manager of the AS number in which the
    source IP address belongs. 

    Traces must be legitimate security-related incidents and not used
    for purposes such as sabotage or censorship.  An example of such
    abuse of the system would include a request to block or rate-limit
    legitimate traffic to prevent information from being shared between
    users on the Internet (restricting access to online versions of
    papers) or restricting access from a competitor's product in order
    to sabotage a business.

    Inter-consortium RID communications raise additional issues
    especially when the peering consortiums reside in different
    regions or nations.  TraceRequests and requested actions to
    mitigate traffic must adhere to the appropriate use guidelines and
    yet prevent abuse of the system.  First, the peering consortiums
    MUST identify the types of traffic that can be traced between the
    borders of the participating NPs of each consortium.  The traffic
    traced should be limited to security incident-related traffic.
    Second, the traces permitted within one consortium if passed to a
    peering consortium may infringe upon the peering consortium's
    freedom of information laws.  An example would be a consortium in
    one country permitting a trace of traffic containing objectionable
    material, outlawed within that country.  The RID trace may be a
    valid use of the system within the confines of that country's
    network border; however, it may not be permitted to continue across
    network boundaries where such content is permitted under law.  By


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 59]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    continuing the trace in another country's network, the trace and
    response could have the effect of improperly restricting access to
    data.  A continued trace into a second country may break the laws
    and regulations of that nation.  Any such traces MUST cease at the
    country's border.
 
    The privacy concerns listed in this section have addressed issues
    of privacy among the trusted parties involved in a trace within an
    NP, a RID consortium, and peering RID consortiums.  Data
    used for RID communications must also be protected from parties
    that are not trusted.  This protection is provided through the
    authentication and encryption of documents as they traverse the
    path of trusted servers.  Each RID system MUST perform a
    bi-directional authentication when sending a RID message and use
    the public encryption key of the upstream or downstream peer to
    send a message or document over the network.  This means that the
    document is decrypted and re-encrypted at each RID system either
    via S/MIME or TLS over BEEP or HTTPS.  The RID messages must be
    decrypted at each RID system in order to properly process the
    request or relay the information.  Today's processing power is more
    than sufficient to handle the minimal burden of encrypting and
    decrypting relatively small typical RID messages.

7. Security Considerations

    Communication between NPs' RID systems must be protected.  An out-
    of-band network, either logical or physical, would prevent outside
    attacks against RID communication.  An out-of-band connection
    would be ideal, but not necessarily practical.  Authenticated
    encrypted tunnels between RID systems MUST be used to provide
    confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, and privacy for the data.
    Trust relationships are based on consortiums and established trust 
    relationships of PKI cross certifications of consortiums.  By using
    SOAP, RIDPolicy information, Transport Layer Security (TLS), and 
    the XML security features of encryption and digital signatures,
    RID takes advantage of existing security standards.  The standards
    provide clear methods to ensure messages are secure, authenticated,
    authorized, meet policy and privacy guidelines, and maintain
    integrity. 

    As specified in the relevant sections of this document, the XML
    digital signature and XML encryption are used in the following
    cases:

    XML Digital Signature
      O Originator of the Trace or Investigation Request MUST sign the
        RecordItem class data to provide authentication to all
        upstream participants in the trace of the origin.  This
        signature MUST be passed to all recipients of the TraceRequest.
      O For all message types, the full RID message MUST be signed by
        the sending peer to provide authentication and integrity to the
        receiving RID system.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 60]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    XML Encryption
      O The entire message may be encrypted to provide an extra layer
        of security between peers so that the message is not only

        encrypted for the transport, but also while stored.  This
        behavior would be agreed upon between peers or a consortium, or
        determined on a per message basis based on security
        requirements.  The RIDPolicy class will be presented in clear
        text in the SOAP header.
      O An Investigation request, or any other message type that may be
        relayed through RID systems other than the intended destination
        as a result of trust relationships, may be encrypted for the
        intended recipient.  This may be necessary if the RID network
        is being used for message transfer, the intermediate parties
        do not need to have knowledge of the request contents, and a
        direct communication path does not exist.  In that case, the
        RIDPolicy class is used by intermediate parties and is
        maintained in the SOAP header in clear text.
      O The action taken in the Result message may be encrypted
        using the key of the request originator.  In that case, the
        intermediate parties can view the RIDPolicy information and
        know the trace has been completed and do not need to see the
        action.  If the use of encryption were limited to sections of
        the message, the History class information would be
        encrypted.  Otherwise, the entire message, with the exception
        of the RIDPolicy information and incident identifier, could be
        encrypted for the originator of the request.  The existence
        of the Result message for an incident would tell the
        intermediate parties used in the path of the trace that the
        incident trace has been completed.

    Policies between NPs must be established to provide guidelines for
    communication.  The policy should include communication methods, 
    security, and fall-back procedures.  The policy should establish a
    method to protect communications of RID systems between all
    bordering NPs.  The trust relationships should extend to all
    bordering NPs to support tracing and stopping attacks throughout
    the network.  A fully meshed communication ability would provide
    the means for all RID messages to be sent directly to the intended
    RID system.  If a fully meshed communication system is
    not available, messages may have to traverse multiple systems to
    reach the intended RID system.  Other policy considerations
    include how the RegistryHandle and RID system IP address should be
    shared.  This should also be coupled with any necessary pre-shared
    key or certificate (or trusted Security Authority) stored in the
    RID system for encryption negotiation where PKI is in use.

    Note: The contact information and corresponding IP address for a
    network RID system is shared among cooperating networks via
    a predefined table.  This information may be stored locally in RID
    systems or a central database accessible on the secured network
    used for inter-NP messaging.  The repository can also be used as


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 61]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    the border directory to other consortiums for sharing public key
    information necessary to establish and protect communications. 

    The method of passing a TraceRequest message to subsequent
    networks eliminates the need for granting access to remote
    entities to configure network equipment on border networks.  Access
    to network equipment to configure systems for trace continuance
    remains in the responsibility of the parties who own and manage
    that equipment.  Thus, there is no need to share authentication
    information with devices outside of the network operation center
    managing the device.  Network administrators, who have the ability
    to base the decision on the available resources and other factors
    of their network, maintain control of the continuance of a trace.

8. Summary

    Security incidents and denial-of-service attacks have always been
    difficult to trace as a result of the spoofed sources, resource
    limitations, and bandwidth utilization problems.  Incident response
    is often slow even when the IP address is known to be valid because
    of the resources required to notify the responsible party of the
    attack and then to stop or mitigate the attack traffic.  Methods to
    identify and trace attacks near real time are essential to
    thwarting attack attempts.  Network providers need policies and
    automated methods to combat the hacker's efforts. NPs need
    automated monitoring and response capabilities to identify and
    trace attacks quickly without resource-intensive side effects.
    Integration with a centralized communication system to coordinate
    the detection, tracing, and identification of attack sources on a
    single network is essential.  RID provides a way to integrate a
    network provider's resources for each aspect of attack detection,
    tracing, and source identification and extends the communication
    capabilities among network providers.  The communication is
    accomplished through the use of flexible IODEF XML-based documents
    that may originate on an IDS system wrapped in a RID message. A
    TraceRequest or Investigation request is communicated to an
    upstream provider and may result in an upstream trace or in an
    action to stop or mitigate the attack traffic.  The messages are
    communicated among peers with security inherent to the RID
    messaging scheme provided through existing standards such as XML
    encryption and digital signatures.  Policy information is carried
    in the RID message itself through the use of the RIDPolicy.  RID
    provides the timely communication among NPs, which is essential for
    incident handling.










Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 62]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


9. References

    [ISO 9594/8] CCITT Rec. X.509 (1994) | ISO/IEC 9594-8:1994,
    Information Technology - Open Systems Interconnection  The
    Directory: Authentication Framework

    [RFC791] "Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program, Protocol
    Specification." Information Sciences Institute, University of
    Southern California. September 1981.

    [RFC1213] "Management Information Base for Network Management of
    TCP/IP-based Internets: MIB-II." K. McCloghrie and M . Rose. March
    1991.

    [RFC1215] "A Convention for Defining Traps for use with the SNMP."
    M. Rose. March 1991.

    [RFC1930] "Guidelines for creation, selection, and registration of
    an Autonomous System (AS)." J. Hawkinson and T. Bates. March 1996.

    [RFC2246] "The TLS Protocol." T. Dierks and C. Allen. 
    January 1999.

    [RFC2256] "A Summary of the X.500(96) User Schema for use with
    LDAPv3." M. Wahl. December 1997.

    [RFC2459] "Internet Public Key Infrastructure: Part I: X.509 
    Certificate and CRL Profile." R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and
    D. Solo. January 1999.

    [RFC2527] "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate
    Policy and Certification Practices Framework." S. Chokhani and
    W. Ford.  March 1999.

    [RFC2528] "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: 
    Representation of Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA) Keys in Internet
    X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificates." R. Housley and
    W. Polk. March 1999.

    [RFC2720] "Traffic Flow Measurement: Meter MIB." N. Brownlee.
    October 1999.

    [RFC2722]"Traffic Flow Measurement:  Architecture." N. Brownlee, C.
    Mills, and G. Ruth. October 1999.

    [RFC2723] "SRL: A Language for Describing Traffic Flows and
    Specifying Actions for Flow Groups." N. Brownlee. October 1999.

    [RFC2827] "Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating Denial of Service
    Attacks Which Employ IP Source Address Spoofing." P. Ferguson and
    D. Senie. May 2000.



Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 63]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    [RFC3821] "An Internet Attribute Certificate Profile for
    Authorization." S. Farrell and R. Housley. April 2002.

    [RFCXXXX] The Incident Data Exchange Format Data Model and XML
    Implementation. J. Meijer, R. Danyliw, and Y. Demchenko. 
    September 2003.  
    http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-inch-iodef-03.txt 

    [1] Advanced and Authenticated Marking Schemes for IP Traceback.
    D. Song and A. Perrig. IEEE INFOCOM 2001.

    [2] Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Algoritms, and Source Code
    B.C. Schneier. Second edition. John Wiley & Sons. 1996.

    [3] "CenterTrack: An IP Overlay Network for Tracing DoS Floods."
    R. Stone. 9th Usenix Security Symposium Proceedings. August
    2000.

    [4] Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition). W3C
    Recommendation. T. Bray, E. Maler, J. Paoli, and C. M. Sperberg-
    McQueen. October 2000. 
    http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/REC-xml-20001006

    [5] http://www.cisco.com/go/netflow

    [6] http://www.info-sec.com/denial/infosece.html-ssi

    [7] "Hash Based IP Traceback." A. Snoren, L. Sanchez, C. Jones,
    F. Tchakountio, S. Kent, and W. Strayer. SIGCOMM'01. August 2001.

    [8] "ICMP Traceback Messages." S. M. Bellovin, M. Leech, and
    T. Taylor. Internet Draft:
    http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/03mar/I-D/draft-ietf-itrace-04.txt
    February 2003.

    [9] "Inferring Internet Denial of Service Activity." D. Moore,
    G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage.  Published in Proceedings
    of the 2001 USENIX Security Symposium.

    [10] "MULTOPS: A Data-Structure For Bandwidth Attack Detection."
    T. M. Gil and M. Poletta.  Published in Proceedings of
    the 2001 USENIX Security Symposium.

    [11] "Network Congestion Monitoring and Detection using the IMI
    infrastructure." T. Saitoh, G. Mansfield, and N.Shiratori.  
    Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University.

    [12] PKCS 5 v2.0 Password-Based Cryptography Standard. RSA Security
    http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-5/index.html.
    March 1999.

    [13] PKCS 7 Cryptographic Message Syntax Standard. RSA Security. 


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 64]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


    http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-7/index.html.
    May 1997.

    [14] "Practical Network support for IP Traceback." S. Savage, 
    D. Wetherall, A. Karlin, and T. Anderson. SIGCOMM'00. August 2000.

    [15] Security Architecture for Open Agent Systems. Vrije
    Universiteit. Y. Demchenko, B. Overiender, and H. M. Boonstra.
    http://carol.science.uva.nl/~demch/worksinprogress/
    draft-saas-paper03.pdf


    [16] "Security in a Web Services World: A Proposed Architecture
    and Roadmap." IBM and Microsoft. April 2002. 
    http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/webservices/library/ws-secmap

    [17] SOAP Version 1.2 Part 0: Primer.  W3C Recommendation.
    http://www.w3c.org/TR/REC-soap12-part0-20030624/. 24 June 2004.

    [18] SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1:Messaging Framework.  W3C
    Recommendation. http://www.w3c.org/TR/REC-soap12-part1-20030624/.
    24 June 2004.

    [19] "Trends in Denial of Service Attack Technology." K. Houle,
    G. Weaver, N. Long, and R. Thomas.  CERT Coordination Center. 
    October 2001.

    [20] XML Encryption Syntax and Processing, W3C Recommendation.
    T. Imamura, B. Dillaway, and E. Simon. December 2002.

    http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlenc-core/

    [21] XML Schema. E. Van der Vlist. OReilly. 2002.

    [22] XML-Signature Syntax and Processing. W3C Recommendation.
    M. Bartel, J. Boyer, B. Fox, B. LaMacchia, and E. Simon. February
    2002. http://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core/#sec-Design.  

















Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 65]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


9.1 Acknowledgements

    Many thanks to coworkers and the Internet community for reviewing
    and commenting on the draft as well as providing recommendations to
    simplify and secure the protocol: Dr. Robert K. Cunningham, Cynthia
    D. McLain, Dr. William Streilein, Iljitsch van Beijnum, Steve
    Bellovin, Yuri Demchenko, Jean-Francois Morfin, Jose Nazaro,
    Stephen Northcutt, Jeffrey Schiller, Brian Trammell, Roman Danyliw,
    and Tony Tauber.

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.
 

9.2 Author Information

    Kathleen M. Moriarty
    MIT Lincoln Laboratory
    244 Wood Street
    Lexington, MA 02420
    Phone: 781-981-5500
    Email: Moriarty@ll.mit.edu

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information

   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 66]
Internet-Draft                                        September 19, 2005


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Sponsor Information

    This work was sponsored by the Air Force under Air Force 
    Contract Number FA8721-05-C-0002.

    "Opinions, interpretations, conclusions, and recommendations
     are those of the author and are not necessarily endorsed
     by the United States Government." 




























Moriarty                Expires: March 19, 2006                [Page 67]
