



Network Working Group                                      K. O'Donoghue
Internet-Draft                                             IETF NOC Team
Intended status: Informational                             June 24, 2019
Expires: December 26, 2019


                   IETF Meeting Network Requirements
                      draft-odonoghue-netrqmts-00

Abstract

   The IETF Meeting Network has become integral to the success of any
   physical IETF meeting.  Building such a network, which provides
   service to thousands of heavy users and their multitude of devices,
   spread throughout the event venue, with very little time for setup
   and testing is a challenge.  This document provides a set of
   requirements, derived from hard won experience, as an aid to anyone
   involved in designing and deploying such future networks.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 26, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  External Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Meeting Facility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Internal Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Terminal Room or equivalent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Wireless  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Network Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  Miscellaneous Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   12. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   13. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   The IETF Meeting Network has grown and evolved over time as has the
   IETF overall.  In addition, the way that the IETF network is build
   and provisioned has also changed.  It is time for the IETF community
   to consider the requirements of this infrastructure and its role in
   supporting the mission of the IETF.  This document is meant to help
   frame that conversation.  Additionally, this document may eventually
   be developed to be useful to others outside the IETF in specifying
   and building their own successful event networks.

   This document is currently being revised as part of an IETF community
   discussion on the network requirements for the IETF meeting network.
   Version -00 represents the requirements as articulated the last time
   these requirements was documented by the IETF NOC Team
   (https://www.ietf.org/how/meetings/admin/meeting-network-
   requirements/).  The current draft plan is to update to a -01 that
   represents the requirements the IETF NOC Team currently builds to.
   Versions beyond that will represent input received from the
   community.  A final version of this document may or may not be
   published depending on the desires of the IETF community and the
   potential usefulness of a document of this sort outside the scope of
   the IETF.







O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


1.1.  Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

2.  External Connectivity

   o  A primary and backup link MUST be provided for redundancy.  If
      technically feasible, these links SHOULD be aggregated or load
      balanced.

   o  The primary link MUST provide at least 45Mb bandwidth in both
      directions, and SHOULD have at least 100Mb bidirectionally.
      (Note: Historically, bandwidth utilization peaked at 80Mb and
      averaged 35Mb.

   o  Recent events have peaked at 50 Mbs and averaged in the 25Mb
      range.)  The backup link MUST have 10 Mb bandwidth in both
      directions and SHOULD have at least 45 Mb bandwidth in both
      directions.

   o  The backup link SHOULD be supplied by a different Internet service
      provider from the primary link.

   o  The primary and backup links SHOULD have physical and logical path
      diversity.

   o  IPv6 MUST be provided (possibly via a tunnel).

   o  The transit provided in support of the IETF MUST be capable of
      providing access to the IPv4 and IPv6 default free zones without
      the imposition of content filtering (e.g., URL, Site, application,
      port, or DPI based filtering).

   o  The primary link MUST support BGP peering, and the backup link
      SHOULD support BGP peering.

   o  Routing MAY be configured to allow the simultaneous usage of the
      bandwidth of both the primary and backup links.

   o  Access to research networks, like those that are part of Internet
      2, MAY be provided on one of the external links.

   o  AS Numbers MAY be supplied by the network provider.  If not, the
      network provider MUST use the AS Numbers provided by IETF.




O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   o  The network provider MUST provide at least a /19 of provider
      independent public IPv4 space or allow the IETF to advertise their
      own space.

   o  The network provider MUST provide at least a /32 of LIR public
      IPv6 space or allow the IETF to advertise their own space.

   o  If providing access space, the network provider MUST provide
      proper IP address delegation for DNS reverse lookups.

3.  Meeting Facility

   o  The facility SHOULD have as much physical separation as possible
      in the meeting room area to improve the RF environment.  In
      addition, the facility SHOULD avoid using airwalls and other
      partitions with low RF attenuation in the 2.4Mhz spectrum between
      meeting rooms.

   o  The facility SHOULD provide a RF environment in all meeting rooms
      (as identified by the Secretariat), common gathering spaces around
      the meeting rooms, the registration area, and the terminal room
      that has a reasonable noise floor in the 2.4Mhz spectrum.

   o  The meeting facility SHOULD have installed network cabling that
      can be used to deploy the network infrastructure.

   o  The meeting facility SHOULD provide the network installation team
      with 24 hour access to key telecom spaces.  The meeting facility
      MUST provide the network installation team with access to key
      telecom spaces from one hour prior to the beginning of sessions to
      one hour after the end of sessions and 9am to 5pm daily during the
      setup period.

   o  All locations for network gear, with the exception of wireless
      APs, MUST be secure.

   o  If wireless will be used for an external link then access to the
      roof or installed location MUST be provided.

   o  The meeting facility MUST have adequate ventilation to support the
      equipment rooms and the terminal room.

   o  The meeting facility MUST have adequate power available to support
      the equipment required to support the network infrastructure and
      its users.  This may include 110v/220v requirements in technical
      closets, roof locations, and various public and back-of-the-house
      areas.




O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   o  The meeting facility The meeting facility SHOULD have UPS power
      available to support key network infrastructure components,
      including at least the core routers, core switches, and hardware
      to maintain the external links.

   o  The meeting facility MUST provide sufficient power in all meeting
      rooms to handle the projected load from users' laptops, using 100%
      congruency between the projected number of attendees in each
      meeting room and the number of laptop users and projecting 70
      watts of power usage per laptop.

4.  Internal Network

   o  Wired Ethernet connections (network drops) MUST be provided in all
      the locations used for meeting room audio distribution for the
      purposes of audio recording and transmission.

   o  Wired network drops MUST be provided to the registration desk.

   o  The network SHOULD have separate VLANS for wired (primarily
      terminal room and audio) and wireless traffic.

   o  The network MUST NOT prohibit end-to-end and external connectivity
      for any traffic (no limiting firewalls or NATs).

   o  The network SHOULD have mechanisms for detecting and silencing
      rogue servers (DHCP, IPv6 RA's, etc)

5.  Terminal Room or equivalent

   o  Terminal Room or equivalent A terminal room MUST be provided.
      This terminal room MAY be a single room or distributed sites in
      reasonable proximity to the meeting rooms.

   o  The terminal room MUST provide Ethernet 10/100 connectivity with
      RJ-45 connectors (approximately 100-150 drops required). (note:
      this number should be revised based on terminal room usage
      statistics)

   o  The terminal room SHOULD provide a small number of desktop or
      laptop computers for emergency use by attendees (minimum
      application requirements are web browsing, word processing,
      presentation production, and printing capability).

   o  The terminal room SHOULD have 24 hour access.  This access SHOULD
      include security, but it MAY not include a 24 hour staffed help
      desk.




O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   o  The IETF users MUST have access to the terminal room from one hour
      prior to the beginning of sessions to one hour after the end of
      sessions.

   o  The terminal room MUST provide at least two network connected
      enterprise class printers.  These printers SHOULD have duplex
      capability.

   o  A color printer MAY be provided.

   o  The terminal room MUST have a manned help desk from one hour prior
      to the beginning of sessions to one hour after the end of
      sessions.  The help desk provides technical assistance to
      attendees, provides one potential interface to the trouble ticket
      system (see next requirement), and maintains the printers.

   o  The network supplier SHOULD provide a trouble ticket system to
      track attendee network issues.  This trouble ticket system SHOULD
      be accessible to the help desk staff in addition to NOC staff.

   o  Power strips MUST be provided in the terminal room.

   o  Power strips MAY be provided in common gathering areas
      (desirable).

   o  The terminal room MUST have physical security (guards) during
      operating hours.

6.  Wireless

   o  The network MUST provide 802.11b coverage in all meeting rooms (as
      identified by the Secretariat), common gathering spaces around the
      meeting rooms, the registration area, and the terminal room.

   o  The network SHOULD provide 802.11b coverage in additional common
      spaces in the meeting venue.  The lobby, bar, restaurant, and most
      commonly used hallways of the primary meeting hotels, SHOULD also
      be provide 802.11b access.

   o  The network SHOULD provide 802.11g in all the spaces identified
      above.

   o  The network SHOULD provide 802.11a coverage in as many of the
      above identified spaces as possible focusing on the spaces with
      the highest user density first (e.g. plenary meeting room).

   o  The network design MUST anticipate 100% congruency between the
      projected number of attendees in each meeting room and the number



O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


      of wireless network users (historical utilization in excess of
      1000 simultaneous wireless users has been observed during a
      plenary session).

   o  The network SHOULD provide separate SSIDs for 802.11b and 802.11a
      networks.

   o  The network MUST provide fully open (unsecured) wireless access.

   o  The network MAY provide additional secured (WEP, 802.11i, WPA)
      wireless access.

   o  There SHOULD be mechanisms for identifying and silencing rogue
      Wireless Access Points.

7.  Services

   o  The network MUST provide redundant DHCPv4 servers.

   o  The network SHOULD provide DHCPv6 service.

   o  The network MUST provide local redundant DNS servers.

   o  The network SHOULD provide NTP.

   o  Printers MUST support IPP and SHOULD support LPR and Windows
      printing.

   o  The network MUST provide a SMTP server providing relay services
      for the IETF network.

   o  The network SHOULD provide a full on-site mirror of the RFC and
      I-D directories.

8.  Network Monitoring

   o  The network MUST provide sufficient monitoring to ensure adequate
      network availability and to detect faults before they impact the
      user experience.

   o  The network SHOULD provide some visibility into the state of the
      network for attendees (e.g. public graphs of network utilization,
      number of wireless associations, etc.).

   o  The network MUST collect data for future use in scaling IETF
      meeting network requirements.  Minimum required metrics include
      bandwidth utilization (average and peak) for each external
      connection and user density per AP and radio.



O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   o  The network provider SHOULD provide SNMP read-only access to the
      network devices to individuals as identified by the Secretariat
      for network management and planning purposes.

9.  Miscellaneous Requirements

   o  The network provider SHOULD maintain spares of critical network
      components on-site.

   o  Attendees SHOULD be notified of power connector requirements well
      in advance of the meeting via both the IETF meeting web page and
      the IETF- announce mailing list.

   o  A document MUST be provided to attendees detailing on-site network
      configuration information, including wireless configuration
      details, services available (e.g. printing, SMTP), instructions on
      how to report network issues (e.g. trouble ticket system interface
      instructions), etc.  Initial versions of this information SHOULD
      be provided in advance of the meeting.

   o  The network provider MUST NOT view the IETF network as an
      experimental facility at the risk of impacting the IETF attendee
      experience.  (Do not experiment with his/her favorite pet
      technology.)

   o  The network provider SHOULD have attended at least one prior IETF
      to observe the IETF network deployment and operation.

   o  The network provider SHOULD supply the IETF network design to an
      IETF technical review team for comments.

10.  Security Considerations

   While security is clearly important to the design and delivery of the
   IETF meeting network.  Draft -00 represents the information captured
   on the original 2009 version.  Security requirements (and
   considerations) will be more clearly addressed in subsequent versions
   of this draft.

11.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.

12.  Acknowledgements

   These requirements are born out of the pain and experience of past
   NOC teams including hosts, volunteers, and network staff.  All errors
   and misstatements are the responsibility of the current author.



O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         June 2019


   Contributors noted in the original 2009 version of this document are
   (in no particular order):

   o  Jim Martin

   o  Karen O'Donoghue

   o  Chris Elliott

   o  Joel Jaeggli

   o  Lucy Lynch

   o  Bill "wej' Jensen

   o  Chris Liljenstoipe

   o  Bill Fenner

   o  Hans Kuhn

   Additional contributions including the current NOC Team will be added
   in subsequent versions of this draft.

   Finally, the author is submitting this draft as an individual to help
   facilitate a conversation and as a long time volunteer member of the
   IETF NOC Team.  This draft does not represent any official position
   of the Internet Society, her current employer.

13.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Author's Address

   Karen O'Donoghue
   IETF NOC Team

   Email: kodonog@pobox.com











O'Donoghue              Expires December 26, 2019               [Page 9]
