
Internet Research Task Force                        Olivier Bonaventure
INTERNET DRAFT                                                UCLouvain

		                                            March, 2007
                                                Expires September, 2007


            Reconsidering the Internet Routing Architecture
                <draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt>

Status of this Memo



   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2007.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).


Abstract

   We first summarize several of the assumptions of the current
   interdomain routing architecture. Then we evaluate several
   alternatives interdomain routing architecture and discuss their



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 1]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   potential benefits.  Concerning the solutions based on an id/locator
   separation, we highlight several important requirements.

1.  Introduction

   The current growth of the BGP routing tables [Hus01]  and Forwarding
   Information bases (FIB) on core routers worries several operators and
   vendors [MZF07].  Another issue is the growth of the number of BGP
   messages that need to be processed by BGP  routers [HA06]. This is
   not the first time that the Internet is confronted with such
   problems. The most successful solution has been the introduction of
   Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) [FLYV93]. Other solutions such
   as using the DNS to aid routing [Hui92]  were proposed, but not
   implemented. CIDR allowed to significantly reduce  the growth rate of
   the BGP routing tables until a few years ago. Today, CIDR is not
   sufficient anymore due to the growth of multihomed stub ASes [ACK03,
   Hus01].
     This work in progress document is divided in two parts. In section
   2, we first discuss several of the implicit assumptions of the
   current interdomain routing architecture. Then, in section 3, we
   discuss several alternatives to these assumptions and highlight some
   design choices.

2. Assumptions

   In this section, we discuss several of the implicit assumptions of
   the current interdomain routing architecture and their implications.

 2.1  IANA-based address allocation


   For many years, the IP addresses have been manually assigned.  IANA
   or the regional registries maintain a pool of IP addresses and
   allocate the IP addresses in two flavors :


    - Provider Independent (PI) address
    - Provider Aggregatable (PA) address

   The IANA-based manual address allocation has been extended to the
   providers receiving PA addresses. Those providers also maintain a
   registry and manually, or partially manually, allocate sub prefixes
   in their PA space. When a network receives a prefix from IANA, a
   regional registry or its provider, its network operators manually
   assign addresses from the received prefix to their routers and
   servers. The only place where the Internet managed to  achieve
   automatic allocation of addresses is the endsystem with the success
   of  DHCP and auto-configuration. Due to the large number of places



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 2]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   where IP addresses are manually configured or specified, renumbering
   the IP addresses of a network is a difficult problem [CR96, BFLN96].
   The available  renumbering techniques [BLD05, Ber97] are complex and
   cannot be fully  automated.

 2.2  An IP address is both a locator and an identifier

   Since the beginning of the Internet, an IP address has been
   associated to a single layer-2 interface. Thus, the IP address serves
   as a locator.
    Unfortunately, an IP address also serves as an identifier.  It is
   only recently that standardised solutions have been  proposed to
   allow the transport layer to work more independently from the network
   layer [SXM+00]. There is also ongoing work to support multiple
   locators below the transport layer [MN06, NB06].

 2.3  ASes are visible entities in the interdomain routing system


   The current interdomain routing system is used to distribute
   prefixes, but it assumes that each prefix belongs to one Autonomous
   System. An AS is defined as ‘‘a set of routers under a single
   technical administration coherent interior routing plan, and presents
   a consistent picture of the
    destinations that are reachable through it’’ in [RLH06].

   Mechanisms have been added to the interdomain routing system to allow
   an AS to aggregate several prefixes received from its peers before
   announcing a larger IP prefix [CS99], but those mechanisms are not
   aggressively  used by ISPs. The large number of multihomed stubs
   [Hus01] is one of the reasons for the limited usage of aggregation.

   The utilisation of the AS-Path as a loop avoidance mechanism in the
   BGP  protocol has increased the reliance on the ASes in the current
   interdomain  routing system. AS-Paths have been used for other
   purposes such as inferring the interdomain topology [SARK02].

 2.4  Interdomain routing convergence


   When a link fails, the interdomain routing protocol needs to converge
   to let the entire Internet know an alternate path to reach the
   destinations affected by the failure. The convergence of the
   interdomain routing system has been relatively slow in the past
   [LABJ00]. Recent measurements show that interdomain routing
   convergence remains relatively slow [WMW+06].

 2.5  Traffic engineering



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 3]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   The interdomain routing system was designed to support a best-effort
   service by allowing each participating router to advertise one path
   towards each destination prefix modulo its routing policies. However,
   due to congestion, routing policies, traffic storms and other issues,
   operators have tweaked the interdomain routing protocol and used it
   to redirect traffic flows to achieve load balancing and other traffic
   engineering objectives.

 2.6  Security is not a strong concern


   When the interdomain routing architecture was designed, few
   researchers  considered security issues or misconfiguration problems.
   The evolution of the Internet has shown that misconfiguration are
   common events  [MWA02] and attacks have become a stronger concern
   recently [Mur06, ND04].

3  Alternative Interdomain Routing Architecture

   In this section, we evaluate several alternatives to the current
   interdomain routing architecture and discuss their potential
   benefits.  We try to favour simplicity whenever possible with the aim
   of reducing the size of the routers’ FIB and the number of BGP update
   messages while still allowing the support of added value services
   such as fast convergence or traffic engineering.

 3.1  Separating locators and identifiers


   The separation between locator and identifier functions of IP
   addresses has  been proposed to solve several problems of the current
   Internet architecture.

   There is debate currently on whether the locators should identify
   routers/middleboxes (e.g. LISP, proxy-shim6, ...) or endsystems (e.g.
   shim6, HIP).  We believe that it is too early to choose. Both have
   advantages and drawbacks when considering both long term and short
   term issues. A new  interdomain routing architecture should not
   dictate the exact placement of  locators. It should allow the
   architecture to evolve from host-attached to middlebox attached
   locators and the opposite.

   In some cases, e.g. a single endsystem attached to two different
   providers,  a host-based solution would be natural. However, in
   enterprise networks,  requiring each endsystem to implement a complex
   protocol may not be the best  solution, especially since the network
   managers often want to control the flow  of the packets for traffic
   engineering purposes.



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 4]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


 3.2  Automatic allocation of locators


   When CIDR was proposed, it was successful in reducing the growth rate
   of the  BGP  routing tables by allowing ISPs to better aggregate the
   prefixes that they  advertise [Hus01].  Unfortunately, this success
   did not continue, mainly due to two  factors :

    1. the growth of multihoming forced ISPs to advertise more and more
      more specific prefixes, which increased the size of the FIBs and
   the
      number of BGP Update messages [HA06]
    2. there is a pressure from enterprise networks to use PI address
   space
      because IP address renumbering is considered too costly

   Despite all the work done on renumbering IP addresses [CR96, Cra00,
   BLD05], enterprise networks are still reluctant to renumber their IP
   addresses when their provider changes.

   The renumbering problem, given all the existing manual configurations
   of addresses will always remain a difficult problem. If the Internet
   moves towards the utilisation of locators, we should not redo the
   same error and start immediately to work on the development of a
   protocol/mechanism to automatically allocate locators. If there is a
   mechanism in place to automatically allocate locators, then it will
   be easier for a network to change them when required.

   Let us briefly describe a possible way to solve this problem. When a
   client network is attached to a provider network, a protocol should
   be used by the provider network to announce to the client network the
   prefix that the client network should use. This protocol could be a
   new BGP AFI or could be a new protocol relying on certificates such
   as the certificates being defined by the SIDR working group. With
   such certificates, when the customer signs a contracts with its
   provider, its receives a certificate signed by the provider and valid
   for the duration of the contract. When the client presents a valid
   certificate to its provider over a BGP peering, the provider replies
   with a certificate containing the locator prefix allocated to the
   client network. Then, a mechanism should be used inside the client
   network to distribute the received prefix. This mechanism should also
   allow the network to allocate sub-prefixes to its own customers. It
   should be possible for a network to indicate to its customers a list
   of allocated sub-prefixes with orders of preference. It should also
   be possible for an ISP to remove (or mark as unusable) a previously
   allocated locator prefix.

   Of course, automatic allocation of locators is not sufficient to



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 5]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   maintain low FIB sizes. The key issue to reduce the size of the FIBs
   is to be able to  efficiently aggregate locators. To achieve this
   aggregation, multiple  locator prefixes will be allocated to each
   customer network. Using multiple locators inside a single customer
   network provide several benefits in terms of path diversity [dQB05].
   Provider Aggregatable Locators (PAL) should be the default for stub
   ASes. Provider Independent Locators (PIL) would be the default for
   Tier-1 ISPs. For smaller ISPs, either PA or PI locators could be
   used.  We believe that in the long term the benefits of PA locators
   will encourage small transit ISPs to also utilise such locators.

 3.3  Removing ASes from the interdomain routing system


   The main objective of the interdomain routing system is the
   distribution of locators. When redesigning the interdomain routing
   system, we should not assume that ASes necessarily need to be visible
   entities exposed by the interdomain routing protocol. The visibility
   of the ASes is an artifact of today’s path-vector based interdomain
   routing. Path vectors have been introduced in BGP to avoid loops, but
   they cause path exploration and are responsible for a fraction of the
   exchanged BGP messages [OZP+06]. Alternative interdomain routing
   protocols have been proposed and should be explored [SCE+05].

 3.4  Interdomain routing convergence


   Link failures are common events that affect both internal links
   inside ASes and peering links between ASes [BFF05].  Studies
   published in the literature show that many link failures last for a
   short period of time [MIB+04, BFF05].  Inside ASes, the success of
   MPLS-based restoration local  techniques [VPD04]  has shown that it
   is better to react locally instead of reacting globally.  Solutions
   have been proposed to protect peering links [BFF05] in transit and
   stub ASes.  and other IP-based solutions are being developed by IETF
   to protect intradomain links [SB06].

   With the current BGP interdomain routing protocol, two timer-based
   techniques have been introduced to reduce the amount of BGP messages
   exchanged after a topology change. The MRAI timer allows to wait some
   time for an iBGP convergence before advertising update messages over
   eBGP sessions. The BGP dampening process was a reaction to link
   flaps, but it is not anymore favoured by operators since it has a
   negative impact on the BGP convergence time [MGVK02].

   We believe that the interdomain routing system should follow the same
   approach to handle link failures as for links inside ISP networks.
   Instead of potentially advertising globally each link failure,  the



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 6]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   interdomain routing system should always favour a local reaction :

    - local restoration provides a faster recovery upon peering link
      failure without requiring a complete convergence [BFF05]
    - as many ASes are multiconnected, there is often a backup link
   between
      the two concerned ASes that allows to maintain the reachability of
      the affected locators
    - if a failure lasts for a long period, then instead of advertising
   the
      failure in the interdomain routing system, it should be possible
   to
      deprecate the locator allocated over the failed link

   The last bullet implies that the locator allocation mechanism should
   support the removal or the deprecation of a previously assigned set
   of locators. When there is a single unprotected link between a
   provider and a customer network, the failure of this link implies
   that the locators assigned to the customer network are no longer
   reachable. Upon detection of the failure, the router attached to the
   peering link in the provider network will send ICMP locator
   unreachable messages upon reception of a packet destined to the
   customer network. Upon  reception of such messages the correspondent
   ASes should consult the mapping mechanism to determine a new locator
   to reach the concerned identifiers. The customer network should
   handle the failure by updating its id-locator  mapping to indicate
   that the locators assigned by the provider attached to the failed
   peering link are not reachable anymore. This will ensure that new
   flows established by remote networks will not use the failed locator
   anymore.


 3.5  Traffic engineering

   Traffic engineering is often a requirement for both transit and stub
   ASes [ACE+02]. In the current interdomain routing system, traffic
   engineering is often done by tweaking the BGP advertisements
   [QUP+03].  However, we would like to point out that there are
   different types of traffic engineering activities, such as :

    - selecting the path with the lowest delay to reach a given
   destination

    - selecting the path with the highest bandwidth to reach a given
      destination
    - forcing outgoing packets to use a given peering link
    - forcing incoming packets to use a given peering link




Bonaventure                                                     [Page 7]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   With a locator-id split, the traffic engineering problem can be
   solved at  different levels. The first level is the mapping mechanism
   that will be used to map identifiers to locators. This mechanism
   should allow to map an identifier to a set of locators, possibly with
   a preference ordering. The entity that controls such a mapping
   mechanism, can easily use it for traffic  engineering purposes. This
   solution can work as demonstrated by the success and deployment of
   Content Distribution Networks today. We believe that  tuning the
   mapping mechanism is the most efficient and the most scalable way to
   allow networks to engineer their incoming packet flows. When an
   entity selects a locator to reach a given identifier among the
   various locators proposed by the mapping mechanism, it can also
   engineer its outgoing traffic by performing this selection. For
   example, in a shim6 context, we have shown how to perform such
   traffic engineering to achieve load-balancing [dBL03] or favour low-
   delay paths  [dUB05].

   The mapping mechanism offers much better flexibility for the traffic
   engineering decisions than the interdomain routing protocol. Thus,
   the mapping mechanism should be the preferred way to perform traffic
   engineering actions and the interdomain routing should remain as
   static as possible.


4  Conclusion


     In this work-in-progress document, we have discussed several
   requirements for a new interdomain routing architecture relying on
   the locator-id split. Our key findings can be summarised as follows :

    - The new interdomain architecture should not dictate the exact
      placement of locators. It should allow both host- and router-
   attached
      locators.

    - The new interdomain architecture must support the automatic
      allocation of locators.

    - ASes should not necessarily be visible entities in the interdomain
      routing system.

    - Fast convergence should not be a requirement for the interdomain
      routing protocol of the new architecture. Local restoration
      mechanisms should be favoured to handle link failures.

    - The identifier-locator mapping mechanism should be able to support
      traffic engineering without any impact on the interdomain routing



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 8]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


      protocol.


Acknowledgements


   We would like to thank Pierre François, Bruno Quoitin, Luigi Iannone
   and Clarence Filsfils for many fruitful discussions on this topic.

   Olivier Bonaventure is partially funded by AGAVE (http://www.ist-
   agave.org ), a research project supported by the European Commission
   under its Sixth Framework Program. The views and conclusions
   contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
   interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or
   endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the AGAVE project or
   the European Commission.

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

References

    [ACE+02]  D. Awduche, A. Chiu, A. Elwalid, I. Widjaja, and X. Xiao.
      Overview and Principles of Internet Traffic Engineering. RFC 3272
      (Informational), May 2002.
    [ACK03]  S. Agarwal, C. Chuah, and R. Katz. OPCA: Robust Interdomain
      Policy Rrouting and Traffic  Control. In Proceedings of the 6th
      International Conference on Open  Architecture and Network
      Programming, IEEE OpenArch, April 2003.
    [Ber97]  H. Berkowitz. Router Renumbering Guide. RFC 2072
      (Informational), January 1997. Updated by RFC 4192.
    [BFF05]  O. Bonaventure, C. Filsfils, and P. Francois. Achieving sub-50
      milliseconds recovery upon BGP peering link  failures. In Co-Next
      2005, Toulouse, France, October 2005.
    [BFLN96]  H. Berkowitz, P. Ferguson, W. Leland, and P. Nesser.
      Enterprise Renumbering: Experience and Information Solicitation. RFC
      1916 (Informational), February 1996.
    [BLD05]  F. Baker, E. Lear, and R. Droms. Procedures for Renumbering an
      IPv6 Network without a Flag Day. RFC 4192 (Informational), September
      2005.
    [CR96]  B. Carpenter and Y. Rekhter. Renumbering Needs Work. RFC 1900
      (Informational), February 1996.
    [Cra00]  M. Crawford. Router Renumbering for IPv6. RFC 2894 (Proposed
      Standard), August 2000.
    [CS99]  E. Chen and J. Stewart. A Framework for Inter-Domain Route
      Aggregation. RFC 2519 (Informational), February 1999.
    [dBL03]  C. de Launois, O. Bonaventure, and M. Lobelle. The NAROS
      approach for IPv6 multihoming with traffic engineering. In 4th COST



Bonaventure                                                     [Page 9]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


      263 International Workshop on Quality of Future  Internet Services
      (QoFIS 2003), volume LNCS 2811, pages 112--121, Stockholm,  Sweden,
      October 1-3rd 2003. Springer-Verlag.
    [dQB05]  C. de Launois, B. Quoitin, and O. Bonaventure. Leveraging
      network performances with IPv6 multihoming and multiple
      provider-dependent aggregatable prefixes. In 3rd International
      Workshop on QoS in Multiservice IP Networks  (QoSIP 2005), Catania,
      Italy, February 2-4th 2005.
    [dUB05]  C. de Launois, S. Uhlig, and O. Bonaventure. Scalable route
      selection for IPv6 multihomed sites. In Proceedings of Networking
      2005, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada,  May 2-6th 2005.
    [FLYV93]  V. Fuller, T. Li, J. Yu, and K. Varadhan. Classless
      Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and  Aggregation
      Strategy. RFC 1519 (Proposed Standard), September 1993. Obsoleted by
      RFC 4632.
    [HA06]  G. Huston and G. Armitage. "projecting future ipv4 router
      requirements from trends in dynamic  bgp behaviour". In Australian
      Telecommunication Networks and Applications  Conference (ATNAC),
      2006.
    [Hui92]  C. Huitema. An Experiment in DNS Based IP Routing. RFC 1383
      (Experimental), December 1992.
    [Hus01]  G. Huston. Analyzing the internet’s BGP routing table.
      Internet Protocol Journal, 4(1), 2001.
    [LABJ00]  C. Labovitz, A. Ahuja, A. Bose, and F. Jahanian. An
      experimental study of internet routing convergence. In SIGCOMM 2000,
      August 2000.
    [MGVK02]  Z. M. Mao, R. Govindan, G. Varghese, and R. Katz. Route flap
      damping exacerbates internet routing convergence. In ACM
      SIGCOMM’2002, 2002.
    [MIB+04]  A. Markopoulou, G. Iannaccone, S. Bhattacharyya, C. Chuah,
      and C. Diot. Characterization of failures in an IP backbone. In IEEE
      Infocom2004, Hong Kong, March 2004.
    [MN06]  R. Moskowitz and P. Nikander. Host Identity Protocol (HIP)
      Architecture. RFC 4423 (Informational), May 2006.
    [Mur06]  S. Murphy. BGP Security Vulnerabilities Analysis. RFC 4272
      (Informational), January 2006.
    [MWA02]  R. Mahajan, D. Wetherall, and T. Anderson. Understanding BGP
      misconfigurations. In ACM SIGCOMM 2002, August 2002.
    [MZF07]  D. Meyer, L. Zhang, and K. Fall. "report from the iab workshop
      on routing and addressing". Internet draft,
      draft-iab-raws-report-01.txt, work in progress,  February 2007.
    [NB06]  E. Nordmark and M. Bagnulo. Level 3 multihoming shim protocol.
      Internet draft draft-ietf-shim6-proto-07.txt, work in progress, Nov
      2006.
    [ND04]  Ola Nordstrom and Constantinos Dovrolis. Beware of bgp attacks.
      SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 34(2):1--8, 2004.
    [OZP+06]  R. Oliveira, B. Zhanf, D. Pei, R. Izhak-Ratzin, and L.
      Zhang. Quantifying path exploration in the internet. In Internet



Bonaventure                                                    [Page 10]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


      Measurement Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,  October 2006.
    [QUP+03]  B. Quoitin, S. Uhlig, C. Pelsser, L. Swinnen, and O.
      Bonaventure. Interdomain traffic engineering with BGP. IEEE
      Communications Magazine, May 2003.
    [RLH06]  Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares. A Border Gateway Protocol 4
      (BGP-4). RFC 4271 (Draft Standard), January 2006.
    [SARK02]  L. Subramanian, S. Agarwal, J. Rexford, and R. Katz.
      Characterizing the Internet Hierarchy from Multiple Vantage  Points.
      In INFOCOM 2002, June 2002.
    [SB06]  M. Shand and S. Bryant. IP Fast Reroute Framework. Internet
      draft, draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework-06.txt, work in  progress,
      October 2006.
    [SCE+05]  L. Subramanian, M. Caesar, C. T. Ee, M. Handley, M. Mao, S.
      Shenker, and  I. Stoica. Hlp: a next generation inter-domain routing
      protocol. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 35(4):13--24, 2005.
    [SXM+00]  R. Stewart, Q. Xie, K. Morneault, C. Sharp, H. Schwarzbauer,
      T. Taylor,  I. Rytina, M. Kalla, L. Zhang, and V. Paxson. Stream
      Control Transmission Protocol. RFC 2960 (Proposed Standard), October
      2000. Updated by RFC 3309.
    [VPD04]  J.-P. Vasseur, M. Pickavet, and P. Demeester. Network
      Recovery: Protection and Restoration of Optical,  SONET-SDH, and
      MPLS. Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
    [WMW+06]  F. Wang, Z. Mao, J. Wang, L. Gao, and R. Bush. A measurement
      study on the impact of routing events on end-to-end  Internet path
      performance. In ACM SIGCOMM, pages 375--387, Pisa, Italy, September
      2006.

Authors Addresses

   Olivier Bonaventure
   Universite catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain)
   Belgium
   Email: FirstName.LastName@uclouvain.be
   URL  : http://www.info.ucl.ac.be/~obo/

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF



Bonaventure                                                    [Page 11]

draft-bonaventure-irtf-rrg-rira-00.txt       March 2007


   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).




















Bonaventure                                                    [Page 12]

