



Network Working Group                                       I. Learmonth
Internet-Draft                                          Uni. of Aberdeen
Expires: February 12, 2015                               August 11, 2014


    An Internet Message Header For Providing Hackerspace Affiliation
                              Information
                 draft-learmonth-hackerspace-header-00

Abstract

   This memo presents a new Internet message header that allows the
   sender of Internet messages to provide hackerspace affiliation
   information to the recipients.  Recipients of Internet messages can
   use this header to look up the hackerspace affiliation of the sender
   of the message.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 12, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Learmonth               Expires February 12, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Hackerspace: Internet Message Header       August 2014


1.  Introduction

   A hackerspace is a community-operated workspace where people with
   common interests, often in computers, machining, technology, science,
   digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize and/or
   collaborate.  Hackerspaces, like a lot of other Internet communities,
   perform a lot of their communication on Internet mailing lists.  Some
   hackers may subscribe to the mailing lists of other hackerspaces, or
   communicate on Internet mailing lists for discussion between
   hackerspaces on a regional, national or global level.  It can be
   helpful for hackers to identify to which hackerspace other hackers
   they are communicating with are affiliated.

   [RFC1036] defines an Organization: header which contains "a short
   phrase describing the organization to which the sender belongs".
   [RFC2076] notes that this header was never standardised for use in
   e-mail but only in USENET messages.  Some MUAs still have implemented
   this header however.

   If the Organization: header were to be used, it would be more
   suitable for it to contain a reference to the sender's employer or
   school than the sender's hackerspace.  The header's text is also
   unstructured and does not lean itself to being read by machines.

   This memo presents a new Internet message header that allows the
   sender of Internet messages to provide hackerspace affiliation
   information to the recipients of the message in a machine-readable
   format.

2.  Hackerspace: header

   The header's text is built from the name of the hackerspace and the
   URL of the hackerspace's home page as described below.

   hackerspace = "Hackerspace" ":" SP space-name SP "<" space-url ">"
   space-name = string
   space-url = http_URL

   http_URL is defined in [RFC2616].

   The Hackerspace: header MAY be added to Internet messages by those
   affiliated with a hackerspace.  MUAs MAY optionally only add the
   header when sending messages to hackerspace-related recipients.








Learmonth               Expires February 12, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Hackerspace: Internet Message Header       August 2014


3.  IANA Considerations

   A new entry is requested in the Permanent Message Header Field Names
   [TO BE REMOVED: This registry can be found at: http://www.iana.org/
   assignments/message-headers/message-headers.xhtml] registry
   maintained by IANA.  The header field name requested is "Hackerspace"
   and it is applicable to the protocol "mail".

4.  Security Considerations

   Privacy issues may arise as, being a header, most encryption schemes
   for Internet mail will not encrypt the text.

   When a message is recieved with a Hackerspace: header, it should not
   be implicitly trusted as it may have been incorrectly defined by the
   sender.

5.  References

   [RFC1036]  Horton, M. and R. Adams, "Standard for interchange of
              USENET messages", RFC 1036, December 1987.

   [RFC2076]  Palme, J., "Common Internet Message Headers", RFC 2076,
              February 1997.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

Appendix A.  Example usage with mutt

   The first of the following .muttrc statements will add a Hackerspace:
   header to outgoing mails showing an affiliation with 57North Hacklab
   and the second statement will unhide the Hackerspace: header when
   viewing emails in the mutt pager.

   my_hdr Hackerspace: 57North Hacklab <http://57north.co/>
   unignore hackerspace

Author's Address











Learmonth               Expires February 12, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Hackerspace: Internet Message Header       August 2014


   Iain R. Learmonth
   University of Aberdeen
   School of Engineering
   Kings College
   Aberdeen  AB24 3UE
   Scotland

   Email: irl@fsfe.org











































Learmonth               Expires February 12, 2015               [Page 4]
