



DOTS                                                            T. Reddy
Internet-Draft                                                    McAfee
Intended status: Standards Track                            M. Boucadair
Expires: January 6, 2020                                          Orange
                                                                E. Doron
                                                            Radware Ltd.
                                                            July 5, 2019


  Distributed Denial-of-Service Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Telemetry
                     draft-reddy-dots-telemetry-00

Abstract

   This document aims to enrich DOTS signal channel protocol with
   various telemetry attributes allowing optimal DDoS attack mitigation.
   This document specifies the normal traffic baseline and attack
   traffic telemetry attributes a DOTS client can convey to its DOTS
   server in the mitigation request, the mitigation status telemetry
   attributes a DOTS server can communicate to a DOTS client, and the
   mitigation efficacy telemetry attributes a DOTS client can
   communicate to a DOTS server.  The telemetry attributes can assist
   the mitigator to choose the DDoS mitigation techniques and perform
   optimal DDoS attack mitigation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  DOTS Telemetry: Overview & Purpose  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  DOTS Telemetry Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Pre-mitigation DOTS Telemetry Attributes  . . . . . . . .   8
       4.1.1.  Total Traffic Normal Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       4.1.2.  Total Pipe Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1.3.  Total Attack Traffic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1.4.  Total Traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1.5.  Attack Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  DOTS Client to Server Mitigation Efficacy DOTS Telemetry
           Attributes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.2.1.  Total Attack Traffic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.2.2.  Attack Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.3.  DOTS Server to Client Mitigation Status DOTS Telemetry
           Attributes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.3.1.  Mitigation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5.  DOTS Telemetry YANG Module  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.1.  Tree Structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  YANG Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.1.  DOTS Signal Channel CBOR Mappings Registry  . . . . . . .  11
     6.2.  DOTS Signal Telemetry YANG Module . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   The Internet security 'battle' between the adversary and security
   countermeasures is an everlasting one.  DDoS attacks have become more
   vicious and sophisticated in almost all aspects of their maneuvers
   and malevolent intentions.  IT organizations and service providers



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   are facing DDoS attacks that fall into two broad categories: Network/
   Transport layer attacks and Application layer attacks.  Network/
   Transport layer attacks target the victim's infrastructure.  These
   attacks are not necessarily aimed at taking down the actual delivered
   services, but rather to eliminate various network elements (routers,
   switches, firewalls, transit links, and so on) from serving
   legitimate user traffic.  The main method of such attacks is to send
   a large volume or high PPS of traffic toward the victim's
   infrastructure.  Typically, attack volumes may vary from a few 100
   Mbps/PPS to 100s of Gbps or even Tbps.  Attacks are commonly carried
   out leveraging botnets and attack reflectors for amplification
   attacks, such as NTP, DNS, SNMP, SSDP, and so on.  Application layer
   attacks target various applications.  Typical examples include
   attacks against HTTP/HTTPS, DNS, SIP, SMTP, and so on.  However, all
   valid applications with their port numbers open at network edges can
   be attractive attack targets.  Application layer attacks are
   considered more complex and hard to categorize, therefore harder to
   detect and mitigate efficiently.

   To compound the problem, attackers also leverage multi-vectored
   attacks.  These merciless attacks are assembled from dynamic attack
   vectors (Network/Application) and tactics.  As such, multiple attack
   vectors formed by multiple attack types and volumes are launched
   simultaneously towards a victim.  Multi-vector attacks are harder to
   detect and defend.  Multiple and simultaneous mitigation techniques
   are needed to defeat such attack campaigns.  It is also common for
   attackers to change attack vectors right after a successful
   mitigation, burdening their opponents with changing their defense
   methods.

   The ultimate conclusion derived from these real scenarios is that
   modern attacks detection and mitigation are most certainly
   complicated and highly convoluted tasks.  They demand a comprehensive
   knowledge of the attack attributes, the targeted normal behavior/
   traffic patterns, as well as the attacker's on-going and past
   actions.  Even more challenging, retrieving all the analytics needed
   for detecting these attacks is not simple to obtain with the
   industry's current capabilities.

   The DOTS signal channel protocol [I-D.ietf-dots-signal-channel] is
   used to carry information about a network resource or a network (or a
   part thereof) that is under a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
   attack.  Such information is sent by a DOTS client to one or multiple
   DOTS servers so that appropriate mitigation actions are undertaken on
   traffic deemed suspicious.  Various use cases are discussed in
   [I-D.ietf-dots-use-cases].





Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   Typically, DOTS clients can be integrated within a DDoS attack
   detector, or network and security elements that have been actively
   engaged with ongoing attacks.  The DOTS client mitigation environment
   determines that it is no longer possible or practical for it to
   handle these attacks.  This can be due to lack of resources or
   security capabilities, as derived from the complexities and the
   intensity of these attacks.  In this circumstance, the DOTS client
   has invaluable knowledge about the actual attacks that need to be
   handled by the DOTS server.  By enabling the DOTS client to share
   this comprehensive knowledge of an ongoing attack under specific
   circumstances, the DOTS server can drastically increase its abilities
   to accomplish successful mitigation.  While the attack is being
   handled by the DOTS server associated mitigation resources, the DOTS
   server has the knowledge about the ongoing attack mitigation.  The
   DOTS server can share this information with the DOTS client so that
   the client can better assess and evaluate the actual mitigation
   realized.

   In some deployments, DOTS clients can send mitigation hints derived
   from attack details to DOTS servers, with the full understanding that
   the DOTS server may ignore mitigation hints, as described in
   [RFC8612] (Gen-004).  Mitigation hints will be transmitted across the
   DOTS signal channel, as the data channel may not be functional during
   an attack.  How a DOTS server is handling normal and attack traffic
   attributes, and mitigation hints is implementation-specific.

   Both DOTS client and server can benefit this information by
   presenting various information in relevant management, reporting, and
   portal systems.

   This document defines DOTS telemetry attributes the DOTS client can
   convey to the DOTS server, and vice versa.  The DOTS telemetry
   attributes are not mandatory fields.  Nevertheless, when DOTS
   telemetry attributes are available to a DOTS agent, and absent any
   policy, it can signal the attributes in order to optimize the overall
   mitigation service provisioned using DOTS.  Some of the DOTS
   telemetry data are not shared during an attack time.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119][RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The reader should be familiar with the terms defined in [RFC8612].




Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   "DOTS Telemetry" is defined as the collection of attributes that are
   used to characterize normal traffic baseline, attacks and their
   mitigation measures, and any related information that may help in
   enforcing countermeasures.  The DOTS Telemetry is an optional set of
   attributes that can be signaled in the DOTS signal channel protocol.

   The meaning of the symbols in YANG tree diagrams is defined in
   [RFC8340].

3.  DOTS Telemetry: Overview & Purpose

   When signaling a mitigation request, it is most certainly beneficial
   for the DOTS client to signal to the DOTS server any knowledge
   regarding ongoing attacks.  This can happen in cases where DOTS
   clients are asking the DOTS server for support in defending against
   attacks that they have already detected and/or mitigated.  These
   actions taken by DOTS clients are referred to as "signaling the DOTS
   Telemetry".

   If attacks are already detected and categorized by the DOTS client
   domain, the DOTS server, and its associated mitigation services, can
   proactively benefit this information and optimize the overall service
   delivered.  It is important to note that DOTS client and server
   detection and mitigation approaches can be different, and can
   potentially outcome different results and attack classifications.
   The DDoS mitigation service treats the ongoing attack details from
   the client as hints and cannot completely rely or trust the attack
   details conveyed by the DOTS client.

   A basic requirement of security operation teams is to be aware and
   get visibility into the attacks they need to handle.  The DOTS server
   security operation teams benefit from the DOTS telemetry, especially
   from the reports of ongoing attacks.  Even if some mitigation can be
   automated, operational teams can use the DOTS telemetry to be
   prepared for attack mitigation and to assign the correct resources
   (operation staff, networking and mitigation) for the specific
   service.  Similarly, security operation personnel at the DOTS client
   side ask for feedback about their requests for protection.
   Therefore, it is valuable for the DOTS server to share DOTS telemetry
   with the DOTS client.  Thus mutual sharing of information is crucial
   for "closing the mitigation loop" between the DOTS client and server.
   For the server side team, it is important to realize that the same
   attacks that the DOTS server's mitigation resources are seeing are
   those that the DOTS client is asking to mitigate.  For the DOTS
   client side team, it is important to realize that the DOTS clients
   receive the required service.  For example: understanding that "I
   asked for mitigation of two attacks and my DOTS server detects and
   mitigates only one...".  Cases of inconsistency in attack



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 5]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   classification between DOTS client and server can be high-lighted,
   and maybe handled, using the DOTS telemetry attributes.

   In addition, management and orchestration systems, at both DOTS
   client and server sides, can potentially use DOTS telemetry as a
   feedback to automate various control and management activities
   derived from ongoing information signaled.

   If the DOTS server's mitigation resources have the capabilities to
   facilitate the DOTS telemetry, the DOTS server adopts its protection
   strategy and activates the required countermeasures immediately
   (automation enabled).  The overall results of this adoption are
   optimized attack mitigation decisions and actions.

   The DOTS telemetry can also be used to tune the DDoS mitigators with
   the correct state of the attack.  During the last few years, DDoS
   attack detection technologies have evolved from threshold-based
   detection (that is, cases when all or specific parts of traffic cross
   a pre-defined threshold for a certain period of time is considered as
   an attack) to an "anomaly detection" approach.  In anomaly detection,
   the main idea is to maintain rigorous learning of "normal" behavior
   and where an "anomaly" (or an attack) is identified and categorized
   based on the knowledge about the normal behavior and a deviation from
   this normal behavior.  Machine learning approaches are used such that
   the actual "traffic thresholds" are "automatically calculated" by
   learning the protected entity normal traffic behavior during peace
   time.  The normal traffic characterization learned is referred to as
   the "normal traffic baseline".  An attack is detected when the
   victim's actual traffic is deviating from this normal baseline.

   In addition, subsequent activities toward mitigating an attack are
   much more challenging.  The ability to distinguish legitimate traffic
   from attacker traffic on a per packet basis is complex.  This
   complexity originates from the fact that the packet itself may look
   "legitimate" and no attack signature can be identified.  The anomaly
   can be identified only after detailed statistical analysis.  DDoS
   attack mitigators use the normal baseline during the mitigation of an
   attack to identify and categorize the expected appearance of a
   specific traffic pattern.  Particularly the mitigators use the normal
   baseline to recognize the "level of normality" needs to be achieved
   during the various mitigation process.

   Normal baseline calculation is performed based on continuous learning
   of the normal behavior of the protected entities.  The minimum
   learning period varies from hours to days and even weeks, depending
   on the protected application behavior.  The baseline cannot be
   learned during active attacks because attack conditions do not
   characterize the protected entities' normal behavior.



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 6]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   If the DOTS client has calculated the normal baseline of its
   protected entities, signaling this attribute to the DOTS server along
   with the attack traffic levels is significantly valuable.  The DOTS
   server benefits from this telemetry by tuning its mitigation
   resources with the DOTS client's normal baseline.  The DOTS server
   mitigators use the baseline to familiarize themselves with the attack
   victim's normal behavior and target the baseline as the level of
   normality they need to achieve.  Consequently, the overall mitigation
   performances obtained are dramatically improved in terms of time to
   mitigate, accuracy, false-negative, false-positive, and other
   measures.

   Mitigation of attacks without having certain knowledge of normal
   traffic can be inaccurate at best.  This is especially true for
   recursive signaling (see Section 3.2.3 in [I-D.ietf-dots-use-cases]).
   In addition, the highly diverse types of use-cases where DOTS clients
   are integrated also emphasize the need for knowledge of client
   behavior.  Consequently, common global thresholds for attack
   detection practically cannot be realized.  Each DOTS client can have
   its own levels of traffic and normal behavior.  Without facilitating
   normal baseline signaling, it may be very difficult for DOTS servers
   in some cases to detect and mitigate the attacks accurately.  It is
   important to emphasize that it is practically impossible for the
   server's mitigators to calculate the normal baseline, in cases they
   do not have any knowledge of the traffic beforehand.  In addition,
   baseline learning requires a period of time that cannot be afforded
   during active attack.  Of course, this information can provided using
   out-of-band mechanisms or manual configuration at the risk to
   maintain inaccurate information as the network evolves and "normal"
   patterns change.  The use of a dynamic and collaborative means
   between the DOTS client and server to identify and share key
   parameters for the sake of efficient DDoS protect is valuable.

   During a high volume attack, DOTS client pipes can be totally
   saturated.  The DOTS client asks the DOTS server to handle the attack
   upstream so that DOTS client pipes return to a reasonable load level
   (normal pattern, ideally).  At this point, it is essential to ensure
   that the DOTS server does not overwhelm the DOTS client pipes by
   sending back "clean traffic", or what it believes is "clean".  This
   can happen when the server has not managed to detect and mitigate all
   the attacks launched towards the client.  In this case, it can be
   valuable to clients to signal to server the "Total pipe capacity",
   which is the level of traffic the clients can absorb from the
   upstream server.  Dynamic updating of the condition of pipes between
   DOTS agents while they are under a DDoS attack is essential.  For
   example, for cases of multiple DOTS clients share the same physical
   connectivity pipes.  It is important to note, that the term "pipe"
   noted here does not necessary represent physical pipe, but rather



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 7]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   represents the current level of traffic client can observe from
   server.  The server should activate other mechanisms to ensure it
   does not saturate the client's pipes unintentionally.  The rate-limit
   action defined in [I-D.ietf-dots-data-channel] can be a reasonable
   candidate to achieve this objective; the client can ask for the type
   of traffic (such as ICMP, UDP, TCP port 80) it prefers to limit.

   To summarize, timely and effective signaling of up-to-date DOTS
   telemetry to all elements involved in the mitigation process is
   essential and absolutely improves the overall service effectiveness.
   Bi-directional feedback between DOTS agents is required for the
   increased awareness of each party, supporting superior and highly
   efficient attack mitigation service.

4.  DOTS Telemetry Attributes

   This section outlines the set of DOTS telemetry attributes.  The
   ultimate objective of these attributes is to allow for the complete
   knowledge of attacks and the various particulars that can best
   characterize attacks.

   The description and motivation behind each attribute were presented
   in Section 3.  DOTS telemetry attributes are optionally signaled and
   therefore MUST NOT be treated as mandatory fields in the DOTS signal
   channel protocol.

4.1.  Pre-mitigation DOTS Telemetry Attributes

   The following pre-mitigation telemetry attributes can be signaled
   from the DOTS client to the DOTS server.

   o  DISCUSSION NOTES: (1) Some telemetry can be communicated using
      DOTS data channel. (2) Evaluate the risk of fragmentation, or (3)
      check if we can define a dedicated URI for telemetry (e.g.: use
      ./telemetry).  Some of the information is not specific to each
      mitigation request.

4.1.1.  Total Traffic Normal Baseline

   The low percentile (10th percentile), mid percentile (50th
   percentile), high percentile (90th percentile) and peak values of
   "Total traffic normal baselines" measured in kilobytes per second or
   megabytes per second or gigabytes per second.








Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 8]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


4.1.2.  Total Pipe Capability

   The limit of traffic volume, in kilobytes per second or megabytes per
   second or gigabytes per second.  This attribute represents the DOTS
   client domain pipe limit.

   o  NOTE: Multi-homing case to be considered.

4.1.3.  Total Attack Traffic

   The low percentile (10th percentile), mid percentile (50th
   percentile), high percentile (90th percentile) and peak values of
   total attack traffic measured in kilobytes per second or megabytes
   per second or gigabytes per second.

4.1.4.  Total Traffic

   The low percentile (10th percentile), mid percentile (50th
   percentile), high percentile (90th percentile) and peak values of
   total traffic during a DDoS attack measured in kilobytes per second
   or megabytes per second gigabytes per second.

4.1.5.  Attack Details

   Various information and details that describe the on-going attacks
   that needs to be mitigated by the DOTS server.  The attack details
   need to cover well-known and common attacks (such as a SYN Flood)
   along with new emerging or vendor-specific attacks.  The following
   fields describing the on-going attack are discussed:

   vendor-id:  Vendor ID is a security vendor's Enterprise Number as
      registered with IANA [Enterprise-Numbers].  It is a four-byte
      integer value.

      This is a mandatory sub-attribute.

   attack-id:  Unique identifier assigned by the vendor for the attack.

      This is a mandatory sub-attribute.

   attack-name:  Textual representation of attack description.  Natural
      Language Processing (e.g., word embedding) can possibly be used to
      map the attack description to an attack type.  Textual
      representation of attack solves two problems (a) avoids the need
      to create mapping tables manually between vendors (2) Avoids the
      need to standardize attack types which keep evolving.

      This is a mandatory sub-attribute



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020                [Page 9]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


   attack-severity:  Attack severity.  Emergency (0), critical (1) and
      alert (2).

      This is an optional sub-attribute

4.2.  DOTS Client to Server Mitigation Efficacy DOTS Telemetry
      Attributes

   The mitigation efficacy telemetry attributes can be signaled from the
   DOTS client to the DOTS server as part of the periodic mitigation
   efficacy updates to the server.

4.2.1.  Total Attack Traffic

   The low percentile (10th percentile), mid percentile (50th
   percentile), high percentile (90th percentile) and peak values of
   total attack traffic the DOTS client still sees during the active
   mitigation service measured in kilobytes per second or megabytes per
   second or gigabytes per second.

4.2.2.  Attack Details

   The overall attack details as observed from the DOTS client
   perspective during the active mitigation service.  The same
   attributes defined in Section 4.1.5 are applicable here.

4.3.  DOTS Server to Client Mitigation Status DOTS Telemetry Attributes

   The mitigation status telemetry attributes can be signaled from the
   DOTS server to the DOTS client as part of the periodic mitigation
   status update.

4.3.1.  Mitigation Status

   As defined in [RFC8612], the actual mitigation activities can include
   several countermeasure mechanisms.  The DOTS server SHOULD signal the
   current operational status to each relevant countermeasure.  A list
   of attacks detected by each countermeasure.  The same attributes
   defined for Section 4.1.5 are applicable here for describing the
   attacks detected and mitigated.

5.  DOTS Telemetry YANG Module

5.1.  Tree Structure

   TODO





Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020               [Page 10]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


5.2.  YANG Module

   TODO

6.  IANA Considerations

6.1.  DOTS Signal Channel CBOR Mappings Registry

   This specification registers the DOTS telemetry attributes in the
   IANA "DOTS Signal Channel CBOR Mappings" registry established by
   [I-D.ietf-dots-signal-channel].

   The DOTS telemetry attributes defined in this specification are
   comprehension-optional parameters.

   o  Note to the RFC Editor: Please delete (TBD1)-(TBD5) once CBOR keys
      are assigned from the 0x8000 - 0xBFFF range.

   +-------------------+------------+--------+---------------+--------+
   | Parameter Name    | YANG       | CBOR   | CBOR Major    | JSON   |
   |                   | Type       | Key    |    Type &     | Type   |
   |                   |            |        | Information   |        |
   +-------------------+------------+--------+---------------+--------+
   | TODO              |            |        |               |        |
   +-------------------+------------+--------+---------------+--------+

6.2.  DOTS Signal Telemetry YANG Module

   This document requests IANA to register the following URI in the "ns"
   subregistry within the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688]:

            URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:TODO
            Registrant Contact: The IESG.
            XML: N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.

   This document requests IANA to register the following YANG module in
   the "YANG Module Names" subregistry [RFC7950] within the "YANG
   Parameters" registry.

            name: ietf-dots-telemetry
            namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:TODO
            maintained by IANA: N
            prefix: dots-telemetry
            reference: RFC XXXX







Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020               [Page 11]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


7.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations in [I-D.ietf-dots-signal-channel] need to be
   taken into consideration.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Flemming Andreasen, Liang Xia, and
   Kaname Nishizuka co-authors of https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-
   doron-dots-telemetry-00 draft and everyone who had contributed to
   that document.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [Enterprise-Numbers]
              "Private Enterprise Numbers", 2005, <http://www.iana.org/
              assignments/enterprise-numbers.html>.

   [I-D.ietf-dots-data-channel]
              Boucadair, M. and R. K, "Distributed Denial-of-Service
              Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Data Channel Specification",
              draft-ietf-dots-data-channel-30 (work in progress), July
              2019.

   [I-D.ietf-dots-signal-channel]
              K, R., Boucadair, M., Patil, P., Mortensen, A., and N.
              Teague, "Distributed Denial-of-Service Open Threat
              Signaling (DOTS) Signal Channel Specification", draft-
              ietf-dots-signal-channel-35 (work in progress), July 2019.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3688]  Mealling, M., "The IETF XML Registry", BCP 81, RFC 3688,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3688, January 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3688>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.



Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020               [Page 12]

Internet-DraDOTS Telemetry for Efficient Protective Networkin  July 2019


9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dots-use-cases]
              Dobbins, R., Migault, D., Fouant, S., Moskowitz, R.,
              Teague, N., Xia, L., and K. Nishizuka, "Use cases for DDoS
              Open Threat Signaling", draft-ietf-dots-use-cases-17 (work
              in progress), January 2019.

   [RFC8340]  Bjorklund, M. and L. Berger, Ed., "YANG Tree Diagrams",
              BCP 215, RFC 8340, DOI 10.17487/RFC8340, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8340>.

   [RFC8612]  Mortensen, A., Reddy, T., and R. Moskowitz, "DDoS Open
              Threat Signaling (DOTS) Requirements", RFC 8612,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8612, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8612>.

Authors' Addresses

   Tirumaleswar Reddy
   McAfee, Inc.
   Embassy Golf Link Business Park
   Bangalore, Karnataka  560071
   India

   Email: kondtir@gmail.com


   Mohamed Boucadair
   Orange
   Rennes  35000
   France

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com


   Ehud Doron
   Radware Ltd.
   Raoul Wallenberg Street
   Tel-Aviv  69710
   Israel

   Email: ehudd@radware.com








Reddy, et al.            Expires January 6, 2020               [Page 13]
