





Mobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET)                             L. Speakman
Internet-Draft                        Research Center for Natural Hazard
Intended status: Informational            and Disaster Recovery, Niigata
Expires: November 25, 2009                                    University
                                                                 K. Mase
                                          Graduate School of Science and
                                          Technology, Niigata University
                                                            May 25, 2009

         Routing Loop Issue in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)
                    draft-speakman-looping-issue-00


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 25, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.


Abstract

   This document describes the routing loop and packet looping issues in
   mobile ad hoc network (MANET) running proactive routing protocols
   using hop count metric.

   Mechanisms of loop formation are identified and how the problem of
   loop formation is exacerbated by the use of Link Layer Notification
   is described.  The effect of the looping packets on the network are
   shown by comparing against the case where the looping packets are
   detected and discarded, showing the need for routing loops or looping
   packets to be dealt with in MANETs.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Mechanism of looping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       4.1. Loop Formation under plain OLSRv2 . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  LLN and its effect on looping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Effect of looping on network performance . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Effect of looping detection and looping packet discard on
       network performance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       11.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       11.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14












Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


1.  Introduction

   To maintain loop-free routes to a destination, it is necessary that
   the same topological image is perceived between neighboring nodes and
   thus across the network as a whole, and to make routing and
   forwarding decision which are consistent with this.  However, it has
   been observed that transient routing loops form in Ad-hoc Networks
   running MANET proactive routing protocols using hop count metric.
   These transient routing loops may only appear for a very short amount
   of time and may not be the result of malevolent nodes but nodes that
   are unable to adequately maintain a coherent and up to date
   perception of the network topology for a short amount of time, thus
   leading to the formation of the transient routing loop.  This may
   occur due to normal operation of the routing protocol.

   Even when only a small portion of the traffic enters these loops and
   only for a brief time, the effect is to increase the impact on the
   surrounding medium and its supported traffic thus degrading overall
   network performance.  A packet may circulate around a loop for some
   time before its TTL or Hop Count field goes to zero.

   Due to the mobile nature of mobile ad-hoc networks and the transient
   nature of the wireless medium, links may form and then disappear on a
   short time scale.  In order to respond to these rapid changes, some
   routing protocols rely on the link layer being able to notify the
   routing protocol as soon as a packet fails to be forwarded over that
   link as determined by the lack of an acknowledgement when
   bidirectional links are being used or by some other means in networks
   where unidirectional links are supported.

   Loop formation is exacerbated by the use of these Link Layer
   Notifications techniques in acknowledgement-enabled link layers in
   which the link layer informs the routing protocol when the sending
   node is unable to receive an acknowledgment of the successful
   forwarding of a unicast packet to the next hop.

   The Routing Loop may be attempted to be directly avoided by careful
   design of the routing protocol, to establish links and topological
   maps that are coherent between nodes and to only make changes that
   can be accounted for in the wider network without ambiguity leading
   to routing loops.  However, this may be difficult with the need for
   routing protocols to quickly update their Information Bases if local
   links fail to perform as expected, thus requiring a sudden change in
   local link state or network topology that may inadvertently lead to
   adjacent nodes' topology maps of the network becoming non-coherent
   between them.

   Furthermore, larger networks in which there are a large number of



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   hops between any source-destination pair may be unable to use low TTL
   (Time to Live) or Hop Count that limit the effects of circulating
   packets that are caught in loops earlier in their path.

   This document identifies the loop formation in proactive link-state
   based routing protocol, OLSRv2 and their transient nature based on
   simulation of networks in which multiple hops are required from
   source to destination.  The detrimental effect on the surrounding
   network traffic of the transient routing loops, in particular the
   packets that loop over them, are shown by comparing against the case
   where the looping packets are detected and immediately discarded,
   showing the need for routing loops or looping packets to be dealt
   with in a timely manner.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [1].

   This document uses the terminology defined in [2, 3, 4], as well as
   the following terms:

      Routing Loop:  An aggregate state existing in two or more nodes
   such that if a packet was routed over them for a particular
   destination, the packet would circulate.

      Loop Detection:  Detection of looping unicast IP packets.

      Post-Loop Detection:  Looping packet detection after one complete
   looping of unicast IP packet has occurred by using DPD-based
   algorithm.

      Duplicate Packet Detection (DPD):  Detection of packets which have
   previously been received.

      Packet Discard:  A loop suppression action that may be triggered
   on looping packet detection in which the packet is immediately
   discarded.


3.  Overview

   Transient routing loops have been observed to form in Ad-hoc Networks
   running MANET proactive routing protocols using hop count metric.
   Even when only a small portion of the traffic enters these loops and
   only for brief time, the effect is to increase the impact on the



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   surrounding medium and its supported traffic thus degrading overall
   network performance.  The effect is exacerbated by the use of Link
   Layer Notifications techniques in acknowledgement-enabled link layers
   in which the link layer informs the routing protocol when the sending
   node is unable to receive an acknowledgment of the successful
   forwarding of a unicast packet to the next hop.

   This document identifies how routing loops form in proactive routing
   protocols with the use of simulation.  Natural incoherency in
   adjacent topology maps are shown to lead to the formation of routing
   loops.  Loop formation is then shown to be exacerbated by the use of
   Link Layer Notification that causes a large increase in local changes
   in the link state and thus the perceived topology map of the network
   as seen by different nodes.  The detrimental effects of the looping
   packets are significantly increased on the network at higher loads.

   The introduction of a Loop Detection technique that triggers a Packet
   Discard action on the detection of looping packets reveals the extent
   to which looping packets have on the network in simulation based on
   OLSRv2 with LLN.  These comparisons made against discarding looping
   packets directly show the necessity of routing loops or looping
   packets to be dealt with.


4.  Mechanism of looping

   The mechanism of loop formation is shown with the help of figure 1
   for the case of the proactive link-state routing protocol, OLSRv2.

   Consider the partial network as shown in figure 1.  This partial
   network is given with the first assumption that it exists as part of
   a larger and denser network with other nodes and links not shown, and
   the second assumption that the shortest route to the destination D
   from 1 is via the left; 1-3-5 and the second shortest route from 1 is
   towards the right; 2-4-6, and similarly for node 2 in a symmetrically
   reversed fashion.  Other longer routes to the destination exist in
   the wider network, and node 5 and 6 may necessarily be the same node.
   Such a partial network may appear very often in most networks.

   Each node advertises itself by Hello Packet as defined in NHDP [3].
   Once each node receives the advertised interfaces of the neighboring
   nodes from the Hello Packet, it advertises the heard links with the
   neighboring nodes allowing each node to build up a Link Set including
   Symmetric (bi-direction) links.  Each Symmetric link is advertised in
   the next round of Hello broadcasts allowing each node to build up a
   map of all symmetrical 2-hop links in the 2-Hop Neighbor Set.  In
   this way, from Figure 1, Node 2 will be aware of the symmetric links
   1-3 via node 1 and so on.



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


                                +--------+
                                | node D | Destination
                                +--------+
                               /          \
                              /            \
                     +--------+            +--------+
                     | node 5 |            | node 6 |
                     +--------+            +--------+
                          /                    \
                         /                      \
                   +--------+                +--------+
                   | node 3 |                | node 4 |
                   +--------+                +--------+
                          \                    /
                           \                  /
                        +--------+      +--------+
                        | node 1 |------| node 2 |
                        +--------+      +--------+

   Figure 1.  Partial network of nodes with routes to destination D
   considered to be part of a larger and denser network with other nodes
   and links not shown.

4.1.  Loop Formation under plain OLSRv2

   To maintain loop-free routes to a destination it is necessary that
   the same topological image is perceived between neighboring nodes and
   thus across the network as a whole, and any changes to the network be
   advertised in such a way that loops do not form.  In Figure 1, under
   standard OLSRv2 operation [3, 4], consider the shortest path chosen
   by each node to the destination D.  For example, node 1 would choose
   the route 1-3-5-D along the left whilst node 2 would choose the route
   2-4-6-D along the right.  This is a partial network conveying
   topology which is seen to commonly exist in ad-hoc networks.

   Each node broadcasts a Hello Packet every 2 seconds advertising its
   Symmetric, Asymmetric and Lost links, and each node broadcasts a TC
   Packet every 5 seconds advertising the Topology as perceived by each
   node which is efficiently flooded through the network by the use of
   MPRs (Multi Point Relays) as defined in [4]

   At startup, links 3-5 and 4-6 are considered to exist as well as the
   other links as given in Figure 1.  Node 5 fails to receive the Hello
   Packet broadcast by node 3 for three consecutive occasions leading to
   the timeout of link 3-5 in node 5's Link Set.  Node 5 also updates
   its 2 Hop Neighbor Set and Topology Set removing the respective link.
   This timeout occurs at three times the Hello Interval after the last
   successfully received Hello Packet that indicated that a symmetric



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   link with node 3 was still formable.  At this time, node 3 is
   unawares that link 3-5 has timed out in node 5, and for the time
   being continues to consider the link as symmetric.  The loss of link
   3-5 is advertised in the next Hello Packet broadcast by node 5, and
   is received by node 3 which updates its Link Set, setting the link to
   Asymmetric, and updating its 2 Hop Neighbor Set, Topology Set,
   Routing and other Sets, and the Routing Table - removing the link
   from use.

   From this point, any data packets that are forwarded to node 3 to
   route to destination D would not use link 3-5 but would choose a
   different longer route through the surrounding network (not shown).
   As such, it is assumed that node 1 forwarding packets to node 3 for
   Destination D will have its packets routed via a different path but
   the network would be sufficiently dense such that the packets still
   reach the destination.

   On the next Hello Packet broadcast by 3, the change in state of link
   3-5 to Asymmetric is advertised.  Node 1 receives this broadcast and
   updates its 2-Hop Neighbor Set removing the link and its Topology Set
   and other respective Sets.  The routing calculation would result in
   the next best route being chosen to destination D, and this would be
   via node 2 along the right; 2-4-6-D, as seen in Figure 1.

   A similar pattern of events that happened in nodes 5, 3 and 1 also
   occur respectively in nodes 6, 4 and 2.  The inability of node 6 to
   receive the Hello Packet broadcast by node 4 results in a timeout of
   link 4-6 in node 6.  This change is then advertised in the Hello
   Packet broadcast by node 6 resulting in node 4 updating its
   respective state.  The change is then advertised by Hello Packet by
   node 4, and node 2 updates its 2-Hop Neighbor Set and Topology Set
   removing link 4-6.  Node 2 then performs a routing calculation
   resulting in the next best route being chosen to destination D via
   node 1 along the left; 1-3-5-D, as seen in Figure 1.

   Node 1 is momentarily unawares of the link break 4-6 and similarly
   node 2 is unawares of the link break 3-5, thus leading to a temporary
   loop forming whereby for every packet for destination D, node 1
   routes via node 2 and node 2 routes via node 1 causing the routing
   loop.

   This is independent of how the loss of link 3-5 and 4-6 formed, and
   the routing loop between 1 and 2 is corrected in some time.  The
   correction takes place and the routing loop vanishes when node 1
   becomes aware of link break 4-6, node 2 becomes aware of link break
   3-5, or other shorter routes become available.

   As seen in simulation, routing loops are created and corrected on a



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   continual basis in the network, however, under 'plain' OLSRv2 are
   seen to be relatively few in number and don't have a significant
   negative impact on total network performance [6].


5.  LLN and its effect on looping

   Loop formation described in section 4 is a temporal effect.  It has
   only a minor impact on packet delivery performance in plain OLSRv2.

   In plain OLSRv2 packets are often attempted to be forwarded over
   links that cannot physically support packets as the link may remain
   in the Link Set for some time even after the physical link has been
   lost.  This false perception can persists for up to three Hello
   Intervals from which the last Hello Packet was received, which is
   designed to avoid unnecessary link removals due to the failure of
   Hello receptions in the radio environment.

   To rectify the problem of continuing to attempt to forward packets
   over a link that has been physically lost, LLN (Link Layer
   Notification) is enabled in order to detect when links are no longer
   physically viable.  With LLN, if a node tries to forward a packet
   over a link, but it cannot receive any link-layer acknowledgement
   after a certain number of retries depending on the Data-Link Protocol
   in use, the Link Layer will notify the routing protocol via the LLN
   mechanism.  The routing protocol will act on this, marking the link
   as Lost in the Link Set, updating the 2-Hop Neighbor Set, calculating
   a new Routing Set, followed by updating the Routing Table.  LLN can
   significantly improve packet delivery ratio by early detection of
   link breaks and rerouting.

   The effect of this is to cause the Link Set in the node that has the
   LLN to change the link over which the packet was dropped from
   Symmetric to Lost ahead of the symmetric link timeouts between the
   nodes.  The surrounding nodes will still have knowledge of the
   existence of this link, and the link will still exist in the Topology
   Sets in the rest of the network for some time, possibly leading to
   the formation of a loop.  The effect of LLN is to ultimately speed
   the process by which a routing loop forms.  Node 3 or node 4 in
   Figure 1 may not have to wait for a full three times the Hello
   Interval before the Link Set changes its state from Symmetric.

   As LLN is triggered on the failure of a data packet to be forwarded
   over a link and the number of LLNs increases with the amount of
   traffic in the network, the number of routing loops also increases
   with the amount traffic in the network.  Furthermore, as LLN results
   in the removal of links at a rate over and above that by timeouts in
   'plain' OLSRv2, the total number of links in the network is further



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   reduced thus increasing the average distance from any source to
   destination.  A larger number of the packets remain in the network,
   taking a longer route, thus adding extra to the network load,
   impacting the surrounding traffic within interference range of the
   loop, and further encouraging a higher chance of an LLN occurring in
   a node along the route supporting the traffic by collision.  The
   negative effect of increased packet looping caused by LLN works
   against the gains from avoiding dropping packets over broken links
   that plagues 'plain' OLSRv2. The negative effect as load increases
   may exceed the gains, thus causing a greater overall loss.


6.  Effect of looping on network performance

   The detrimental effect of looping packets on the network for the case
   of OLSRv2 is found from simulation given in [6].

   Simulations are performed with 60 nodes in an area of 1km by 2km to
   establish a MANET using OLSRv2.  The nodes have mobility of between 0
   and 5m/s and the applied load on the network is varied by increasing
   the number of applications flows.  Each application flow consists of
   a separate client and server that sends 512 Byte application packets
   from the client to the server at a rate of 4 per second.

   In OLSRv2, the problem of looping is relatively small, however, high
   loss is observed as packets are forwarded over links which are no
   longer physically able to support traffic.  The simulated results
   show from the PDR (Packet Delivery Ratio) is 0.75 to 0.8 under given
   simulation conditions and slowly decrease with supplied load.  The
   low performance of OLSRv2 reveals the need for LLN.

   In OLSRv2 with LLN at low loads the PDR is raised to 0.95 for the
   same conditions, however, the problem of looping packets grows as the
   load in the network is increased, causing a direct detrimental effect
   on the performance of the network.  The PDR begins to decline rapidly
   with increasing load as a direct consequence of the looping packets,
   with a much steeper negative slope against increasing load than for
   OLSRv2.  Due to the looping packets in the network at higher loads
   under OLSRv2 with LLN, it underperforms that of OLSRv2, rapidly
   declining to a PDR of below 0.75 as load is increased to moderate
   values.


7.  Effect of looping packet detection and looping packet discard on
   network performance

   To directly compare against the effect of removing the looping
   packets from the network, a looping packet detection technique is



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   introduced, henceforth known as Loop Detection, and an action to
   discard the looping packet on loop detection, henceforth known as
   Packet Discard.

   The loop detection technique, called "Post-Loop Detection", is a
   looping packet detection algorithm that detects a looping packet
   after one complete packet loop occurs.  Detection is performed at the
   Network layer, for incoming packets that are not destined to this
   node, immediately before being further processed by the Network
   Layer.

   For every unicast packet outgoing that is destined to a node that is
   not the immediate next hop, the immutable header fields, option
   fields and data content of the outgoing IP packet is used to generate
   a hash digest of a set size of only a few bytes or tens of bytes.
   All incoming unicast packets are then hashed in the same way and
   compared against the existing hashed outgoing packets using an
   efficient search algorithm, as specified in [6], similar to a DPD-
   based algorithm as specified in [5].

   DPD algorithms such as S-DPD and H-DPD specified in [5] MAY be
   sufficiently usable in this "Post-Loop Detection" mechanism.  But DPD
   algorithms specified in [5] are only for multicast IP packets, and
   they operate only when node receives packets with multicast address.
   Therefore these DPD algorithms MUST be extended for unicast IP
   packets, and they MUST be operated when node receives ANY packets to
   detect the loops.

   Once a looping packet is detected, a Packet Discard action is
   triggered.  The packet will not continue to circulate around the loop
   unnecessarily, therefore reducing the demand on the surrounding
   wireless medium.

   The simulation results in [6] indicate that the Packet Discard action
   on Post-Loop Detection when used with OLSRv2 with LLN is able to
   raise the PDR (Packet Delivery Ratio), particularly at higher loads
   where looping packets are greater in number.

   Using the simulation data results as expressed in section 6, when
   using Packet Discard the PDR is always increased over that of OLSRv2
   with LLN.  At low loads, the PDR is raised from 0.95 to 0.96

   As load increases, and the number of looping packets increase, the
   Packet Discard action is able to discard the looping packets thus
   maintaining PDR relatively high.  The PDR is maintained above 0.9 for
   more than double the applied load as seen in OLSRv2 with LLN and no
   Loop Detection, and always achieves greater PDR than that of OLSRv2
   or OLSRv2 with LLN.



Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   Figure 2 gives a qualitative and rough quantitative expression of the
   results of employing Link Layer Notification techniques that leads to
   more loops, and the Packet Discard action on Loop Detection that
   suppresses the effect of these looping packets.

      PDR (Packet Delivery Ration)

   1.00 - |
          |
   0.96 - |----------------          OLSRv2 + LLN + PD (Packet Discard)
   0.95 - |-------         ----------
          |       -----              -----
          |            ---                ----
          |               --                  ---
          |                 \                    --
          |                  \ OLSRv2 + LLN        --
          |                   \
          |  OLSRv2            \
   0.77 - |----------------     \
          |                ------------
          |                       \    --------
          |                        \           ------
          |                         --
          |                            --
          |                              --
   0.60 - |_____________________________________________
                            load (number of applications)

   Figure 2. The end-to-end delivery ratio of packets as seen in
   simulation.  Load is increased (x-axis) by increasing the number of
   application flows.  The use of LLN increases the number of loops as
   the load is increased, thus having a detrimental effect on the
   network.  The use of PD on Loop Detection suppresses the effects of
   these looping packets thus revealing to what extent the looping
   packets have on the network.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document presents no IANA considerations.


9.  Security Considerations

   This document provides recommendations for mechanisms to be used in
   protocols; full security considerations are to be provided by those
   protocols, rather than in this document.




Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


   It may however be noted that introduction of approaches in
   consideration of dealing with the looping issue may provide security
   advantages or disadvantages to the protocol.


10.  Acknowledgements

   This research was supported by the Strategic Information and
   Communication R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE).










































Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

11.2.  Informative References

   [2] T. Clausen, C. Dearlove, J. Dean & C. Adith, "Generalized MANET
       Packet/Message Format", RFC5444, February 2009.

   [3] T. Clausen, C. Dearlove & J. Dean, "MANET Neighborhood Discovery
       Protocol (NHDP)", draft-ietf-manet-nhdp-09 (work in progress),
       2009.03.26.

   [4] T. Clausen, C. Dearlove & P. Jacquet, "The Optimized Link State
       Routing Protocol version 2", draft-ietf-manet-olsrv2-08 (work in
       progress), 2009.03.10.

   [5] J.Macker, et al., "Simplified Multicast Forwarding for MANET",
       draft-ietf-manet-smf-08 (work in progress), 2008.11.03.

   [6] L. Speakman, Y. Owada, K. Mase, "Looping in OLSRv2 in Mobile Ad-
       hoc Networks, Loop Suppression and Loop Correction", IEICE Trans.
       Commun. Vol. E92-B, No. 04, April 2009.

























Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet Draft       draft-speakman-looping-issue-00        May 25, 2009


Authors' Addresses


   Kenichi Mase
   Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University

   Phone: +81 25 262 7446
   Email: mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp
   URL:   http://www2.net.ie.niigata-u.ac.jp/


   Lee Speakman
   Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University

   Email: delta@net.ie.niigata-u.ac.jp
   URL:   http://www2.net.ie.niigata-u.ac.jp/



































Speakman, Mase          Expires November 25, 2009              [Page 14]

