Internet Engineering Task Force                            Wassim Haddad
Mobility and Multi-homing Privacy                               Ericsson
Internet Draft                                             Erik Nordmark
Expires July 2005                                       Sun Microsystems
                                                          Francis Dupont
                                                                  Point6
                                                         Marcelo Bagnulo
                                                                    UC3M
                                                     Soohong Daniel Park
                                                     Samsung Electronics
                                                         Basavaraj Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                       Hannes Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                           February 2005


          Privacy for Mobile and Multi-homed Nodes (MoMiPriv):
                      Formalizing the Threat Model
                <draft-haddad-momipriv-threat-model-00>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been
   disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware
   will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

   This document is an Internet Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.
   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited


Abstract

   This memo describes threats violating the privacy based on
   identifiers used at the MAC and IP layers, in the context of
   a mobile and multi-homed environment.



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



Table of Contents


   1. Introduction..................................................3
   2. Terminology...................................................3
   3. Threat Model Applied to Privacy...............................4

   4. Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the MAC Layer..............5
     4.1. Threats from Data Collectors..............................5
       4.1.1. Discovering the Identity Presence.....................5
       4.1.2. Determining the Location..............................6
       4.1.3. Tracing the Target....................................7
       4.1.4. Threats from Various Malicious Nodes..................7

   5. Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the IP Layer...............8
     5.1. Threats Against Privacy in Mobile IPv6....................8
       5.1.1. Quick Overview of MIPv6...............................8
       5.1.2. Threats against MIPv6 Bidirectionnal Tunneling Mode...9
       5.1.3. Threats Related to MIPv6 RO Mode......................9

   6. Threat Model Applied to a Static Multi-homed Node............10
     6.1. Threats againt Privacy on the MAC Layer..................11
     6.2. Threats against Privacy on the IP Layer..................11

   7. Security Considerations......................................13
   8. IANA Considerations..........................................13
   9. Informative References.......................................14
   10. Normative References........................................15
   11. Authors'Addresses...........................................16
   Intellectual Property Statement.................................18
   Disclaimer of Validity..........................................18
   Copyright Statement.............................................18





















Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



1. Introduction


   The MoMiPriv problem statement document [MOMPS] introduced new
   attributes related to the privacy and described critical issues
   related to providing these attributes on both the IP and MAC
   layers. In addition, MOMPS highlighted the interdependency
   between issues on the MAC and IP layers and the need to solve
   them all together.

   This memo describes threats and possible attacks against
   privacy at the MAC and IP layers, in the context of a mobile
   and multi-homed environment.



2. Terminology


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY"
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2219
   [TERM].

   It would also be useful to clarify the following entities
   involved in defining threats against privacy:


   Target

        We use the term "target" to specify an entity who's privacy
        is threatened by an adversary/malicious node.


   Adversary/Malicious Node

        This term refers to the entity that is trying to violate
        the privacy of its target.


   In addition, this draft uses the terminology described in
   [MOMPS].












Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



3. Threat Model Applied to Privacy


   Before listing threats against privacy, we start by describing
   the privacy threat model, which will be applied on the MAC and
   IP layers in order to perform our analysis. The location of
   adversaries violating privacy must be taken into account when
   analyzing the different threats.

   In a mobile environment, the three main threats against privacy
   are the following:

      - Identifying

      - Locating

      - Tracing


   In the MoMiPriv context, a malicious node can identify its
   target via its device identifier(s), i.e., MAC address and/or
   its IPv6 address(es). Once the identification procedure is
   achieved, it becomes by itself a threat against privacy, since
   a malicious node located in one particular place will be able
   to claim with certain confidence that its target was present
   in the same place at a specific time, by just capturing its MAC
   address.

   The next logic step after identifying a target is to locate it
   with maximum accuracy. The third step consists on tracing the
   target (possibly in real-time) while it is moving across the
   Internet.

   Performing these three steps allow the malicious node to
   gradually increase its knowledge about its target by gathering
   more and more information about it. These information may allow,
   for example to build a profile of the target and then to launch
   specific attacks or to misuse the obtained information in other
   ways (e.g., marketing purposes, statistics, etc). Data gathered
   may include higher-layer identifiers (e.g., email addresses) or
   pseudonyms, location information, temporal information, mobility
   patterns, etc.

   In order to access the MAC address of a targeted node in a
   WLAN, the malicious node needs to be either on the same link or
   within the distributed system (DS). However, in other scenarios,
   especially in the ongoing deployment of public outdoor WLAN
   technologies, more complex attacks involving multiple malicious
   nodes need to be considered.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   Actually, taking a look at today's WLAN deployments in some
   cities like Chicago and New York [WIGLE] gives a clear picture
   of the high density of APs already deployed. These examples of
   today's WLAN deployment leads to the following conclusions:


   a) the high density of APs deployed nowadays greatly extends
      the spatial and temporal coverage of the three main threats
      against privacy mentioned above.

   b) the MAC address is becoming easier to detect and thus is
      causing a growing privacy concern, in particular for
      mobility.

   c) in some existing public areas covered by WLAN technologies,
      any efficient tracing of a designed target is greatly
      improved whenever multiple co-operative malicious nodes are
      deployed in different locations covered by WLAN technologies.


   Based on the above, the suggested threat model when applied to
   the MAC layer should take into consideration the classic
   scenario, where one malicious node is collecting data on the
   link/DS and the scenario where many malicious nodes are
   deployed in different locations, within the WLAN covered area,
   and performing data collection while collaborating together
   for identifying, locating and tracking purposes.



4. Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the MAC Layer


   We start our analyze by applying the threat model to the MAC
   layer.



4.1. Threats from Collecting Data


4.1.1. Discovering the Identity Presence


   The WLAN technologies discloses the user's device identifier,
   i.e., the MAC address, in each data frame sent/received by the
   mobile node (MN) within the distribution system (DS) thus,
   making the device identifier readable/available to any malicious
   eavesdropper located on the link or in the same DS.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   Based on this observation, collecting data on one particular
   link/DS, coupled with prior knowledge of the targeted node's MAC
   address allows the malicious node to check first if its target is
   located within the covered area or not.

   An eavesdropper can perform data collecting via two ways. The
   first one is by positioning itself on the link/DS and sniffing
   packets exchanged between the MNs and the APs. The second way
   consists on deploying rogue access points in some particular
   areas. The ability to deploy rogue access points requires a
   missing security protection of the WLAN network.

   In WLAN, the targeted MN does not even need to exchange data
   packets with another node, to disclose its MAC address to a
   malicious node eavesdropping on the same link than the MN. In
   fact, the target's MAC address appears in control messages
   exchanged between the MN and the AP(s) or between different
   MNs (adhoc mode).

   In addition, identifying the target allows the malicious node to
   learn the target's IPv6 address and the data sequence number.

   On the other side, a malicious node collecting data from one
   particular DS, may also try to conduct an active search for its
   target within the DS by trying to connect to the target, using
   the IPv6 address derived from the link local address, according
   to the stateless address configuration protocol defined in
   [STAT]. In such scenario, if the targeted node replies to the
   malicious node's request while being located within the same DS,
   then its presence will immediately be detected.

   A malicious node may also choose and add new targets to its list,
   based on other criterias, which are learned from collecting data.
   For example, the frequency, timing and the presence duration of
   one particular node may encourage the malicious eavsedeopper to
   learn more in order to gradually build a profile for that node.



4.1.2. Determining the Location


   After identifying its target within a DS, a malicious node may
   attempt to determine its location. Such step can be performed
   by different means.

   But it should be noted first, that discovering the target's
   presence on the MAC layer, implicitly maps its geographical
   location within a specific area. Depending on the network
   topology and the link layer technology, this area might be quite



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   large or might have a fairly irregular shape. Hence, the
   malicious node may want to learn the most accurate location of
   its target.

   It is also possible to determine the geographical location of
   the MN with a certain accuracy at the physical layer. This is
   done by identifying the Access Point (AP) to which, the MN is
   currently attached and then trying to determine the geographical
   location of the corresponding AP.



4.1.3. Tracing the Target


   After identifying and locating its target, a malicious node
   located in a particular DS, can use data collecting to trace
   its target in real time within the entire ESS.

   Tracing can be done either via the target's MAC address or its
   IPv6 address or via the data sequence number carried in each
   data frame or through combining them.

   On the other side, these information allow the malicious node
   to break the unlinkability protection provided by changing the
   MAC address, e.g., during a L2 handoff, since it will always be
   possible to trace the MN by other tools than its MAC address.



4.1.4. Threats from Various Malicious Nodes


   An efficient way to trace a target within an area covered by
   wireless link layer technologies is by deploying many malicious
   nodes within one specific area.

   As it has been mentioned above, a malicious node located
   within a specific DS can trace its target only within the DS.
   However, there may be scenarios where tracing a particular
   target needs to go beyond one specific DS boundaries.
   In addition, the target MN's MAC address may change many times
   before the MN leaves the DS. Consequently, even if the new DS
   is monitored by a malicious eavesdropper, it will not be possible
   for him/her to identify the target anymore.

   If the malicious nodes collaborate with each other, it would be
   possible to keep tracing the target within a specific region. In
   fact, the main goals behind collaborative tracing is to break the
   unlinkability protection when provided in a independent way at the



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   MAC and IP layers. In fact, changing the MAC address alone while
   keeping using the same IP address will always make the target
   identifiable and traceable through different DSs.

   Note that in addition to using the MAC and IP addresses, the
   sequence number can also be used for tracing purposes.



5. Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the IP Layer


   Learning the target's IP address discloses the topological
   location, which may in turn reveal also geographical location
   information of the target. For example, location specific
   extensions to the DNS directory [LOC_DNS] can help to reveal
   further information about the geographical location of a
   particular IP address. Tools are also available [HEO] that allows
   everyone to querry this information using a graphical interface.
   Note that the location information cannot be always correct, for
   example due to state entries in the DNS, NATed IP addresses, usage
   of tunnels (e.g., VPN, Mobile IP, etc.).

   This information can be used to link the current target's
   location(s) to the regular one and provide the eavesdropper more
   information about its target's movements in real time.



5.1. Threats Against Privacy in Mobile IPv6


   In Mobile IPv6, threats against privacy can originate from the
   correspondent node (CN) and/or from a malicious node(s) located
   either between the MN and the CN or between the MN and its home
   agent.



5.1.1. Quick Overview of MIPv6


   Mobile IPv6 [MIP6] protocol allows a mobile node to switch
   between different networks, while keeping ongoing session(s)
   alive. For this purpose, MIPv6 offers two modes to handle the
   mobility problem. The first mode is the bidirectional tunnelling
   (BT) mode, which hides the MN's movements from the CN by sending
   all data packets through the MN's HA. Consequently, the BT mode
   provides a certain level of location privacy by hiding the MN's
   current location from the CN.



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   The other mode is the route optimization (RO) mode, which allows
   the MN to keep exchanging data packets on the direct path with
   the CN, while moving outside its home network. For this purpose,
   the MN needs to update the CN with its current new location each
   time it switches to a new network. This is done by sending a
   binding update (BU) message to the CN to update its binding cache
   entry (BCE) with the MN's new location, i.e., care-of address.
   In addition, the RO mode requires the MN and the CN to insert the
   MN's home address in each data packet exchanged between them.



5.1.2. Threats Related to MIPv6 BT Mode


   As mentioned above, the BT mode keeps the CN totally unaware of
   the MN's movements across the Internet. However, the MN must
   update its HA with its new current location each time it switches
   to a new network, in order to enable the HA to encapsulate data
   packets to its new location, i.e., new care-of address (CoA).

   In the BT mode, tracing the MN can either be done via the MAC
   address as described earlier, or by having a malicious node
   located somewhere between the MN and the HA, and looking into
   the inner data packet header.

   On the other side, the MIPv6 protocol suggests that the tunnel
   between the MN and the HA can be protected with ESP. In such
   case, the malicious node won't be able anymore to identify its
   target (when located between the mobile node and the home agent)
   thus making the tracing impossible. However, tracing can always be
   possible at the MAC layer.



5.1.3. Threats Related to MIPv6 RO Mode


   The MIPv6 RO mode and all new optimizations, e.g., [OMIPv6],
   [MIPsec] and [PreKbm], requires the MN to send a BU message to
   update the CN in order to announce its new current location after
   each IP handover, and to insert the MN's home address in each
   data packets sent to/from the MN.

   Consequently, threats against MN's privacy can emanate from a
   malicious CN, which starts by establishing a session with the
   target, i.e., by using its target's IPv6 home address, sending
   it enough data packets and then waiting till its target switches
   to the RO mode.
   But it should be noted that the MN may not decide to switch to



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   the RO mode but keep using instead the BT mode, in order to
   avoid disclosing its current location to the CN.

   On the other side, a malicious node may position itself
   somewhere on the direct path between the MN and the CN and learn
   the MN's current location from sniffing the BU message(s) and/or
   the data packets exchanged between the two entities.

   Another possibility is to do the tracing on the MAC address. As
   mentioned above, this requires the malicious node to be located
   on the same link/DS than the MN.

   The MIPv6 RO mode requires protecting all signalling messages
   exchanged between the MN and the HA by an ESP tunnel. In such
   case, a malicious node located between the MN and the HA cannot
   identify its target.

   However, the IETF has recently adopted a new authentication
   protocol for MIPv6 [MIPAUTH], which allows securing the BU/BA
   signalling messages exchanged between the HA and the MN by using
   an authentication option carried in the BU/BA messages.

   MIPAUTH protocol may have a serious impact on the MN's privacy,
   since it offers the malicious node a new location, i.e., the
   path between the targeted MN and its HA, to identify, locate and
   trace its target. This is in addition to positioning itself on
   the path between the targeted MN and the CN.
   It should be noted also that the path between the MN and the HA
   may be more interesting to use in order to break the MN's
   privacy, since the MN may try to hide its real identity (and
   consequently its location) from the CN, as proposed in [MIPLOP]
   while still using the real IPv6 home address to exchange
   signalling messages with its HA.

   Furthermore, it would also be possible to learn the MN's pseudo-
   identifier(s) used in exchanging data packets and signalling
   messages between the MN and the CN on the direct path, by
   having two malicious nodes located between the MN and the HA
   and between the MN and the CN and collaborating together.



6. Threat Model Applied to a Static Multi-homed Node


   A multi-homed node can be described as being attached to more
   than one Internet Service Provider (ISP). Consequently, the
   multiple addresses available to a multi-homed node are
   pre-defined and known in advance in most of the cases.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   The main goals behind providing the multi-homing feature are to
   allow the multi-homed node to use multiple attachments in
   parallel and the ability to switch between these different
   attachments during an ongoing session(s), e.g., in case of a
   failure.
   For these purposes, the multi6 WG introduced recently a new
   proposal to address multi-homing issues, based on using the Hash
   Based Addresses [HBA] and a Layer 3 Shim Approach [SHIM].

   The HBA technology offers a new mechanism to provide a secure
   binding between multiple addresses with different prefixes
   available to a host within a multihomed site. This is achieved
   by generating the interface identifiers of the addresses of a
   host as hashes of the available prefixes and a random number.
   Then, the multiple addresses are generated by prepending the
   different prefixes to the generated interface identifiers. The
   result is a set of addresses that are inherently bound. In
   addition, the HBA technology allows the CN to verify if two HBA
   addresses belong to the same HBA set.

   The Layer 3 Shim approach aims to eliminate any impact on upper
   layer protocols by ensuring that they can keep operating
   unmodified in a multi-homed environment while still seeing a
   stable IPv6 address.

   For a static multi-homed, the main privacy concern are the
   ability to identify the multi-homed node by an untrusted party
   and to discover its available addresses. The untrusted party
   can be the CN itself or a third party located somewhere between
   the multi-homed node and the CN.



6.1. Threats againt Privacy on the MAC Layer


   A malicious node can identify the targeted multi-homed node via
   its MAC address. The ability to identify the target at the MAC
   layer allows the malicious node to learn part or all available
   locators used by the targeted node. However, it should be noted
   that for a static target, a successful identification of the MAC
   address may probably require more precise information concerning
   the geographical location of the target.



6.2. Threats against Privacy on the IP Layer


   In a multi-homed environment, threats against privacy on the IP



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   layer can emanate from the CN itself, in an attempt to learn
   part/all multi-homed node's available locators [M6THREATS].

   For example, a malicious CN can use one pre-identified locator
   belonging to its target, to establish a session with the target.
   After that, the CN can try to push its target to switch (i.e.,
   disclose) to new locator(s) by stopping replying to packets
   sent with the initial address, i.e., pretending a failure.
   In such scenario, and in order to avoid interrupting ongoing
   session, the targeted node may decide to switch to another (or
   more) locator(s), depending on the CN willingness to re-start
   sending packets to the new locator.

   On the other side, an untrusted third party located near its
   target (e.g., based on prior knowledge of one of the target's
   locator) or one particular CN, can correlate between different
   locators used by the targeted node by eavesdropping on packets
   exchanged between the two entities.

   Depending on the final solution adopted, the attacker can also
   sniff context establishment packets that will probably contain
   some or all the locators available to the multi-homed node.































Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



7. Security Considerations


   This document aims to formalize a privacy threat model for the
   MAC and IP layers and does not suggest any solutions to counter
   these threats. Based on that, the suggested threat model does
   not add nor amplify any existing attacks against the mobile or
   multi-homed node.



8. IANA Considerations


   This document has no IANA considerations.






































Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



9. Informative References



   [HBA]        M. Bagnulo, "Hash Based Addresses (HBA)"
                draft-ietf-multi6-hba-00, December 2004.


   [HEO]        High Earth Orbit, available at: http://
                highearthorbit.com/projects/geolocation/index.php,
                (February 2005).


   [LOC_DNS]    C. Davis, P. Vixie, T. Goodwin, I. Dickinson, "A
                Means for Expressing Location Information in the
                Domain Name System", RFC1876, January 1996.


   [M6THREATS]  E. Nordmark, T. Li, "Threats relating to IPv6
                multihoming solutions",
                draft-ietf-multi6-multihoming-threats-03,
                January 2005.


   [MIPAUTH]    A. Patel, K. Leung, M. Khalil, H. Akhtar, K.
                Chowdhurry, "Authentication Protocol for Mobile
                IPv6", draft-ietf-mip6-auth-protocol-03, January
                2005.


   [MIPLOP]     C. Castelluccia, F. Dupont, G. Montenegro,
                "A Simple Privacy Extension for Mobile IPv6",
                Mobile and Wireless Communication Networks, IEEE
                MWCN, October 2004.


   [MIPSec]     F. Dupont, JM, Combes, "Using IPsec between Mobile
                and Correspondent IPv6 Nodes",
                draft-ietf-mip6-cn-ipsec-00, January 2005.


   [MOMPS]      W. Haddad, E. Nordmark, F. Dupont, M. Bagnulo, S.
                Park, B. Patil, "Privacy for Mobile and Multi-homed
                Nodes: MoMiPriv Problem Statement",
                draft-haddad-momipriv-problem-statement-01, February
                2005.


   [OMIPv6]     W. Haddad, L. Madour, J. Arkko, F. Dupont, "Applying
                Cryptographically Generated Addresses to Optimize



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



                MIPv6 (CGA-OMIPv6)", draft-haddad-mip6-cga-omipv6-03,
                October 2004.


   [PreKbm]     C. Perkins, "Precomputable Binding Management Key Kbm
                for Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-mip6-precfgkbm-01.txt,
                October 2004.


   [SHIM]       E. Nordmark, M. Bagnulo, "Multihoming L3 Shim Approach",
                draft-ietf-multi6-l3shim-00.txt, January 2005.


   [STAT]       S. Thomson, T. Narten, T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
                Address Autoconfiguration",
                draft-ietf-ipv6-rfc2462bis-07.txt, December 2004.


   [WIGLE]      http://wigle.net/gps/gps/GPSDB/map/



10. Normative References



   [MIP6]       D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
                IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.


   [TERM]       S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119.





















Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



11. Authors's Addresses


   Wassim Haddad
   Ericsson Research
   8400, Decarie Blvd
   Town of Mount Royal
   Quebec H4P 2N2
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900
   E-Mail: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com


   Erik Nordmark
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   17 Network Circle
   Mountain View, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 786 2921
   Fax:   +1 650 786 5896
   E-Mail: Erik.Nordmark@sun.com


   Francis Dupont
   Point6
   c/o GET/ENST Bretagne
   Campus de Rennes
   2, rue de la Chataigneraie
   CS 17607
   35576 Cesson-Sevigne Cedex
   France

   E-Mail: Francis.Dupont@enst-bretagne.fr


   Marcelo Bagnulo
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   SPAIN

   Phone: 34 91 6249500
   E-Mail: Marcelo@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/marcelo


   Soohong Daniel Park
   Samsung Electronics



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



   Mobile Platform Laboratory, Samsung Electronics
   416. Maetan-Dong, Yeongtong-Gu, Suwon
   Korea

   Phone: +81 31 200 4508
   E-Mail: soohong.park@samsung.com


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX 75039
   USA

   Phone:  +1 972 894-6709
   E-Mail: Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com


   Hannes Tschoefning
   Siemens AG
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   81739 Munich
   Germany

   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com




























Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT               MoMiPriv Threat Model         February 2005



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the
   technology described in this document or the extent to which any
   license under such rights might or might not be available; nor
   does it represent that it has made any independent effort to
   identify any such rights. Information on the IETF's procedures
   with respect to rights in IETF Documents can be found in BCP 78
   and BCP 79.
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the
   use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be
   required to implement this standard. Please address the
   information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights
   claimed in regard to some or all of the specification contained
   in this document. For more information consult the online list
   of claimed rights.



Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY
   THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all
   their rights.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 18]


