


Network Working Group                                           N. Freed
Internet-Draft                                          Sun Microsystems
Expires: September 20, 2007                               March 19, 2007


                Sieve Email Filtering:  Notary Extension
                      draft-freed-sieve-notary-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 20, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes the "notary" extension to the Sieve email
   filtering language.  The "notary" extension provides access to
   additional envelope information provided by the delivery status
   notification extension to SMTP defined in RFC 3461.

Change History (to be removed prior to publication as an RFC

   Fixed several typos.




Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Notary Extension               March 2007


1.  Introduction

   Sieve [I-D.ietf-sieve-3028bis] is a language for filtering email
   messages at or around the time of final delivery.  It is designed to
   be implementable on either a mail client or mail server.  It is
   suitable for running on a mail server where users may not be allowed
   to execute arbitrary programs, such as on black box Internet Message
   Access Protocol [RFC3501] servers, as it has no user-controlled loops
   or the ability to run external programs.

   The base sieve specification defines the envelope extension and test
   to access information in the message envelope.  Only information
   available in regular SMTP is provided; additional information added
   to the SMTP envelope by SMTP extensions cannot be accessed.  The
   "notary" extension extends the envelope test to allow access to the
   additional envelope fields defined by the SMTP extension for delivery
   status notification specified in RFC 3461 [RFC3461].


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119].

   The terms used to describe the various components of the Sieve
   language are taken from [I-D.ietf-sieve-3028bis] section 1.1.


3.  Capability Identifiers

   The capability strings associated with the extension defined in this
   document is "notary".


4.  Notary extension

   The "notary" extension does not define any new tests or actions,
   rather, it adds four values to the list of possible (case-
   insensitivie) envelope-part strings defined in
   [I-D.ietf-sieve-3028bis] section 5.4:

   notify  Match the list of notification conditions, or NOTIFY values,
      associated with TO address used in the SMTP RCPT command that
      resulted in this message getting delivered to this user.  More
      than one notification condition can be in effect at once; each
      condition that is in effect is tested separately and any match
      causes the text to succeed.  The syntax and semantics of the



Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Notary Extension               March 2007


      NOTIFY parameter are defined in RFC 3461 [RFC3461] section 4.1.
      Currently the possible notification condition values are "NEVER",
      "SUCCESS", "FAILURE" and "DELAY".

   orcpt  Match the original recipient, or ORCPT, value in decoded form
      associated with the TO address used in the SMTP RCPT command that
      resulted in this message getting delivered to this user.  The
      syntax and semantics of the ORCPT parameter are defined in RFC
      3461 [RFC3461] section 4.2.

   ret  Match the return of content, or RET, value given in the SMTP
      MAIL FROM command.  The syntax and semantics of the RET parameter
      are defined in RFC 3461 [RFC3461] section 4.3.  Currently the
      possible return of content values are "FULL" and "HDRS".

   envid  Match the envelope identifier, or ENVID, value in decoded form
      given in the SMTP MAIL FROM command.  The syntax and semantics of
      the ENVID parameter are defined in RFC 3461 [RFC3461] section 4.4.

   All of these tests fail unconditionally if the specified envelope
   parameter does not exist for the current message or recipient.

   The "relational" extension [I-D.ietf-sieve-3431bis] adds a match type
   called ":count".  The count of an envelope test of with an envelope-
   part of "orcpt", "ret", and "envid" is 1 if the corresponding SMTP
   parameter is present and 0 otherwise.  The count of an envelope test
   with an envelope-part of "notify" is equal to the number of
   notification conditions specified and 0 if the NOTIFY parameter is
   not present.


5.  Security Considerations

   This extension provides access to additional message envelope
   information.  THis is not believe to raise any additional security
   issues beyond those for the Sieve "envelope" test.

   All of the security considerations given in the base Sieve
   specification also apply to this extension.












Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Notary Extension               March 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   The following template specifies the IANA registration of the Sieve
   extension specified in this document:

      To: iana@iana.org
      Subject: Registration of new Sieve extension

      Capability name: notary
      Description:     The "notary" extension extends the envelope test
                       to allow checking of information associated with
                       the NOTARY SMTP extension.
      RFC number:      RFC XXXX
      Contact address: Ned Freed <ned.freed@mrochek.com>

      This information should be added to the list of sieve extensions
      given on http://www.iana.org/assignments/sieve-extensions.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative references

   [I-D.ietf-sieve-3028bis]
              Guenther, P. and T. Showalter, "Sieve: An Email Filtering
              Language", draft-ietf-sieve-3028bis-12 (work in progress),
              February 2007, <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
              draft-ietf-sieve-3028bis-12.txt>.

   [I-D.ietf-sieve-3431bis]
              Segmuller, W. and B. Leiba, "Sieve Extension: Relational
              Tests", draft-ietf-sieve-3431bis-04 (work in progress),
              December 2005, <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
              draft-ietf-sieve-3431bis-04.txt>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3461]  Moore, K., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
              Extension for Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs)",
              RFC 3461, January 2003.

7.2.  Informative references

   [RFC3501]  Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION
              4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003.





Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Notary Extension               March 2007


Author's Address

   Ned Freed
   Sun Microsystems
   3401 Centrelake Drive, Suite 410
   Ontario, CA  92761-1205
   USA

   Phone: +1 909 457 4293
   Email: ned.freed@mrochek.com









































Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Notary Extension               March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Freed                  Expires September 20, 2007               [Page 6]

