
Service Location Working Group                              Erik Guttman
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Sun Microsystems, Inc
                                                            29 July 1998

                    The Directory Agent Service Type
                   draft-ietf-svrloc-da-scheme-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Service Location Working Group
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be
   submitted to the srvloc@srvloc.org mailing list.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

   This document describes the Directory Agent service type.  Directory
   Agents are one of three types of agents used in the Service Location
   Protocol, Version 2 [1].  The Directory Agent caches services for a
   set of Service Agents which have been enabled to use SLPv2.  User
   Agents issue requests of Directory Agents to discover services.

1. Introduction

   This document provides a Service Template for SLPv2 Directory Agents.
   Service templates are defined in [2].  

   SLPv2 may be used to discover Directory Agents.  Directory Agents 
   respond with DAAdvert messages which include attributes.  This 
   document describes the standard attributes which Directory Agents
   MAY include in their DAAdverts.





Guttman                  Expires 29 January 1999               [Page  1]

Internet Draft       The Directory Agent Service Type       21 June 1998

2. The Directory-Agent Service Type

  -------------------------template begins here-----------------------
  type=directory-agent

  version=0.0

  lang=en

  description=
    This defines the directory-agent service type.  This service is
    used by SLPv2 User Agents, who issue service discovery requests
    and by SLPv2 Service Agents, who register their services with
    the Directory Agent.  The SLPv2 Directory Agent caches the service
    information and provides scalability to the SLPv2 protocol.  The
    Directory Agent MAY include attribute information in its DAAdvert
    messages.  User Agents and Service Agents MAY also use attributes
    to select Directory Agents, by issuing SLPv2 Directory Agent
    discovery Service Requests messages which include a search filter.

  url-syntax=
    url-path= ; The URL of the service agent.  Defined in [1].

  min-lifetime=string L O
  ; The minimum lifetime the Directory Agent will accept in service
  ; registrations.

  max-lifetime=integer L O
  ; The maximum lifetime the Directory Agent will accept in service
  ; registrations.

  --------------------------template ends here------------------------

  contacts = "Erik Guttman" <erik.guttman@sun.com>


3. Security Considerations

  Authentication of Directory Agent URLs is possible within the context
  of SLPv2 [1].  Directory Agent URLs may be used by SLPv2 UAs and SAs.  
  If SLPv2 security mechanisms are not used, UAs and SAs will have no 
  guarantee these services actually conform to the selected subset.











Guttman                  Expires 29 January 1999               [Page  2]

Internet Draft       The Directory Agent Service Type       21 June 1998


References:

  [1] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day.  Service Location
      Protocol. draft-ietf-svrloc-protocol-v2-08.txt, July 1998 (work in
      progress).

  [2] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Kempf, Service Templates and service:
      Schemes. draft-ietf-svrloc-service-scheme-10.txt
      March, 1998 (work in progress).


Author Contact Information:

     Erik Guttman
     Sun Microsystems
     Bahnstr. 2
     74915 Waibstadt Germany
     Erik.Guttman@sun.com
     +49 7263 911 701

































Guttman                  Expires 29 January 1999               [Page  3]





