




Internet Draft                               Ping Pan, Ed  (Ciena Corp)
Expires: May 2003                        Der-Hwa Gan (Juniper Networks)
                                        George Swallow  (Cisco Systems)
                                  Jean Philippe Vasseur (Cisco Systems)
                                          Dave Cooper (Global Crossing)
                                         Alia Atlas, Ed (Avici Systems)
                                            Markus Jork (Avici Systems)


           Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels

              draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document defines extensions to and describes the use of RSVP
   [RSVP, RSVP-TE] to establish backup LSP tunnels for local repair of
   LSP tunnels.  These mechanisms enable the re-direction of traffic
   onto backup LSP tunnels in 10s of milliseconds in the event of a
   failure.

   Two methods are defined here.  The one-to-one backup method creates
   detour LSPs for each protected LSP at each potential point of local
   repair.  The facility backup method creates a bypass tunnel to
   protect a potential failure point; by taking advantage of MPLS label
   stacking, this bypass tunnel can protect a set of protected LSPs that



Pan et al.                                                      [Page 1]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   have similar backup constraints. Both methods can be used to protect
   links and nodes during network failure.  The described behavior and
   extensions to RSVP allow LERs and LSRs to implement either or both
   methods and to interoperate in a mixed network.















































Pan et al.                                                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


Contents

    1  Introduction   .............................................  4
    2  Terminology  ...............................................  4
    3  Local Repair Techniques  ...................................  6
    3.1  One-to-one Backup  .......................................  6
    3.2  Facility Backup  .........................................  7
    4  RSVP Extensions  ...........................................  8
    4.1  FAST_REROUTE Object  .....................................  8
    4.2  DETOUR Object  ........................................... 11
    4.3  SESSION_ATTRIBUTE Flags  ................................. 12
    4.4  RRO IPv4/IPv6 Sub-Object Flags  .......................... 13
    5  Head-End Behavior  ......................................... 14
    6  Point of Local Repair Behavior  ............................ 15
    6.1  Signaling a Backup Path  ................................. 16
    6.1.1  Backup Path Identification: Sender-Template Specific ... 17
    6.1.2  Backup Path Identification: Path-Specific  ............. 18
    6.2  Procedures for Backup Path Computation  .................. 18
    6.3  Signaling Backups for One-To-One Protection  ............. 20
    6.3.1  Make-Before-Break with Detour LSPs  .................... 21
    6.3.2  Message Handling  ...................................... 21
    6.3.3  Local Reroute of Traffic Onto Detour LSP  .............. 22
    6.4  Signaling for Facility Protection  ....................... 23
    6.4.1  Discovering Downstream Labels  ......................... 23
    6.4.2  Procedures for the PLR before Local Repair  ............ 23
    6.4.3  Procedures for the PLR during Local Repair  ............ 23
    6.4.4  Processing backup tunnel's ERO  ........................ 24
    6.5  PLR Procedures During Local Repair  ...................... 25
    6.5.1  Notification of local repair  .......................... 25
    6.5.2  Revertive Behavior  .................................... 26
    7  Merge Node Behavior  ....................................... 27
    7.1  Handling Backup Path Messages Before Failure  ............ 27
    7.1.1  Merging Backup Paths using the Sender-Template
           Specific Method  ....................................... 28
    7.1.2  Merging Detours using Path-Specific Method  ............ 28
    7.1.2.1  An Example on Path Message Merging  .................. 29
    7.1.3  Message Handling for Merged Detours  ................... 30
    7.2  Handling Failures  ....................................... 30
    8  Behavior of all LSRs  ...................................... 31
    8.1  Merging Detours in Path-Specific Method  ................. 31
    9  Security Considerations  ................................... 32
   10  IANA Guidelines  ........................................... 32
   11  Intellectual Property Considerations  ...................... 32
   12  Full Copyright Statement  .................................. 32
   13  Acknowledgments  ........................................... 33
   14  References  ................................................ 33
   15  Author Information  ........................................ 33




Pan et al.                                                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


1.  Introduction

   This document extends RSVP [RSVP] to establish backup LSP tunnels
   for the local repair of LSP tunnels.  This technique is presented
   to meet the needs of real-time applications, such as voice over IP,
   for which it is highly desirable to be able to re-direct user
   traffic onto backup LSP tunnels in 10s of milliseconds.  This
   timing requirement can be satisfied by computing and signaling
   backup LSP tunnels in advance of failure and by re-directing
   traffic as close to failure point as possible.  In this way, the
   time for the redirection does not include any path computation or
   signaling delays, including delays to propagate failure
   notification between LSRs.  The speed of repair made possible by
   the techniques and extensions described herein is the primary
   advantage of this method.  We use the term local repair when
   referring to techniques which accomplish this, and refer to an
   explicitly routed LSP which is provided with such protection as a
   protected LSP.  These techniques are applicable only to explicitly
   routed LSPs; Application of the techniques discussed herein to LSPs
   which dynamically change their routes such as those used in unicast
   IGP routing is beyond the scope of this document.

   Section 2 covers new terminology used in this document.  The two
   basic strategies for creating backup LSPs are described in Section
   3.  In Section 4, the protocol extensions to RSVP to support local
   protection are described.  In Section 5, the behavior of an LER
   which wishes to request local protection for an LSP is presented.
   The behavior of a potential point of local repair (PLR) is given in
   Section 6; this describes how to determine the appropriate strategy
   to use for protecting an LSP and how to implement each of the
   strategies.  The behavior of a merge node, the LSR where a
   protected LSP and its backup LSP rejoin, is described in Section 7.
   Finally, the required behavior of other nodes in the network is
   discussed in Section 8.


2. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC-WORDS].

   The reader is assumed to be familiar with the terminology in [RSVP]
   and [RSVP-TE].

      LSR - Label Switch Router

      LSP - An MPLS Label Switched Path.  In this document, an LSP



Pan et al.                                                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


            will always refer to an explicitly routed LSP.

      Local Repair - Techniques used to repair LSP tunnels quickly
           when a node or link along the LSPs path fails.

      PLR - Point of Local Repair. The head-end LSR of a backup tunnel
           or a detour LSP.

      One-to-one Backup - A local repair technique where a backup LSP
           is separately created for each protected LSP at a PLR.

      Facility Backup - A local repair technique where a bypass tunnel
           is used to protect one or more protected LSPs which
           traverse the PLR, the resource being protected and the
           Merge Point in that order.

      Protected LSP - An LSP is said to be protected at a given hop if
           it has one or multiple associated backup tunnels originating
           at that hop.

      Detour LSP - The LSP that is used to re-route traffic around
           a failure in one-to-one backup.

      Bypass Tunnel - An LSP that is used to protect a set of LSPs
           passing over a common facility.

      Backup Tunnel - The LSP that is used to backup up one of the many
           LSPs in many-to-one backup.

      NHOP Bypass Tunnel - Next-Hop Bypass Tunnel.  A backup tunnel
           which bypasses a single link of the protected LSP.

      NNHOP Bypass Tunnel - Next-Next-Hop Bypass Tunnel.  A backup
           tunnel which bypasses a single node of the protected LSP.

      Backup Path - The LSP that is responsible for backing up one
           protection LSP. A backup path refers to either a detour LSP
           or a backup tunnel.

      MP - Merge Point. The LSR where one or more backup tunnels rejoin
           the path of the protected LSP, downstream of the potential
           failure. The same LSR may be both an MP and a PLR
           simultaneously.

      DMP - Detour Merge Point.  In the case of one-to-one backup,
           this is an LSR where multiple detours converge and only one
           detour is signaled beyond that LSR.




Pan et al.                                                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


      Reroutable LSP - Any LSP for which the head-end LSR requests
           local protection. See Section 9.1 for more detail.

      CSPF - Constraint-based Shortest Path First.

      SRLG Disjoint - A path is considered to be SRLG disjoint from a
         given link or node if the path does not use any links or
         nodes which belong to the same SRLG as that given link or
         node.


3.  Local Repair Techniques

   Two different techniques for local protection are presented here.
   The one-to-one backup technique has a PLR compute a separate backup
   LSP, called a detour LSP, for each LSP which the PLR protects using
   this technique.  With the facility backup technique, the PLR creates
   a single bypass tunnel which can be used to protect multiple LSPs.


3.1.  One-to-one backup

   In the one-to-one technique, a label switched path is established
   which intersects the original LSP somewhere downstream of the point
   of link or node failure.  For each LSP which is backed up, a
   separate backup LSP is established.

              [R1]---[R2]-----[R3]----[R4]---[R5]
                 \     \         \   /   \   /
                [R6]---[R7]-------[R8]----[R9]

              Protected LSP:  [R1->R2->R3->R4->R5]
              R1's Backup:    [R1->R6->R7->R8->R3]
              R2's Backup:    [R2->R7->R8->R4]
              R3's Backup:    [R3->R8->R9->R5]
              R4's Backup:    [R4->R9->R5]

              Example 1: One-to-One Backup Technique

   In the simple topology shown above in Example 1, the protected LSP
   runs from R1 to R5.  R2 can provide user traffic protection by
   creating a partial backup LSP which merges with the protected LSP
   at R4.  We refer to a partial one-to-one backup LSP
   [R2->R7->R8->R4] as a detour.

   To fully protect an LSP that traverses N nodes, there could be as
   many as (N - 1) detours.  The paths for the detours necessary to
   fully protect the LSP in Example 1 are given there.  To minimize



Pan et al.                                                      [Page 6]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   the number of LSPs in the network, it is desirable to merge a
   detour back to its protected LSP when feasible.  When a detour LSP
   intersects its protected LSP at an LSR with the same outgoing
   interface, it will be merged.

   When a failure occurs along the protected LSP, the PLR redirects
   traffic onto the local detour.  For instance, if the link [R2->R3]
   fails in Example 1, R2 will switch traffic received from R1 onto
   the protected LSP along link [R2->R7] using the label received when
   R2 created the detour.  When R4 receives traffic with the label
   provided for R2's detour, R4 will switch that traffic onto link
   [R4-R5] using the label received from R5 for the protected LSP.  At
   no point does the depth of the label stack increase as a result of
   taking the detour.  While R2 is using its detour, traffic will take
   the path [R1->R2->R7->R8->R4->R5].


3.2. Facility backup

   The facility backup technique takes advantage of the MPLS label
   stack.  Instead of creating a separate LSP for every backed-up LSP, a
   single LSP is created which serves to backup up a set of LSPs.  We
   call such an LSP tunnel a bypass tunnel.

   The bypass tunnel must intersect the path of the original LSP(s)
   somewhere downstream of the PLR.  Naturally, this constrains the
   set of LSPs being backed-up via that bypass tunnel to those that
   pass through some common downstream node.  All LSPs which pass
   through the point of local repair and through this common node
   which do not also use the facilities involved in the bypass tunnel
   are candidates for this set of LSPs.

                 [R8]
                     \
               [R1]---[R2]----[R3]----[R4]---[R5]
                          \          /   \
                           [R6]===[R7]     [R9]

                Protected LSP 1: [R1->R2->R3->R4->R5]
                Protected LSP 2: [R8->R2->R3->R4]
                Protected LSP 3: [R2->R3->R4->R9]
                Bypass LSP Tunnel: [R2->R6->R7->R4]

                    Example 2: Facility Backup Technique

   In Example 2, R2 has built a bypass tunnel which protects against
   the failure of link [R2->R3], link [R3->R4] or node [R3].  The
   doubled lines represent this tunnel.  The scalability improvement



Pan et al.                                                      [Page 7]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   this technique provides is that the same bypass tunnel can also be
   used to protect LSPs from any of R1, R2 or R8 to any of R4, R5 or
   R9.  Example 2 describes three different protected LSPs which are
   using the same bypass tunnel for protection.

   As with the one-to-one technique, to fully protect an LSP that
   traverses N nodes, there could be as many as (N-1) bypass tunnels.
   However, each of those bypass tunnels could protected a set of
   LSPs.

   When a failure occurs along a protected LSP, the PLR redirects
   traffic into the appropriate bypass tunnel.  For instance, if link
   [R2->R3] fails in Example 2, R2 will switch traffic received from
   R1 on the protected LSP onto link [R2->R6]; the label will be
   switched for one which will be understood by R4 to indicate the
   protected LSP and then the bypass tunnel's label will be pushed
   onto the label-stack of the redirected packets.  If
   penultimate-hop-popping is used, then the merge point in Example 2,
   R4, will receive the redirected packet with a label indicating the
   protected LSP that the packet is to follow.  If
   penultimate-hop-popping is not used, then R4 will pop the bypass
   tunnel's label and examine the label underneath to determine the
   protected LSP that the packet is to follow.  When R2 is using the
   bypass tunnel for protected LSP 1, the traffic takes the path
   [R1->R2->R6->R7->R4->R5]; the bypass tunnel is the connection
   between R2 and R4.


4. RSVP Extensions

   We propose two additional objects, FAST_REROUTE and DETOUR, to
   extend RSVP-TE for fast-reroute signaling.  These new objects are
   backward compatible with LSRs that do not recognize them (see
   section 3.10 in [RSVP]).  Both objects can only be carried in RSVP
   Path messages.

   The SESSION_ATTRIBUTE and RECORD_ROUTE objects are also extended to
   support bandwidth and node protection features.


4.1. FAST_REROUTE Object

   The FAST-REROUTE object is used to control the backup used for the
   protected LSP.  This specifies the setup and hold priorities, the
   session attribute filters, and bandwidth to be used for protection.
   It also allows a specific local protection technique to be requested.
   This object MUST only be inserted into the PATH message by the
   head-end LER and MUST NOT be changed by downstream LSRs. The



Pan et al.                                                      [Page 8]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   FAST-REROUTE object has the following format:

      Class = TBD  (use form 11bbbbbb for compatibility)
      C-Type = 1

               0             1              2             3
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |       Length (bytes)      |  Class-Num  |   C-Type    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | Setup Prio  | Hold Prio   | Hop-limit   |    Flags    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                 Bandwidth                             |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                  Include-any                          |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                  Exclude-any                          |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                  Include-all                          |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+


      Setup Priority

        The priority of the backup path with respect to taking
        resources, in the range of 0 to 7.  The value 0 is the highest
        priority.  Setup Priority is used in deciding whether
        this session can preempt another session. See [RSVP-TE] for
        the usage on priority.

      Holding Priority

        The priority of the backup path with respect to holding
        resources, in the range of 0 to 7.  The value 0 is the highest
        priority.  Holding Priority is used in deciding whether this
        session can be preempted by another session. See [RSVP-TE] for
        the usage on priority.

      Hop-limit

       The maximum number of extra hops the backup path is allowed
       to take, from current node (a PLR) to a MP, with PLR and MP
       excluded in counting.  For example, hop-limit of 0 means only
       direct links between PLR and MP can be considered.

      Flags

       0x01  One-to-one Backup Desired




Pan et al.                                                      [Page 9]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


          Indicates that protection via the one-to-one backup
          technique is desired.

       0x02  Facility Backup Desired

          Indicates that protection via the facility backup
          technique is desired.

      Bandwidth

       Bandwidth estimate  (32-bit IEEE floating point integer) in
       bytes-per-second.

      Exclude-any

       A 32-bit vector representing a set of attribute filters
       associated with a backup path any of which renders a link
       unacceptable.

      Include-any

       A 32-bit vector representing a set of attribute filters
       associated with a backup path any of which renders a link
       acceptable (with respect to this test). A null set (all bits
       set to zero) automatically passes.

      Include-all

       A 32-bit vector representing a set of attribute filters
       associated with a backup path all of which must be present for
       a link to be acceptable (with respect to this test). A null set
       (all bits set to zero) automatically passes.


   The two high-order bits of the Class-Num (11) indicate that nodes
   that do not understand the object should ignore it and pass if
   forward unchanged.

   For informational purposes, a different C-type value and format for
   the FAST_REROUTE object are specified below.  This is used by
   existing implementations.  The meaning of the fields is the same as
   described for C-Type 1.









Pan et al.                                                     [Page 10]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


      C-Type = 7

               0             1              2             3
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |       Length (bytes)      |  Class-Num  |   C-Type    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | Setup Prio  | Hold Prio   | Hop-limit   | Reserved    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                 Bandwidth                             |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                  Include-any                          |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                  Exclude-any                          |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+


4.2. DETOUR Object

   The DETOUR object is used in one-to-one backup to identify detour
   LSPs. It has the following format:

      Class = TBD  (to conform 0bbbbbbb format for compatibility)
      C-Type = 7

             0             1              2             3
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |       Length (bytes)      |  Class-Num  |   C-Type    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                      PLR ID  1                        |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                    Avoid Node ID 1                    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
       //                        ....                          //
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                      PLR ID  n                        |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |                    Avoid Node ID  n                   |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+


      PLR ID  (1 - n)

        IPv4 address identifying the beginning point of detour which
        is a PLR. Any local address on the PLR can be used.

      Avoid Node ID  (1 - n)

        IP address identifying the immediate downstream node that



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 11]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        the PLR is trying to avoid. Router ID of downstream node
        is preferred. This field is mandatory, and is used by
        the MP for merging rules discussed below.

   There can be more than one pair of (PLR_ID, Avoid_Node_ID) entries in
   a DETOUR object. If detour merging is desired, after each merging
   operation, the Detour Merge Point should combine all the merged
   detours in the subsequent Path messages.

   The high-order bit of the C-Class is zero; LSRs that do not support
   the DETOUR objects MUST reject any Path message containing a DETOUR
   object and send a PathErr to notify the PLR.


4.3. SESSION_ATTRIBUTE Flags

   To explicitly request bandwidth and node protection, two new flags
   are defined in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.

   For both C-Type 1 and 7, the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object currently has
   the following flags defined:

      Local protection desired:   0x01

        This flag permits transit routers to use a local repair
        mechanism which may result in violation of the explicit route
        object.  When a fault is detected on an adjacent downstream link
        or node, a transit node may reroute traffic for fast service
        restoration.

      Label recording desired:   0x02

        This flag indicates that label information should be included
        when doing a route record.

      SE Style desired:   0x04

        This flag indicates that the tunnel ingress node may choose to
        reroute this tunnel without tearing it down. A tunnel egress
        node SHOULD use the SE Style when responding with a Resv
        message.  When requesting fast reroute, the head-end LSR
        SHOULD set this flag; this is not necessary for the
        path-specific method of the one-to-one backup technique.

   The following new flags are defined:

      Bandwidth protection desired:  0x08




Pan et al.                                                     [Page 12]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        This flag indicates to the PLRs along the protected LSP path
        that a backup path with a bandwidth guarantee is desired.
        The bandwidth to be guaranteed is that of the protected
        LSP, if no FAST_REROUTE object is included in the PATH message;
        if a FAST_REROUTE object is in the PATH message, then the
        bandwidth specified therein is that to be guaranteed.

      Node protection desired: 0x10

        This flag indicates to the PLRs along a protected LSP path
        that a backup path which bypasses at least the next node of
        the protected LSP is desired.


4.4. RRO IPv4/IPv6 Sub-Object Flags

   To report whether bandwidth and/or node protection are provided as
   requested, we define two news flags in the RRO IPv4 sub-object.

   RRO IPv4 and IPv6 sub-object address:

   These two sub-objects currently have the following flags defined:

      Local protection available:  0x01

        Indicates that the link downstream of this node is protected
        via a local repair mechanism, which can be either one-to-one
        or facility backup.

      Local protection in use:  0x02

        Indicates that a local repair mechanism is in use to maintain
        this tunnel (usually in the face of an outage of the link it
        was previously routed over, or an outage of the neighboring
        node).


   Two new flags are defined:

      Bandwidth protection:  0x04

        The PLR will set this when the protected LSP has a backup path
        which is guaranteed to provide the desired bandwidth specified
        in the FAST_REROUTE object or the bandwidth of the protected
        LSP, if no FAST_REROUTE object was included.  The PLR may set
        this whenever the desired bandwidth is guaranteed; the PLR
        MUST set this flag when the desired bandwidth is guaranteed
        and the "bandwidth protection desired" flag was set in the



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 13]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.  If the requested bandwidth is not
        guaranteed, the PLR MUST NOT set this flag.


      Node protection:  0x08

        The PLR will set this when the protected LSP has a backup path
        which provides protection against a failure of the next LSR
        along the protected LSP.  The PLR may set this whenever node
        protection is provided by the protected LSP's backup path; the
        PLR MUST set this flag when the node protection is provided
        and the "node protection desired" flag was set in the
        SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.  If node protection is not provided,
        the PLR MUST NOT set this flag.  Thus, if a PLR could only
        setup a link-protection backup path, the "Local protection
        available" bit will be set but the "Node protection" bit will
        be cleared.


5. Head-End Behavior

   The head-end of an LSP determines whether local protection should
   be requested for that LSP and which local protection technique is
   desired for the protected LSP.  The head-end also determines what
   constraints should be requested for the backup paths of a protected
   LSP.

   To indicate that an LSP should be locally protected, the head-end
   LSR MUST either set the "Local protection desired" flag in the
   SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object or include a FAST_REROUTE object in the
   PATH message or both.  It is recommended that the "local protection
   desired" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object always be set.  If a
   head-end LSR signals a FAST_REROUTE object, it MUST be stored for
   Path refreshes.

   The head-end LSR of a protected LSP MUST set the "label recording
   desired" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.  This facilitates
   the use of the facility backup technique.  If node protection is
   desired, the head-end LSR should set the "node protection desired"
   flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object; if only link protection is
   desired, this flag should be cleared.  Similarly, if a guarantee of
   bandwidth protection is desired, then the "bandwidth protection
   desired" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object should be set;
   otherwise, this flag should be cleared.

   If the head-end LSR determines that control of the backup paths for
   the protected LSP is desired, then the LSR should include the
   FAST_REROUTE object.  The attribute filters, bandwidth, hop-limit



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 14]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   and priorities will be used by the PLRs when determining the backup
   paths.

   If the head-end LSR desires that the protected LSP be protected via
   the one-to-one backup technique, then head-end LSR should include a
   FAST_REROUTE object and set the "one-to-one backup desired" flag.
   If the head-end LSR desires that the protected LSP be protected via
   the facility backup technique, then the head-end LSR should include
   a FAST_REROUTE object and set the "facility backup desired" flag.
   The lack of a FAST_REROUTE object, or having both these flags
   clear should be treated by PLRs as a lack of preference.  If
   both flags are set a PLR may use either method or both.

   The head-end LSR of a protected LSP MUST support the additional
   flags defined in Section 4.4 being set or clear in the RRO IPv4 and
   IPv6 sub-objects.  The head-end LSR of a protected LSP MUST support
   the RRO Label sub-object.

   If the head-end LSR of an LSP determines that local protection is
   newly desired, this should be signaled via make-before-break.


6. Point of Local Repair Behavior

   Every LSR along a protected LSP (except the egress) MUST follow the
   PLR behavior described in this document.

   A PLR SHOULD support the FAST_REROUTE object, the "local protection
   desired", "label recording desired", "node protection desired" and
   "bandwidth protection desired" flags in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE
   object, and the "local protection available", "local protection in
   use", "bandwidth protection", and "node protection" flags in the
   RRO IPv4 and IPv6 sub-objects.  A PLR MAY support the DETOUR
   object.

   A PLR MUST consider an LSP as having asked for local protection if
   the "local protection desired" flag is set in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE
   object and/or the FAST_REROUTE object is included.  If the
   FAST_REROUTE object is included, a PLR SHOULD consider providing
   one-to-one protection if the "one-to-one desired" is set and SHOULD
   consider providing facility backup if the "facility backup desired"
   flag is set when determining whether to provide local protection
   and which technique to use to provide that local protection.  If
   the "node protection desired" flag is set, the PLR SHOULD try to
   provide node protection; if this is not feasible, the PLR SHOULD
   then try to provide link protection.

   The following treatment for the RRO IPv4 or IPv6 sub-object's flags



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 15]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   must be followed if an RRO is included in the protected LSP's RESV
   message.  Based on this additional information the head-end may
   take appropriate actions.

    - Until a PLR has a backup path available, the PLR MUST clear the
      relevant four flags in the corresponding RRO IPv4 or IPv6
      sub-object.

    - Whenever the PLR has a backup path available, the PLR MUST set
      the "local protection available" flag.  If no established
      one-to-one backup LSP or bypass tunnel exists, or the one-to-one
      LSP and the bypass tunnel is in "DOWN" state, the PLR MUST clear
      the "local protection available" flag in its IPv4 (or IPv6)
      address subobject of the RRO and SHOULD send the updated RESV.

    - The PLR MUST clear the "local protection in use" flag unless it
      is actively redirecting traffic into the backup path instead of
      along the protected LSP.

    - The PLR SHOULD also set the "node protection" flag if the backup
      path protects against the failure of the immediate downstream
      node and, if not, the PLR SHOULD clear the "node protection"
      flag.  This MUST be done if the "node protection desired" flag
      was set in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.

    - The PLR SHOULD set the "bandwidth protection" if the backup path
      offers a bandwidth guarantee and, if not, SHOULD clear the
      "bandwidth protection" flag. This MUST be done if the "bandwidth
      protection desired" flag was set in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE
      object.


6.1 Signaling a Backup Path

   A number of objectives must be met to obtain a satisfactory signaling
   solution. These are summarized as follows:

     1. Unambiguously and uniquely identify backup paths
     2. Unambiguously associate protected LSPs with their backup paths
     3. Work with both global and non-global label spaces
     4. Allow for merging of backup paths
     5. Maintain RSVP state during and after fail-over.

   LSP tunnels are identified by a combination of the SESSION and
   SENDER_TEMPLATE objects. The relevant fields are as follows.

      IPv4 (or IPv6) tunnel end point address




Pan et al.                                                     [Page 16]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        IPv4 (or IPv6) address of the egress node for the tunnel.

      Tunnel ID

        A 16-bit identifier used in the SESSION that remains constant
        over the life of the tunnel.

      Extended Tunnel ID

        A 32-bit (IPv4) or 128-bit (IPv6) identifier used in the SESSION
        that remains constant over the life of the tunnel. Normally set
        to all zeros. Ingress nodes that wish to narrow the scope of a
        SESSION to the ingress-egress pair may place their IP address
        here as a globally unique identifier.

      IPv4 (or IPv6) tunnel sender address

        IPv4 (or IPv6) address for a sender node

      LSP ID

        A  16-bit identifier used in the SENDER_TEMPLATE and the
        FILTER_SPEC that can be changed to allow a sender to share
        resources with itself.

   The first three of these are in the SESSION object and are the basic
   identification of the tunnel.  Setting the "Extended Tunnel ID" to
   an IP address of the head-end LSR allows the scope of the SESSION
   to be narrowed to only LSPs sent by that LSR.  A backup LSP is
   considered to be part of the same session as its protected LSP;
   therefore these three cannot be varied.

   The last two are in the SENDER_TEMPLATE.  Multiple LSPs in the same
   SESSION may be protected and take different routes; this is common
   when rerouting a tunnel using make-before-break.  It is necessary
   that a backup path be clearly identified with its protected LSP, so
   that correct merging and state treatment can be done.  Therefore, a
   backup path must inherit its LSP ID from the associated protected
   LSP.  Thus, the only field in the SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE
   objects which could be varied between a backup path and a protected
   LSP is the "IPv4 (or IPv6) tunnel sender address" in the
   SENDER_TEMPLATE.

   There are two different methods to uniquely identify a backup
   path.  These are described below.


6.1.1. Backup Path Identification: Sender-Template-Specific



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 17]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   In this approach, the SESSION object and the LSP_ID are copied from
   the protected LSP.  The "IPv4 tunnel sender address" is set to an
   address of the PLR.  If the head-end of a tunnel is also acting as
   the PLR, it must choose an IP address different from the one used
   in the SENDER_TEMPLATE of the original LSP tunnel.

   When using the sender-template-specific approach, the protected
   LSPs and the backup paths SHOULD use the Shared Explicit (SE)
   style.  This allows bandwidth sharing between multiple backup
   paths.  The backup paths and the protected LSP MAY be merged by the
   Detour Merge Points, when the ERO from the MP to the egress is the
   same on each LSP to be merged, as specified in [RSVP-TE].


6.1.2. Backup Path Identification: Path-Specific

   In this approach, rather than varying the SESSION or
   SENDER_TEMPLATE objects, a new object, the DETOUR object, is used
   to distinguish between PATH messages for a backup path and the
   protected LSP.

   Thus, the backup paths use the same SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE
   objects as the ones used in the protected LSP. The presence of
   DETOUR object in Path messages signifies a backup path; the
   presence of FAST_REROUTE object and/or the "local protection
   requested" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object indicates a
   protected LSP.

   In the path-message-specific approach, when an LSR receives
   multiple Path messages which have the same SESSION and
   SENDER_TEMPLATE objects and also have the same next-hop, that LSR
   must merge the Path messages.  Without this behavior, the multiple
   RESV messages received back would not be distinguishable as to
   which backup path each belongs to.  This merging behavior does
   reduce the total number of RSVP states inside the network at the
   expense of merging LSPs with different EROs.


6.2 Procedures for Backup Path Computation

   Before a PLR can create a detour or a bypass tunnel, the desired
   explicit route must be determined.  This can be done using a CSPF.

   Before CSPF computation, the following information should be
   collected at a PLR:

      - The list of downstream nodes that the protected LSP passes
        through. This information is readily available from the



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 18]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        RECORD_ROUTE objects during LSP setup. This information is also
        available from the ERO.  However, if the ERO contains loose
        sub-objects, the ERO may not provide adequate information.

      - The downstream links/nodes that we want to protect against. Once
        again, this information is learned from the RECORD_ROUTE
        objects.  Whether node protection is desired is determined by
        the "node protection" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object and
        local policy.

      - The upstream uni-directional links that the protected LSP
        passes through.  This information is learned from the
        RECORD_ROUTE objects; it is only needed for setting up
        one-to-one protection.  In the path-specific method, it is
        necessary to avoid the detour and the protected LSP sharing
        a common next-hop upstream of the failure.  In the
        sender-template-specific mode, this same restriction is
        necessary to avoid sharing bandwidth between the detour and
        its protected LSP, where that bandwidth has only been reserved
        once.

      - The link attribute filters to be applied.  These are derived
        from the FAST_REROUTE object, if included in the PATH message,
        and the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object otherwise.

      - The bandwidth to be used is found in the FAST_REROUTE object,
        if included in the PATH message, and in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE
        object otherwise.  Local policy may modify the bandwidth to be
        reserved.

      - The hop-limit, if a FAST_REROUTE object was included in the
        PATH message.

   When applying a CSPF algorithm to compute the backup route, the
   following constraints should be satisfied:

      - For detour LSPs, the destination MUST be the tail-end of the
        protected LSP; for bypass tunnels (Section 6), the destination
        MUST be the address of the MP.

      - When setting up one-to-one protection using the path-specific
        method, a detour MUST not traverse the upstream links of the
        protected LSP in the same direction.  This prevents the
        possibility of early merging of the detour into the protected
        LSP.  When setting up one-to-one protection using the
        sender-template-specific method, a detour should not traverse
        the upstream links of the protected LSP in the same direction;
        this prevents sharing the bandwidth between a protected LSP



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 19]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


        and its backup upstream of the failure where the bandwidth
        would be used twice in the event of a failure.

      - The backup LSP cannot traverse the downstream node and/or link
        whose failure is being protected against.  Note that if the
        PLR is the penultimate hop, node protection is not possible
        and only the downstream link can be avoided.  The backup path
        may be computed to be SRLG disjoint from the downstream node
        and/or link being avoided.

      - The backup path must satisfy the resource requirements of the
        protected LSP.  This SHOULD consider the link attribute
        filters, bandwidth, and hop limits determined from the
        FAST_REROUTE object and SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.

   If such computation succeeds, the PLR should attempt to establish a
   backup path.  The PLR may schedule a re-computation at a later time
   to discover better paths that may have emerged.  If for any reason,
   the PLR is unable to bring up a backup path, it must schedule a
   retry at a later time.


6.3 Signaling Backups for One-To-One Protection

   Once a PLR has decided to locally protect an LSP with one-to-one
   backup, and has identified the desired path, it takes the following
   steps to signal the detour.

   The following describes the transformation to be performed upon the
   protected LSP's PATH message to create the detour LSP's PATH
   message.

   - If the sender-template specific method is to be used, then the
     PLR MUST change the "IPv4 (or IPv6) tunnel sender address" of the
     SENDER_TEMPLATE to an address belonging to the PLR that is not
     the same as was used for the protected LSP.  Additionally, the
     DETOUR object MAY be added to the PATH message.

   - If the path-specific method is to be used, then the PLR MUST add
     a DETOUR object to the PATH message.

   - The SESSION_ATTRIBUTE flags "Local protection desired",
     "Bandwidth protection desired" and "Node protection desired" MUST
     be cleared.  The "Label recording desired" flag MAY be modified.
     If the Path Message contained a FAST_REROUTE object, and the ERO
     is not completely strict, the Include-any, Exclude-any, and
     Include-all fields of the FAST_REROUTE object should be copied to
     the corresponding fields of the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 20]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   - If the protected LSP's Path message contained a FAST_REROUTE
     object, this MUST be removed from the detour LSP's PATH message.

   - The PLR must generate an EXPLICIT_ROUTE object toward the egress.
     First, the PLR must remove all sub-objects preceding the first
     address belonging to the Merge Point.  Then the PLR should add
     sub-objects corresponding to the desired backup path between the
     PLR and the MP.

   - The SENDER_TSPEC object should contain the bandwidth information
     from the received FAST_REROUTE object, if included in the
     protected LSP's PATH message.

   - The RSVP_HOP object containing one of the PLR's IP address.

   - The detour LSPs MUST use the same reservation style as the
     protected LSP. This must be correctly reflected in the
     SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object.

   Detour LSPs are regular LSPs in operation.  Once a detour path is
   successfully computed and the detour LSP is established, the PLR
   need not compute detour routes again, unless (1) the contents of
   FAST_REROUTE have changed, or (2) the downstream interface and/or
   the nexthop router for a protected LSP have changed.  The PLR may
   recompute detour routes at any time.


6.3.1 Make-Before-Break with Detour LSPs

   If the sender-template specific method is used, it is possible to
   do make-before-break with detour LSPs.  This is done by using two
   different IP addresses belonging to the PLR (which were not used in
   the SENDER_TEMPLATE of the protected LSP).  If the current detour
   LSP uses the first IP address in its SENDER_TEMPLATE, then the new
   detour LSP should be signaled using the second IP address in its
   SENDER_TEMPLATE.  Once the new detour LSP has been created, the
   current detour LSP can be torn down.  By alternating the use of
   these IP addresses, the current and new detour LSPs will have
   different SENDER_TEMPLATES and, thus, different state in the
   downstream LSRs.

   This make-before-break mechanism, changing the PLR IP address in
   the DETOUR object instead, is not feasible with the path-specific
   method because the PATH messages for new and current detour LSPs
   may be merged if they share a common next-hop.


6.3.2 Message Handling



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 21]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   LSRs must process the detour LSPs independent of the protected LSPs
   to avoid triggering the LSP loop detection procedure described in
   [RSVP-TE].

   The PLR MUST not mix the messages for the protected and the detour
   LSPs.  When a PLR receives Resv, ResvTear and PathErr messages from
   the downstream detour destination, the messages MUST not be forwarded
   upstream. Similarly, when a PLR receives ResvErr and ResvConf
   messages from a protected LSP, it MUST not propagate them onto the
   associated detour LSP.

   A session tear-down request is normally originated by the sender via
   PathTear messages. When a PLR node receives a PathTear message from
   upstream, it MUST delete both the protected and the detour LSPs. The
   PathTear messages MUST propagate to both protected and detour LSPs.

   During error conditions, the LSRs may send ResvTear messages to fix
   problems on the failing path. When a PLR node receives the ResvTear
   messages from downstream for a protected LSP, as long as a detour is
   up, the ResvTear messages MUST not be sent further upstream.
   PathErrs should be treated similiarly.


6.3.3 Local Reroute of Traffic onto Detour LSP

   When the PLR detects a failure on the protected LSP, the PLR MUST
   rapidly switch packets to the protected LSP's backup LSP instead of
   the protected LSP's normal out-segment.  The goal of this technique
   is to effect the redirection within 10s of milliseconds.

               L32      L33      L34      L35
           R1-------R2-------R3-------R4-------R5
                    |                |
               L46  |      L47       | L44
                    R6---------------R7

            Protected LSP: [R1->R2->R3->R4->R5]
            Detour LSP:    [R2->R6->R7->R4]

                 Example 3: Redirect to Detour

   In Example 3 above, if the link [R2->R3] fails, then R2 would do
   the following.  Any traffic received on link [R1->R2] with label
   L32 would be sent out link [R2->R6] with label L46 (along the
   detour LSP) instead of out link [R3->R4] with lable L34 (along the
   protected LSP).  The Merge Point, R4, would recognize that packets
   received on link [R7->R4] with label L44 should be sent out link
   [R4->R5] with label L35, and thus merged with the protected LSP.



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 22]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


6.4 Signaling for Facility Protection

    A PLR may use one or more bypass tunnels to protect against the
    failure of a link and/or a node.  These bypass tunnels may be
    setup in advance or may be dynamically created as new protected
    LSPs are signaled.


6.4.1. Discovering Downstream Labels

   To support facility backup, it is necessary for the PLR to
   determine a label which will indicate to the MP that packets
   received with that label should be switched along the protected
   LSP.  This can be done without explicitly signaling the backup path
   if the MP uses a label space global to that LSR.

   As described in Section 5, the head-end LSR MUST set the "label
   recording requested" flag in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object for LSPs
   requesting local protection.  This will cause (as specified in
   [RSVP- TE]) all LSRs to record their INBOUND labels and to note via
   a flag if the label is global to the LSR.  Thus, when a protected
   LSP is first signaled through a PLR, the PLR can examine the RRO in
   the Resv message and learn about the incoming labels that are used
   by all downstream nodes for this LSP.

   When MPs use per-interface-label spaces, the PLR must send Path
   messages (for each protected LSP using a bypass tunnel) via that
   bypass tunnel prior to the failure in order to discover the
   appropriate MP label. The signaling procedures for this are in
   Section 6.4.3 below.


6.4.2. Procedures for the PLR before Local Repair

   A PLR which determines to use facility-backup to protect a given
   LSP SHOULD select a bypass tunnel to use taking into account
   whether node protection is to be provided, what bandwidth was
   requested and whether a bandwidth guarantee is desired, and what
   link attribute filters were specified in the FAST_REROUTE object.
   The selection of a bypass tunnel for a protected LSP is performed
   by the PLR when the LSP is first setup.


6.4.3. Procedures for the PLR during Local Repair

   When the PLR detects a link or/and node failure condition, it needs
   to reroute the data traffic onto the bypass tunnel and to start
   sending the control traffic for the protected LSP onto the bypass



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 23]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   tunnel.

   The backup tunnel is identified using the sender-template-specific
   method.  The procedures to follow are similar to those described in
   Section 6.3.

      - The SESSION is unchanged.

      - The SESSION_ATTRIBUTE is unchanged except as follows:
        The "Local protection desired", "Bandwidth protection desired",
        and "Node protection desired" flags SHOULD be cleared.
        The "Label recording desired" MAY be modified.

      - The IPv4 (or IPv6) tunnel sender address of the SENDER_TEMPLATE
        is set to an address belonging to the PLR.

      - The RSVP_HOP object must contain an IP source address
        belonging to the PLR. Consequently, the MP will send messages
        back to the PLR using as a destination that IP address.

      - The PLR must generate an EXPLICIT_ROUTE object toward the
        egress. Detailed ERO processing is described below.

      - The RRO object may need to be updated, as described in Section
        6.5.

   The PLR sends Path, PathTear, and ResvConf messages via the backup
   tunnel.  The MP sends Resv, ResvTear, and PathErr messages by
   directly addressing them to the address in the RSVP_HOP object
   contents as specified in [RSVP].

   If it is necessary to signal the backup prior to failure to
   determine the MP label to use, then the same Path message is sent.
   In this case, the PLR should continue to send Path messages for the
   protected LSP along the normal route.   PathTear messages should be
   duplicated, with one sent along the normal route and one sent thru
   the bypass tunnel. The MP should duplicate the Resv and ResvTear
   messages and sent them to both the PLR and the LSR indicated by the
   protected LSP's RSVP_HOP object.


6.4.4. Processing backup tunnel's ERO

   Procedures for ERO processing are described in [RSVP-TE]. This
   section describes additional ERO update procedures for Path messages
   which are sent over bypass tunnels.  If normal ERO processing rules
   were followed, the Merge Point would examine the first sub-object and
   likely reject it (Bad initial sub-object).  This is because the



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 24]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   unmodified ERO might contain the IP address of a bypassed node (in
   the case of a NNHOP Backup Tunnel), or of an interface which is
   currently down (in the case of a NHOP Backup Tunnel).  For this
   reason, the PLR invoke the following ERO procedures before sending a
   Path message via a bypass tunnel.

   Sub-objects belonging to abstract nodes which precede the Merge Point
   are removed, along with the first sub-object belonging to the MP.  A
   sub-object identifying the Backup Tunnel destination is then added.

   More specifically, the PLR must:

     - remove all the sub-objects proceeding the first address belonging
        to the MP.

     - replace this first MP address with an IP address of the MP.
        (Note that this could be same address that was just removed.)


6.5. PLR Procedures During Local Repair

   In addition to the technique specific signaling and packet
   treatment, there is common signaling which should be followed.

   During fast reroute, for each protected LSP containing an RRO
   object, the PLR obtains the RRO from the protected LSP's stored
   RESV and updates it by inserting an IPv4 sub-object with the IPv4
   address of the outbound interface address the traffic is forwarded
   onto.

   The PLR MUST update the IPv4 or IPv6 sub-object it
   inserted into the RRO by setting the "Local protection in use" and
   "Local Protection Available" flags.


6.5.1. Notification of local repair

   In many situations, the route used during a Local Repair will be less
   than optimal. The purpose of Local Repair is to keep high priority
   and loss sensitive traffic flowing while a more optimal re-routing of
   the tunnel can be effected by the head-end of the tunnel.  Thus the
   head-end needs to know of the failure so it may re-signal an LSP
   which is optimal.

   To provide this notification, the PLR SHOULD send a Path Error
   message with error code of "Notify" (Error code =25) and an error
   value field of ss00 cccc cccc cccc where ss=00 and the sub-code = 3
   ("Tunnel locally repaired") (see [RSVP-TE])



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 25]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   Additionally a head-end may also detect that an LSP needs to be moved
   to a more optimal path by noticing failures reported via the IGP.
   Note that in the case of inter-area TE LSP (TE LSP spanning areas),
   the head-end LSR will need to rely exclusively on Path Error messages
   to be informed of failures in another area.


6.5.2 Revertive Behavior

   Upon a failure event, a protected TE LSP is locally repaired by the
   PLR.  There are two basic strategies for restoring the TE LSP to a
   full working path.

    - Global revertive mode: The head-end LSR of each tunnel is
      responsible for reoptimizing the TE LSPs that used the failed
      resource.  There are several potential reoptimization triggers -
      RSVP error messages, inspection of OSPF LSAs or ISIS LSPs, and
      timers.  Note that this re-optimization process may proceed as
      soon as the failure is detected.  It is not tied to the
      restoration of the failed resource.

    - Local revertive mode: Upon detecting that the resource is
      restored, the PLR re-signals each of TE LSPs that used to be
      routed over the restored resource.  Every TE LSP successfully
      resignaled along the restored resource is switched back.

   There are several circumstances where a local revertive mode might
   not be desirable. In the case of resource flapping (not an uncommon
   failure type), this could generate multiple traffic disruptions.
   Therefore, in the local revertive mode, the PLR should implement a
   means to dampen the re-signaling process in order to limit
   potential disruptions due to flapping.

   In the local revertive mode, any TE LSP will be switched back,
   without any distinction, as opposed to the global revertive mode
   where the decision to reuse the restored resource is taken by the
   head-end LSR based on the TE LSP attributes. When the head-end
   learns of the failure, it may reoptimize the protected LSP tunnel
   along a different and more optimal path, because it has a more
   complete view of the resources and TE LSP constraints; this means
   that the old LSP which has been reverted to may not be optimal any
   longer. Note that in the case of inter-area LSP, where the TE LSP
   path computation might be done on some Path Computation Server, the
   reoptimization process can still be triggered on the Head-End
   LSP. The local revertive mode is optional.

   However, there are circumstances where the Head-end does not have
   the ability to reroute the TE LSP (e.g if the protected LSP is



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 26]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   pinned down, as may be desirable if the paths are determined using
   an off-line optimization tool) or if Head-end does not have the
   complete TE topology information (depending on the path computation
   scenario). In those cases, the local revertive might be a
   interesting option.

   It is recommended that one always use the globally revertive mode.
   Note that a link or node "failure" may be due to the facility being
   permanently taken out of service.  Local revertive mode is
   optional.  When used in combination, the global mode may rely
   solely on timers to do the reoptimization.  When local revertive
   mode is not used, head-end LSRs SHOULD react to RSVP error messages
   and/or IGP indications in order to make a timely response.

   Interoperability: If a PLR is configured with the local revertive
   mode but the MP is not, any attempt from the PLR to resignal the TE
   LSP over the restored resource would fail as the MP will not send
   any Resv message. The PLR will still refresh the TE LSP over the
   backup tunnel. The TE LSP will not revert to the restored resource;
   instead it will continue to use the backup until it is
   re-optimized.

7. Merge Node Behavior

   An LSR is a Merge Point if it receives the Path message for a
   protected LSP and one or more messages for a backup LSP which is
   merged into that protected LSP.  In the one-to-one backup
   technique, the LSR is aware that it is a merge node prior to
   failure.  In the facility backup technique, the LSR may not know
   that it is a Merge Point until a failure occurs and it receives a
   backup LSP's Path message.  Therefore, an LSR which is on the path
   of a protected LSP SHOULD always assume that it is a merge point.

   When a MP receives a backup LSP's Path message thru a bypass
   tunnel, the Send_TTL in the Common Header may not match the TTL of
   the IP packet within which the Path message was transported.  This
   is expected behavior.


7.1. Handling Backup Path Messages Before Failure

   There are two circumstances where a Merge Point will receive Path
   messages for a backup path prior to failure.  In the first case, if
   a PLR is providing local protection via the one-to-one backup
   technique, the detour will be signaled and must be properly handled
   by the MP.  In this case, the backup LSP may be signaled via the
   sender-template-specific method or via the path-specific method.




Pan et al.                                                     [Page 27]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   In the second case, if the Merge Point does not provide labels
   global to the MP and record them in a Label sub-object of the RRO
   or if the PLR does not use such recorded information, the PLR may
   signal the backup path, as described above in Section 6.4.1, to
   determine the label to use if the PLR is providing protection
   according to the facility backup technique. In this case, the
   backup LSP is signaled via the sender-template-specific method.

   The reception of a backup LSP's path message does not indicate that
   a failure has occured and the incoming protected LSP will no longer
   be used.


7.1.1. Merginging Backup Paths using the Sender-Template Specific Method

   An LSR may receive multiple Path messages for one or more backup
   LSPs and, possibly, the protected LSP.  Each of these Path messages
   will have a different SENDER_TEMPLATE.  The protected LSP can be
   recognized because it will either include the FAST_REROUTE object,
   have the "local protection desired" flag set in the
   SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object or both.

   If the outgoing interface and next-hop LSR are the same, then the
   Path messages are eligible for merging.  As specified in [RSVP],
   only those Path messages whose ERO from that LSR to the egress is
   the same can be merged.  If merging occurs and one of the Path
   messages merged was for the protected LSP, then the final Path
   message to be sent MUST be that of the protected LSP.  This merges
   the backup LSPs into the protected LSP at that LSR.  Once the final
   Path message has been identified, the MP MUST start to refresh it
   downstream periodically.

   If merging occurs and all the Path messages were for backup LSPs,
   then the DETOUR object, if any, should be altered as specified in
   Section 8.1


7.1.2. Merging Detours using the Path-Specific Method

   An LSR (that is, an MP) may receive multiple Path messages from
   different interfaces with identical SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE
   objects. In this case, Path state merging is REQUIRED.

   The merging rule is the following:

   For all Path messages that do not have either a FAST_REROUTE or a
   DETOUR object, or the MP is the egress of the LSP, no merging is
   required.  The messages are processed according to [RSVP-TE].



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 28]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   Otherwise, the MP MUST record the Path state as well as their
   incoming interface. If the Path messages do not share outgoing
   interface and next-hop LSR, the MP must consider them as independent
   LSPs, and must not merge them.

   For all the Path messages that share the same outgoing interface and
   next-hop LSR, the MP runs the following procedure to select one of
   them as the Path message to forward downstream.

     1. Eliminate from consideration those that traverse nodes that
        other Path messages want to avoid.

     2. If one LSP is originated from this node, this must be
        the final LSP. Quit.

     3. If only one Path message contains FAST_REROUTE object, this
        becomes the chosen Path message. Quit.

     4. If there are several LSPs, and not all of them have a DETOUR
        object, then eliminate those with DETOUR from consideration.

     5. If several candidates remain (that is, there are both detour
        and protected LSPs), prefer the ones with FAST_REROUTE object.

     6. If none found, prefer the ones without DETOUR object. If none
        found, prefer the ones with DETOUR object.

     7. If several candidate Path message still remain, it is a local
        decision to choose which one will be the final LSP. The decision
        can be based on the number of IP hops in ERO, bandwidth
        requirements, or others.

   Once the final Path message has been identified, the MP MUST start to
   refresh it downstream periodically.  Other LSPs are considered merged
   at this node.  For bandwidth reservation on the outgoing link, any
   merging should be considered to have occured before bandwidth is
   reserved.  Thus, even though Fixed Filter is specified, multiple
   detours and/or their protected LSP which are to be merged due to
   sharing an outgoing interface and next-hop LSR will reserve only
   the bandwidth of the final Path message on that outgoing
   interface.


7.1.2.1. An Example on Path Message Merging

                R7---R8---R9-\
                |    |    |   \
           R1---R2---R3---R4---R5---R6



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 29]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


           Protected LSP:  [R1->R2->R3->R4->R5->R6]
           R2's Detour:    [R2->R7->R8->R9->R4->R5->R6]
           R3's Detour:    [R3->R8->R9->R5->R6]

           Example 4: Path Message Merging

   In Example 4 above, R8 will receive Path messages that have the
   same SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE from detours for R2 and R3.
   During merging at R8 since detour R3 has a shorter ERO path length
   (that is, ERO is [R9->R5->R6], and path length is 3), R8 will
   select it as the final LSP, and only propagate its Path messages
   downstream.  Upon receiving a Resv (or a ResvTear) message, R8 must
   relay on the messages toward both R2 and R3.

   R5 needs to merge as well, and will select the main LSP, since it
   has the FAST_REROUTE object.  Thus, the detour LSP terminates at
   R5.


7.1.3. Message Handling for Merged Detours

   When an LSR receives a ResvTear for an LSP, the LSR must determine
   whether it has an alternate associated LSP.  For instance, if the
   ResvTear was received for a protected LSP, but an associated backup
   LSP has not received a ResvTear, then the LSR has an alternate
   associated LSP.  If the LSR does not have an alternate associated
   LSP, then the MP MUST propogate the ResvTear toward the LSP's
   ingress and, for each backup LSP merged into that LSP at this LSR,
   the ResvTear should also be propogated along the backup LSP.

   The MP may receive PathTear messages for some of the merging LSPs.
   No PathTear message should be propagated downstream until the MP
   has received PathTear messages for each of the merged LSPs.
   However, the fact that one or more of the merged LSPs has been torn
   down should be reflected in the downstream message, such as by
   changing the DETOUR object, if any.


7.2.  Handling Failures

   When a downstream LSR detects a local link failure, for any
   protected LSPs routed over the failed link, Path and Resv state
   MUST NOT be cleared and PathTear and ResvErr messages MUST NOT be
   sent immediately; if this is not the case, then the facility backup
   technique will not work.  Further a downstream LSR SHOULD reset the
   refresh timers for these LSPs as if they had just been refreshed.
   This is to allow time for the PLR to begin refreshing state via the
   bypass tunnel.  State MUST be removed if it has not been refreshed



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 30]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   before the refresh timer expires.  This allows the facility backup
   technique to work without requiring that it signal backup paths
   thru the bypass tunnel before failure.

   After a failure has occured, the MP must still send Resv messages
   for the backup LSPs associated with the protected LSPs which have
   failed.  If the backup LSP was sent through a bypass tunnel, then
   the PHOP object in its Path message will have the IP address of the
   associated PLR. This will ensure that Resv state is refreshed.

   Once the local link has recovered, the MP may or may not accept
   Path messages for existing protected LSPs which had failed over to
   their backup.


8.  Behavior of all LSRs

   The objects defined and the techniques defined in this document
   require behavior from all LSRs in the traffic-engineered network,
   even if that LSR is not along the path of a protected LSP.

   First, if a DETOUR object is included in the backup LSP's path
   message for the sender-template-specific method, the LSRs in the
   traffic-engineered network should support the DETOUR object.

   Second, if the Path-Specific Method is to be supported for
   the one-to-one backup technique, it is necessary that the LSRs in
   the traffic-engineered network be capable of merging detours as
   specified below in Section 8.1.

   It is possible to avoid specific LSRs which do not support this
   behavior by assigning an link attribute to all the links of those
   LSPs and then requesting that backup paths exclude that link
   attribute.


8.1. Merging Detours in Path-Specific Method

   If multiple Path Messages for different detours are received with
   the same SESSION, SENDER_TEMPLATE, outgoing interface and next-hop
   LSR, then the LSR must function as a Detour Merge Point and merge
   the detour Path Messages.  This merging should occur as specified
   in Section 7.1.2 and shown in Example 4.

   In addition, it is necessary to update the DETOUR object to reflect
   the merging which has taken place.  This is done using the
   following algorithm to format the outgoing DETOUR object for the
   final LSP:



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 31]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


     - Combine all the (PLR_ID, Avoid_Node_ID) pairs from all the
       DETOUR objects of all merged LSPs, and create a new object with
       all listed. Ordering is insignificant.


9. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security issues. The security
   considerations pertaining to the original RSVP protocol [RSVP] remain
   relevant.

   It should be noted that the facility backup technique requires that
   a PLR and its selected Merge Point will trust RSVP messages
   received from each other.


10. IANA Guidelines

   IANA [RFC-IANA] will assign RSVP C-class numbers for FAST_ROUTE and
   DETOUR objects.  Currently, in production networks, FAST_REROUTE uses
   C-class 205, and DETOUR uses C-class 63.


11. Intellectual Property Considerations

   Cisco Systems and Juniper Networks may have intellectual property
   rights claimed in regard to some of the specification contained in
   this document


12. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.




Pan et al.                                                     [Page 32]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


13. Acknowledgments

   We would like to acknowledge input and helpful comments from Rob
   Goguen, Tony Li, Yakov Rekhter and Curtis Villamizar.  Especially,
   we thank those, who have been involved in interoperability testing
   and field trails, and provided invaluable ideas and suggestions.
   They are Rob Goguen, Carol Iturralde, Brook Bailey, Safaa Hasan,
   and Richard Southern.


14. References

   [RSVP] R. Braden, Ed., et al, "Resource ReSerVation protocol (RSVP)
   -- version 1 functional specification," RFC2205, September 1997.

   [RSVP-TE] D. Awduche, et al, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
   tunnels", RFC3029, December 2001.

   [RFC-WORDS]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [OSPF-TE] Katz, Yeung, Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF,
   draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-05.txt, June 2001.

   [ISIS-TE] Smit, Li, IS-IS extensions for Traffic Engineering, draft-
   ietf-isis-tr affic-03.txt, June 2001.

   [RSVP-REFRESH]  L. Berger, et al, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction
   Extensions", RFC2961.

   [RFC-IANA] T. Narten and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
   IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434.


15. Author Information

   Ping Pan



Pan et al.                                                     [Page 33]

Internet Draft                                                  May 2003


   CIENA Corp.
   10480 Ridgeview Court
   Cupertino, CA 95014
   e-mail: ppan@ciena.net
   phone: +1 408 366 4991

   Der-Hwa Gan
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N.Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   e-mail: dhg@juniper.net
   phone: +1 408 745 2074

   George Swallow
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   250 Apollo Drive
   Chelmsford, MA 01824
   email:  swallow@cisco.com
   phone:  +1 978 244 8143

   Jean Philippe Vasseur
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   300 Apollo Drive
   Chelmsford, MA 01824
   email: jpv@cisco.com
   phone:  +1 978 497 6238

   Dave Cooper
   Global Crossing
   960 Hamlin Court
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   email: dcooper@gblx.net
   phone: +1 916 415 0437

   Alia Atlas
   Avici Systems
   101 Billerica Avenue
   N. Billerica, MA 01862
   email: aatlas@avici.com
   phone: +1 978 964 2070

   Markus Jork
   Avici Systems
   101 Billerica Avenue
   N. Billerica, MA 01862
   email: mjork@avici.com
   phone: +1 978 964 2142




Pan et al.                                                     [Page 34]

