Internet Engineering Task Force                             Duncan Mills
Internet Draft                                                  Vodafone
draft-mills-sip-access-network-info-00.txt        
        
        
                                                        Date: April 2002
                                                   Expires: October 2002







The SIP Access Network Info header



Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
groups may also distribute working documents as
Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a
maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

The distribution of this memo is unlimited.

1. Abstract

This document defines the private SIP extension header
P-Access-Network-Info. This mechanism is useful in SIP networks that
are partitioned, such as 3G wireless networks which are partitioned at
the SIP layer into "access" and "home" networks. SIP User Agents may
use this header to relay information about the access network to
serving proxies in their home network. The serving proxy may then use
this information to optimize services for the UA. For example, a 3GPP
terminal uses this header to pass information about the access network
such as radio access technology and cell ID to its home service.

2. Conventions used in this document

In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
"SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1] and
indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.

3. Table of Contents
 
Status of this Memo                                       1
1. Abstract                                               1
2. Conventions used in this document                      1
3. Table of Contents                                      2
4. Introduction                                           2
5. Overview                                               2
6. The P-Access-Network-Info header                       3
7. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header           4
7.1 UAC behavior                                          4
7.2 UAS behavior                                          4
7.3 Proxy behavior                                        5
8. Security considerations                                5
10. References                                            5
11. Author's Address                                      6
Full Copyright Statement                                  6

4. Introduction

There are many cases where a user is accessing their home network
services via a particular access network. An example is a 3GPP
wireless terminal that accesses a SIP server via the UMTS Radio Access
Network. Other examples include a laptop connected to a wireless LAN
at an airport, or a laptop connected to a local ISP from a hotel room.

In this document we define an access network as any network that
provides a user with access to the SIP capabilities or services
provided by the home network of that user.
 
5. Overview

In some cases, the home network may wish to know information about the
type of access network that the UA is currently using.  Some services
are more suitable or less suitable depending on the access type, and
some services are of more value to subscribers if the access network
details are known in the home network.  For instance, the type of
access being used may influence home network decisions on what level
of security to apply to sessions, or it may influence the value a home
network chooses to use for default timers.

In other cases, the home network may simply wish to know crude
location information in order to provide certain basic services.

In most cases, it may be desired that the home network have the
knowledge of some information relating to the network that provided
access to the service. This is achieved by defining a new private SIP
extension header as defined in [3], P-Access-Network-Info. This header
carries information relating to the access network between the UAC and
its serving proxy in the home network.


6. The P-Access-Network-Info header

The P-Access-Network-Info header is used to transport a set of
parameters associated with the access characteristics of a particular
network.

The P-Access-Network-Info header MAY be inserted by a UA. Proxies,
MUST NOT add to or modify the contents of the P-Access-Network-Info.

The information in the P-Access-Network-Info is privacy sensitive. It
is intended for use between the UA and its serving proxy. The serving
proxy MUST delete this header before forwarding the message outside of
the its domain.

The UA inserting this information MUST trust the serving proxy to
protect its privacy by deleting the header before forwarding the
message outside of the home proxy∆s domain. In order to do this it
must also have transitive trust in intermediate proxies between it and
the serving proxy. This trust is established by business agreements
between the home network and the access network, and generally
supported by the use of standard security mechanisms, e.g. IPsec, AKA,
and TLS.

The P-Access-Network-Info header is described using ABNF syntax.  The
following description of the ABNF syntax is based on the ABNF used for
SIP [3]:

P-Access-Network-Info                = "Access-Network-Info" HCOLON 
                                     access-network-information

access-network-information           = access-type | access-info |
                                     token

access-type                          ='IEEE-802.11a" |
                                     "IEEE-802.11b" |
                                     "3GPP-GERAN' |
                                     "3GPP-UTRAN-FDD" |
                                     "3GPP-UTRAN-TDD" |
                                     "3GPP-CDMA2000" |
                                     quoted-string

access-info                          = "3GPP-CGI" |
                                     "3GPP-UTRAN-Cell-ID" |
                                     quoted-string

token                                = quoted-string


A UAC supporting this extension may be capable of accessing the
services provided by its home network via one or more access
technologies.  Such a UAC must know the values to use for each type of
supported access technology. The means of this determination are
outside the scope of this document.

The home network must know the possible values that a particular UA
may use to populate the access-type and access-info fields.

In other words, a home network with business agreements allowing users
to access via a particular technology must be able to parse the
P-Access-Network-Info header containing an access-type for that
technology in order to use this information.

For example, the access-type could read ÊIEEE-802.11b∆.  If a home
network knows it has a business agreement with a W-LAN access network,
it must be ready to understand the value ÊIEEE-802.11b∆.
Similarly, a UAC supporting this extension that can access via W-LAN
must be able to insert the relevant value.

Access-info could contain additional information relating to the
access network.  In particular, the contents of the access-info field
may be dependent on the value of the access-type field.  For example,
where the access-type is ÊCellular Radio-GERAN∆, the access-info
SHALL be Cell-Global-Identity.  These conditions are defined elsewhere
by proprietary users of this extension, e.g. by 3GPP.

The following table expands on tables 2 and 3 in [3].

Header field         where  proxy  ACK  BYE  CAN  INV  OPT  REG 
----------------------------------------------------------------
P-Access-Network-Info       acm    o    o    o    o    o    o  

Comparisons follow the case-sensitivity rules defined by SIP [3].

7. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header

7.1 UAC behavior

A UAC that supports this extension and is willing to disclose the
related parameters may insert the P-Access-Network-Info header in any
SIP message request The UAC SHOULD insert this header only when it
trusts both the access network and the home network.

This document does not define either the nature or the information or
the messages where the P-Access-Network-Info needs to be inserted.

7.2 UAS behavior

A serving proxy that supports this extension and receives the
P-Access-Network-Info header MAY use the contents to, e.g., provide a
different service depending on the network through which the UA is
accessing the server.  A serving proxy that supports this extension
deletes the P-Access-Network-Info header from a message before
forwarding the message outside of the home network domain.  The
information carried in the header is used by the home network and is
of no interest to the destination network.

It is implied that a serving proxy using the information contained in
this header has to trust the access network.

7.3 Proxy behavior

A proxy MUST NOT insert or modify the P-Access-Network-Info header. 

A serving proxy, typically located in the home network, and therefore
trusted, SHOULD delete the header when the SIP signaling is forwarded
beyond the home network domain. The serving network information is
used by a home network and is of no interest to the destination
network.

8. Security considerations

This extension assumes that the access network is trusted by the UA
(because the UA∆s home network has a trust relationship with the
access network), as described in section 6.

This extension assumes that the information added to the header by the
UAC should be sent only to trusted entities and should not be used
outside of the home network domain.

The home network uses the information contained in this header to
provide additional services or enhanced performance to the user, and
UAs are expected to provide correct information.  However, there are
no security problems resulting from a UAC inserting incorrect
information.

This header SHOULD always be deleted by the serving network prior to
forwarding it outside of the home network domain, as described in
section 7.

9. IANA Considerations

This document defines the SIP extension header "P-Access-Network-Info"
which should be included in the registry of SIP headers defined in SIP
[3].  As required by the SIP change process draft-tsvarea-sipchange
[6] the SIP extension header name "Access-Network-Info" should also be
registered in association with this extension.

10. References

Normative References

1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9,
          RFC 2026, October 1996.

2. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
          Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

3. Authors, "SIP, Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, date.

4. D. Crocker, Ed., and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for syntax
          specifications: ABNF," RFC 2234, November 1997.


Non-Normative References

1. Mankin, A., "SIP Change Process draft-tsvarea-sipchange", March
          2002.

2. Garcia M. et al: "3GPP requirements on SIP",
          draft-garcia-sipping-3gpp-reqs-03.txt, September 2002, work
          in progress.



11. Author's Address

Duncan Mills
The Courtyard, 2-4 London Road
Newbury
Berkshire RG14 1JX
Tel: +44 1635 676074
e-mail: duncan.mills@vf.vodafone.co.uk



Full Copyright Statement

"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved. This
document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others,
and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist
in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to
translate it into languages other than English.  The limited
permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the
Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  This document and the
information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE
INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


