

Inter-Domain Routing Working Group                           Paul Traina
INTERNET DRAFT                                             cisco Systems
<draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-stdreport1-02.txt>                     May 13, 1996


                 BGP-4 Requirement Satisfaction Report

                          Status of this Memo

   This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
   not specify an Internet standard.  Distribution of this memo is
   unlimited.

   This document is an Internet Draft. Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time. It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress".


Introduction

   The purpose of this memo is to document how the requirements for
   advancing a routing protocol to Full Standard have been satisfied by
   Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4) (and create needless
   busywork).  This report provides a roadmap to all information
   necessary to move BGP-4 to Standard.  This is the first of two final
   reports on the BGP protocol.  As required by the Internet Activities
   Board (IAB) and the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), the
   second report will present additional knowledge and understanding
   gained in the time when the protocol was mada a Draft standard and
   when it was submitted for Standard.

   The remaining sections of this memo document how BGP satisfies
   General Requirements specified in Section 3.0, as well as
   Requirements for Standard specified in Section 6.0 of the "Internet
   Routing Protocol Standardization Criteria" document [1].

   Please send comments to bgp@ans.net.







Expiration Date December 1996                                   [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1996


Documentation

   BGP is an inter-autonomous system routing protocol designed for
   TCP/IP internets.

   Version 4 of the BGP protocol (BGP-4) specification has been
   submitted as [2].

   The MIB specification for BGP-4 has been submitted as [3].

   The applicability document for BGP-4 has been submitted as [4].

   Implementation experience, operational experience, compatibility,
   migration and testing issues are documented in [5], [6], and [7].


Implementations

   There are multiple independantly written interoperable
   implementations of BGP-4 currently available.  This section gives a
   brief overview of the implementations that are currently used in the
   operational Internet.  They are:

         - cisco Systems, Inc.
         - gated consortium
         - 3COM
         - Bay Networks (Wellfleet)
         - Proteon
         - Rainbow-Bridge
         - Telebit (DK)



Acknowledgments

   The BGP protocol has been developed by the IDR (formerly BGP) Working
   Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force.  The group would like
   to express deepest thanks to Yakov Rekhter and Sue Hares, co-chairs
   of the IDR working group.  I'd also like to explicitly thank Yakov
   Rekhter for the review of this document as well as constructive and
   valuable comments.

   This report is in part based on the initial work of Peter Lothberg
   (Ebone), Andrew Partan (Alternet), Sean Doran (Sprint), Tony Bates
   (MCI), and several others.  Details of their work were presented at
   the Twenti-fifth and Twenti-seventh IETF meetings and are available
   from the IETF proceedings.




Expiration Date December 1996                                   [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1996


Author's  Address:

   Paul Traina
   cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134
   pst@cisco.com


References

[1] RFC1264
   Hinden, R., "Internet Routing Protocol Standardization Criteria",
   October 1991.

[2] draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-02.txt
   Rekhter, Y., and Li, T., "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)",
   January 1996.

[3] RFC1657
   S. Willis, J. Burruss, J. Chu, "Definitions of Managed Objects for
   the Fourth Version of the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP-4) using
   SMIv2", July 1994.

[4] RFC1772
   Rekhter, Y., and P. Gross, Editors, "Application of the Border
   Gateway Protocol in the Internet", March 1995.

[5] RFC1773
   Traina P., "Experience with the BGP-4 protocol", March 1995.

[6] RFC1774
   Traina P., "BGP-4 Protocol Analysis", March 1995.

[7] RFC1656
   Traina P., "BGP-4 Implementation Expereience", July 1994.















Expiration Date March 1996                                      [Page 3]

