INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  I. King
<draft-king-vnd-urlscheme-00.txt>                 Microsoft Corporation
                                                          March 5, 1999



           	The VND Tree for URL Scheme Names



Status of this Memo

	This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
	all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

	Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
	Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
	other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
	Drafts. 

	Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
	months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
	at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
	reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

	The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
	http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

	The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
	http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

	This Internet-Draft expires September 5, 1999.

Copyright Notice

	Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

	This document describes the vnd scheme namespace, or "tree," which 
	provides for vendor-specific URL scheme namespaces with relaxed 
	registration requirements, which can be used with no concern for 
	name collision.  The namespace also implicitly provides 
	identification of the originator of the URL scheme, in the event 
	others become interested in the scheme. 

1.0 Introduction

	The URL scheme name registration process, described in RFC [URL-
	PROCESS][1] requires IESG review and approval of all proposed scheme 
	names within the "IETF tree", which encompasses simple, short, often 
	descriptive URL scheme names (such as http:, fax:, or mailto:).  
	This is intended to allow for considered public review of proposals 
	which would associate a commonly-used label with a URL scheme, and 
	to avoid collision and multiple implementations in the URL scheme 
	namespace.  However, this form of URL scheme name is often selected 
	because the name is intended to be widely distributed, seen and 
	used, possibly by naive users.  In the development of new products, 
	vendors often have the need to use URLs to identify and locate 
	resources in a manner that is NOT seen by end users, is not widely 
	distributed, or for some other reason does not justify the effort to 
	register a scheme name from the IETF tree.  

	One approach which has been used informally for some time is what we 
	may call the vnd scheme name tree.  URL scheme names in this tree 
	are characterized by the initial string 'vnd', followed by a 
	separator '.' and thence by an abbreviation identifying a particular 
	vendor.  For example, Microsoft has made use of 'vnd.ms' as a URL 
	scheme namespace, creating new scheme names by appending another 
	separator '.' and a unique string (for example, vnd.ms.foo:).  This 
	parallels syntax documented for MIME type naming in RFC 2048 [2].  

	This document shall formalize the use of the vnd scheme name syntax, 
	defining the vnd scheme name tree as one parallel to the IETF tree, 
	with unique requirements for registration and management.  

2.0 VND Scheme Name Syntax

2.1 General Syntax

	The general syntax of a URL scheme name in conformance with the vnd 
	tree is:

						'vnd.'<vendor-ID>'.'<scheme-ID>

	where vnd is a reserved prefix that uniquely identifies a URL scheme 
	name belonging to this tree, the vendor-ID is a string registered 
	with IANA to uniquely identify an organization, and the scheme-ID is 
	a string of US-ASCII characters, in conformance with RFC 2396[3] and 
	RFC [URL-GUIDELINES], that identifies the particular scheme within 
	the subtree owned by the organization identified by <vendor-ID>.  
	All parts are case-insensitive.  

	This syntax specifically disallows the form `vnd.foo', where `foo' 
	is the scheme-ID and there is no vendor-ID.  If a scheme is to be 
	widely shared, it should either be owned by one vendor and shared 
	with others by agreement, or should be registered within the IETF 
	tree.  The sole purpose for the vnd tree is to support vendor-
	specific URL scheme namespaces.  

2.2 Choosing a vendor-ID

	The vendor-ID is a short string of US-ASCII characters that is 
	sufficient to uniquely identify the organization.  The vendor-ID 
	string may consist only of alphanumeric characters, and the first 
	character must be alphabetic.  In particular, the character `.' is 
	specifically disallowed.  The vendor-ID must be registered with 
	IANA, and IANA may disapprove a registration for failure to meet 
	syntax rules, for conflict or confusion with another vendor-ID, for 
	being an inappropriate identifier for the vendor (for instance, if 
	Microsoft sought to use the vendor-ID `sun'), or for being 
	objectionable in some other way (for instance, a word generally 
	considered profane or offensive).  Vendors are encouraged to 
	establish only one vendor-ID, although it is recognized that large 
	organizations may actually consist of multiple sub-units. 

	The organization may be a business (whether for-profit or not), 
	governmental unit, educational institution, or any other entity 
	which is regularly engaged in producing software.  The term "vendor" 
	is used in this document for simplicity.  

2.3 Syntax for the scheme-ID

	The scheme-ID must comply with RFC 2396 and should comply with RFC 
	[URL-GUIDELINES].  

3.0 Requirements for Scheme Name Registration

3.1 General Requirements

	These requirements are modeled upon those for MIME types, as set 
	forth in RFC 2048.  The purpose of registration is to give notice to 
	the Internet community of the existence of the vnd subtree and of 
	the new scheme.  Registration of the vendor-ID is required, and 
	serves to partition the namespace (and avoid collision).  
	Registration of the specific scheme is optional, and may be anything 
	in the range from notice that the name is in use, to a full 
	specification of the scheme's syntax and semantics.  

3.2 Registering the vendor-ID

	The request for vendor-ID registration may be included in a vnd URL 
	scheme name registration, or may be separately submitted, to IANA at 
	iana@iana.org. The request must contain the proposed vendor-ID, the 
	vendor's legal business name, principal business address, telephone 
	number, and contact information for a person or position that will 
	be responsible for the use of the vendor's subtree.  The vendor 
	should inform IANA if changes in business (acquisition, closure, 
	etc.) lead to changes in this information, and may expressly 
	transfer ownership of its vendor-ID and associated subtree upon such 
	changes or for any other reason.  

	A given vendor-ID can be issued only once, and it does not expire; 
	however, if IANA becomes aware that the entity so identified is no 
	longer in existence, and no express transfer of the vendor-ID 
	registration was performed, IANA may declare a given registration 
	`archived'.  This is to avoid possible name collision; if vendor B 
	were allowed to re-register vendor A's vendor-ID (with no contact 
	between the vendors), and vendor A's products were still used, 
	vendor B might ignorantly redefine a URL scheme in a way that breaks 
	vendor A's products.  

	IANA will maintain a public registry of the vendor-IDs that have 
	been assigned, together with contact information.  

3.3 Publishing Scheme-Specific Information

	While public exposure and review of a URL scheme created in the vnd 
	tree is not required, using the IETF Internet-Draft mechanism for 
	peer review is strongly encouraged to improve the quality of the 
	specification.  RFC publication of vnd tree URL schemes is 
	encouraged but not required.  Material may be published as an 
	Informational RFC by sending it to the RFC Editor (please follow the 
	instructions to RFC authors, RFC 2223 [5]).  

	Another useful mechanism for disseminating information about a new 
	vnd URL scheme is publication on the ietf-announce mailing list.  
	This is encouraged for URL schemes which a vendor believes might be 
	of general interest to the Internet community at some point in the 
	future, but is discouraged if the URL scheme name is expected to be 
	visible to end users.  In the case of a URL scheme name that is 
	intended to be transcribed and otherwise used by end users, a name 
	should be registered in the IETF tree pursuant to RFC [URL-PROCESS].  

	IANA will maintain a public registry of vnd tree scheme names that 
	have been published by either of the above methods.  

	In publishing information about a new vnd URL scheme, vendors are 
	encouraged to follow the guidelines set forth in section 6 of RFC 
	[URL-PROCESS].  

3.4 Change Control

	The vendor is the owner of all schemes within its tree and has sole 
	responsibility for management of the sub-tree created by its vendor-
	ID, and owns change control for any URL schemes deployed therein.  
	No one may implement or deploy a URL scheme in a vnd scheme 
	namespace to which one is not entitled by virtue of association with 
	the vendor.  If a vendor publishes information about a vnd URL 
	scheme by either of the methods described in section 3.3 above, 
	changes to the syntax or semantics of that URL scheme must be 
	subsequently published by the same medium as originally employed.  

4.0 Security Considerations

	The vendor identified by the vendor-ID part of the URL scheme name 
	should be consulted for any information regarding the URL scheme and 
	its implementation.  To that end, vendors must provide a point of 
	contact that can be reasonably authenticated, for instance, common 
	business contact information (business address, telephone number, 
	etc.).  (This is addressed in the registration section above.)  

	No vendor is required by reason of registration in the vnd tree, by 
	either means, to disclose syntactical or other information about 
	schemes it has developed.  Security considerations for individual 
	schemes may vary, and the vendor is not required to publish same.  
	Notwithstanding, the vendor is highly encouraged to publish any 
	known security issues, and to comply with the security 
	considerations set forth in RFC [URL-GUIDELINES].  

	Vendors should exercise caution around the security risks posed by a 
	given URL scheme, and take steps to protect themselves against 
	damage caused by ignorant use of the URL scheme by others.  In other 
	words, if the URL scheme has not been published, together with its 
	security considerations, the vendor is probably best served by 
	avoiding use which would expose the scheme to others (i.e. on the 
	open Internet).  Likewise, caution should be exercised in using a 
	vnd URL scheme if one cannot obtain information on its syntax and 
	semantics; uninformed use may have unexpected impact.  

5.0 References

[1]	Petke, R., King, I., "Registration Procedures for URL Scheme 
	Names", RFC [URL-PROCESS], November 1998

[2]	Freed, N., Klensin, J., Postel, J., "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
	Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", RFC 2048, 
	November 1996

[3]	Masinter, L., Alvestrand, H., Zigmond, D., Petke, R., "Guidelines 
	for New URL Schemes", RFC [URL-GUIDELINES], August 1998

[4]	Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., Masinter, L., "Uniform Resource 
	Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August 1998

[5]	Postel, J., Reynolds, J., "Instructions to RFC Authors", RFC 
	2223, October 1997.

6.0  Author's Address

	Ian King
	Microsoft Corporation
	One Microsoft Way
	Redmond, WA  98052-6399
	USA
	Phone: +1 425-703-2293
	FAX: +1 425-936-7329
	Email: iking@microsoft.com

