

Internet Engineering Task Force                           Sipping WG 
Internet Draft                                           Taegyu Kang 
November 11, 2004                                  Doyoung Kim 
Expires MAY 2005                                    YoungsunKim 
                                                         ETRI 
                                                                      


         Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model for Transcoding with the 
                       Session Initiation Protocol 
                draft-taegyukang-sipping-transc-itg-00.txt 

Status of this Memo 

By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
RFC 3668. 

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
                   
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.txt  
                   
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
                   
This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2005. 
                   
Copyright Notice 
                   
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
                   
Abstract 
                   
This document introduces a new model, Intelligent Transcoding 
Gateway, in Framework[6] for transcoding with the Session Initiation 
Protocol. The model might be applied for more general-purpose 
services satisfying the requirements of multimedia applications 
                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 1] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
without an additional INVITE, meanwhile the existing two models, The 
third party call control model and The conference bridge model,  
are applied for the specific application requirements in support of 
deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired individuals[2]. 
                   
                   






















                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 2] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
                   
                   
                   
                   
Table of Contents 
                   
1. Introduction...................................................4 
2. Background of Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model............4 
3. Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model..........................4 
4. The Comparison of Models.......................................5 
5. Security Considerations........................................6 
6. References.....................................................6 
Acknowledgment....................................................7  
Authors' Addresses................................................7  
Intellectual Property Statement...................................7 
Disclaimer of Validity and Copyright Statement....................8 
                   
















                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 3] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
                   
                   
1. Introduction 
                   
Simple homogeneous terminals and special purpose terminals are the 
majority of the existing network terminals. Communication media is 
getting more diverse in terms of the types of network terminals. 
However, the era of new communication media types through the several 
kinds of network terminals such as hardware IP phones(POTS style, PDA 
style, mobile phone style), software IP phones(special purpose 
software phone, messenger phone, ITSP phone), POTS phones, ISDN 
phones and mobile phones is coming. 
We believe that transcoding services are the key solution for 
supporting these types of communication in heterogeneous networks and 
different capability terminals. 
The transcoding function converges wireline network, wireless network, 
internet, and broadcasting network with a horizontal structure. We 
can converge the networks using the Intelligent Transcoding Gateway 
Model for transcoding with Session Initiation Protocol[1]. 
                   
                
                
                
2. Background of Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model 
                   
                   
The IETF sipping WG has been developing two models for transcoding 
services: Third Party Call Control Transcoding Model[4][7] and 
Conference Bridge Transcoding Model[5]. The Third Party Call Control 
Transcoding Model is suitable for advanced end points that are able 
to perform third party call control. The Conference Bridge 
Transcoding Model is suitable for a centralized conference. These two 
models are useful for a specific application invoked rarely to 
support deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired individuals[2]. We 
need another model that is useful for general applications[8] invoked 
frequently. The transcoding function is needed in cases of 
interwoking between different networks with different codecs and 
communicating between different applications (text and speech). So, 
the Intelligent Transcoding Gateway(ITG) Model is introduced in this 
document. 
                   
                   
                   
3. Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model 
                   
The Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model has a transcoding function 
in a transit node between the calling party and the called party. The 
Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model T receives codec information 

                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 4] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
from A and sends additional codec information to B with SIP/SDP. We 
assume that T has other codec that is not supported by A or B. 
                   
                   
                   
+-------+             +-------+             +-------+ 
|       |<----SIP---->|       |<----SIP---->|       | 
|   A   |             |   T   |             |   B   | 
|   a   |----Media----|a-b,a-c|----Media----|   c   | 
+-------+             +-------+             +-------+ 
                
Figure 1: Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model 
                   
We can explain cases where A supports codec a, B supports codec c, 
and T supports transcoding function with a to b and a to c. 
A caller party sends an INVITE message with SDP[3] codec a to T. 
After receiving from A, T sends an INVITE message with SDP 
A(a)+T(b+c) to called party B. After receiving of the INVITE message 
from T, called party B responds with an OK message to T with SDP B(c). 
T sends an OK message with SDP TA(a) to caller party A. This 
procedure can provide to call setup and media communication between 
the caller party with codec a and the called party with codec c. 
                   
The Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model can be used for 
heterogeneous networks and applications. The examples of 
heterogeneous networks are ones between PSTN and 3GPP/3GPP2, PSTN and 
Internet Telephony, or Internet Telephony and 3GPP/3GPP2. The 
examples of heterogeneous applications are to communicate in real 
time between voice and text, video/voice and voice, or video/voice 
and text. 
                   
                   
                   
4. The Comparison of Models 
                   
The models are compared with signaling traffic overhead. The 
Conference bridge model and the Third party transcoding server model 
need an additional signaling procedure for transcoding service 
whenever they are invoked. The additional signaling procedure 
includes an additional INVITE procedure with SIP/SDP between invoking 
point and serving point. Conference bridge model and Third party 
transcoding server model are useful for environments that rarely 
occur for the transcoding service. 
                   
The Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model has an overhead of 
additional codec information insertion at the INVITE message without 
an additional INVITE. The overhead for codec information insertion at 
T is less than that for an additional INVITE signaling procedure.  
                   
                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 5] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
The Intelligent Transcoding Gateway Model is the best solution from 
the point of ITSP(Internet Telephony Service Provider). In an ITSP 
environment, all call control messages should be controlled by the 
ITSP server, ITSP would service to terminals with all kinds of codecs. 
ITSP's media server has a transcoding function and call control by 
itself. This model has the advantage of no additional messages 
between nodes and no modification for call set up standard. 
                
The transcoding technology with the Intelligent Transcoding Gateway 
Model is one of the solutions for network convergence of PSTN, mobile 
network, internet telephony, and digital broadcasting TV. 
                   
                
5. Security Considerations 
                   
This document does not introduce any new security considerations. 
                   
                
6. References 
                   
[1] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. R. Johnston, J. 
Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: 
session initiation protocol," RFC 3261, Internet Engineering 
Task Force, June 2002. 

[2] N. Charlton, M. Gasson, G. Gybels, M. Spanner, and A. van Wijk, 
"User requirements for the session initiation protocol (SIP) 
in support of deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired 
individuals," RFC 3351, Internet Engineering Task Force, Aug. 
2002. 

[3] J. Rosenberg and H. Schulzrinne, "An offer/answer model with 
session description protocol (SDP)," RFC 3264, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, June 2002. 

[4] J. Rosenberg, J. Peterson, H. Schulzrinne, and G. Camarillo, 
"Best current practices for third party call control in the 
session initiation protocol," RFC 3725, Internet Engineering 
Task Force, Jan. 2004. Work in progress. 

[5] G. Camarillo, "The session initiation protocol conference 
bridge transcoding model," Internet Draft draft-camarillo-
sipping-transc-b2bua-00, Internet Engineering Task Force, Aug. 
2003.  Work in progress. 

[6] G. Camarillo, "Framework for Transcoding with the Session 
Initiation Protocol," Internet Draft draft-ietf-transc-
framework-00.txt, Internet Engineering Task Force, Feb. 2004.  
Work in progress. 

[7] G. Camarillo, E. Burger, H. Schulzrinne, A. van Wijk, 
"Transcoding Services Invocation in the Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP) Using Third Party Call Control (3pcc)," Sep 
2004 Work in progress. 

                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 6] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
[8] A. van Wijk, "Framework of requirements for real-time text 
conversation using SIP," Internet Draft draft-vanwijk-sipping-
toip-00, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jan. 2004.  Work in 
progress 
                   
                
Acknowledgment 
                
                
Author's Addresses 
                   
Tae-Gyu Kang 
ETRI 
VoIP Service Technology Team 
161 Kajeong Yousung Taejeon 305-350 
South Korea 
Electronic mail: tgkang@etri.re.kr 
                   
Do-Young Kim 
VoIP Service Technology Team 
161 Kajeong Yousung Taejeon 305-350 
South Korea 
Electronic mail: dyk@etri.re.kr 
                   
Young-Sun Kim 
Broadband convergence Network Service Research Group 
161 Kajeong Yousung Taejeon 305-350 
South Korea 
Electronic mail: sunkim@etri.re.kr 
                   
                   
                
                
Intellectual Property Statement 
                   
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
                   
Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 

                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 7] 
                                    SIPPING                  November 2004 
                
                
specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
                   
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
ipr@ietf.org. 
                   
                   
Disclaimer of Validity 
                   
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
                   
Copyright Statement 
                   
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
                   
                   











                
                
Taegyu Kang               Expires - May 2005                  [Page 8] 
