



MPLS Working Group                                              R. Torvi
Internet-Draft                                                 R. Bonica
Intended status: Informational                          Juniper Networks
Expires: April 25, 2015                                          M. Conn
                                                              D. Pacella
                                                             L. Tomotaki
                                                               M. Wygant
                                                                 Verizon
                                                        October 22, 2014


                             LSP Self-Ping
                     draft-bonica-mpls-self-ping-01

Abstract

   This memo describes LSP Self-ping.  Ingress LSR's can use LSP Self-
   ping to verify that an LSP is ready to carry traffic.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  LSP Self Ping Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Rejected Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   An ingress Label Switching Router (LSR) can use RSVP-TE [RFC3209] to
   establish an MPLS Label Switched Path [RFC3032].  The following
   paragraphs provide an overview of RSVP-TE procedures.

   The ingress LSR calculates an explicit path between itself and an
   egress LSR.  It then formats an RSVP PATH message, including an
   Explicit Route Object (ERO).  The ERO represents the explicit path
   between the ingress and egress LSRs.

   The ingress LSR forwards the PATH message in the direction of the
   egress LSR, following the path defined by the ERO.  Each transit LSR
   that receives the PATH message executes admission control procedures.
   If the transit LSR admits the LSP, it reserves bandwidth (if
   necessary) and sends the PATH message downstream, to the next node in
   the ERO.

   When the egress LSR receives the PATH message, it binds a label to
   the LSP.  The label can be implicit null, explicit null, or non-null.
   The egress LSR then installs forwarding state (if necessary), and
   constructs an RSVP RESV message.  The RESV message includes a Label
   Object containing the label that has been bound to the LSP.

   The egress LSR sends the RESV message upstream towards the ingress
   LSR.  The RESV message visits the same transit LSRs that the PATH
   message visited, but in reverse order.  Each transit LSR binds a
   label to the LSP, updates its forwarding state and updates the RESV
   message.  As a result, the RESV message contains a Label Object and
   the Label Object contains the label that has been bound to the LSP.
   Next, the transit LSR sends the RESV message upstream, along the
   explicit path.





Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   The ingress LSR receives the RESV message and installs forwarding
   state.  Once the ingress LSR installs forwarding state it can forward
   traffic through the LSP.

   An implementation can optimize the procedure described above by
   allowing LSRs to send a RESV messages upstream before installing
   forwarding state.  This optimization is desirable, because it allows
   LSRs to install forwarding state in parallel, thus accelerating the
   process of LSP signaling and setup.  However, this optimization
   creates a race condition.  When the ingress LSR receives a RESV
   message, some downstream LSRs may have not yet completed the process
   of forwarding state installation.  If the ingress sends traffic over
   the LSP, the traffic will be black-holed until forwarding state has
   been installed on all downstream LSRs.

   The ingress LSP can prevent back-holing by verifying the LSPs
   readiness to carry traffic before forwarding traffic through it.
   Ingress LSRs can use LSP Self-Ping to verify that an LSP is ready to
   carry traffic.

   LSP Self-ping is an extremely lightweight mechanism, designed to
   perform well when control plane resources are scarce.  Therefore, LSP
   Self-ping consumes no control plane resources on transit or egress
   LSRs.

   This memo describes LSP Self-ping.

2.  LSP Self Ping Procedures

   In order to verify that an LSP is ready to carry traffic, the ingress
   LSR creates a short-lived LSP Self-ping session.  All session state
   is maintained locally on the ingress LSR.  Session state includes the
   following:

   o  Session-id: A 16-bit number that identifies the session

   o  verification-status: A boolean variable indicating whether LSP
      readiness has been verified.  The initial value of this variable
      is FALSE.

   o  retries: The number of times that the ingress LSR probes the LSP
      before giving up.  The initial value of this variable is
      determined by configuration.

   o  retry-timer: The number of milliseconds that the LSR waits after
      probing the LSP.  The initial value of this variable is determined
      by configuration.




Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   The ingress LSR executes the following procedure until verification-
   status equals TRUE or retries is less than 1:

   o  Format a Self-ping message

   o  Send the Self-ping message through the LSP under test

   o  Set a timer to expire in retry-timer milliseconds

   o  Wait until either a) a Self-ping message associated with the
      session returns or b) the timer expires.  If a Self-ping
      associated with the session returns, set verification-status to
      TRUE.  Otherwise, decrement retries.  Optionally, increase the
      value of retry-timer according to an appropriate back off
      algorithm.

   If the protocol messages used to establish the LSP were delivered
   over IPv4 [RFC0791] the Self-ping message is an ICMPv4 [RFC0792] Echo
   Reply.  If the protocol messages used to establish the LSP were
   delivered over IPv6 [RFC2460] the Self-ping message is an ICMPv6
   [RFC4443] Echo Reply.  In either case, the contents of the ICMP
   message are as follows:

   o  Source Address is configurable.  By default, it is the address of
      the egress LSR

   o  Destination Address equals the address of the ingress LSR

   o  Time to Live (TTL) / Hop Count equals 255

   o  DSCP is configurable.  By default, it is equal to CS6 (Ox48)
      [RFC4594]

   o  ICMP Identifier equals Session-id

   o  ICMP Sequence equals retries

   The reader should note that the ingress LSR probes the LSP by sending
   an ICMP Echo Reply message, addressed to itself, through the LSP.
   The egress LSR forwards the Echo Reply message back to the ingress
   LSR, exactly as it would forward any other packet.

   If the LSP under test is ready to carry traffic, the egress LSR
   receives the Echo Reply message.  The Echo Reply message can arrive
   at the egress LSR with or without an MPLS header, depending on
   whether the LSP under test executes penultimate hop-popping
   procedures.  If the Echo Reply message arrives at the egress LSR with
   an MPLS header, the egress LSR removes that header.



Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   The egress LSR forwards the Echo Reply message to its destination,
   the ingress LSR.  The egress LSR forwards the Echo Reply message
   exactly as it would forward any other packet.  If the egress LSR's
   most preferred route to the ingress LSR is through an LSP, the egress
   LSR forwards the Echo Reply message through that LSP.  However, if
   the egress LSR's most preferred route to the ingress LSR is not
   through an LSP, the egress LSR forwards the Echo Reply message
   without MPLS encapsulation.

   If the ingress LSR receives an ICMP Echo Reply message with ICMP
   identifier equal to the Session-ID, it sets the verification-status
   to TRUE.  The ICMP Sequence number does not have to match the last
   Sequence Number sent.

   When an LSP Self-ping session terminates, it returns the value of
   verification-status to the invoking protocol.  For example, assume
   that RSVP-TE invokes LSP Self-ping as part of the LSP set-up
   procedure.  If LSP Self-ping returns TRUE, RSVP-TE makes the LSP
   under test available for forwarding.  However, if LSP Self-ping
   returns FALSE, RSVP-TE takes appropriate remedial actions.

   LSP Self-ping fails if all of the following conditions are true:

   o  The Source Address of the ICMP Echo Reply message is equal to its
      default value (that is, the address of the egress LSR)

   o  The penultimate hop pops the MPLS label

   o  The egress LSR executes Unicast Reverse Path Forwarding (uRPF)
      procedures

   In this scenario and in similar scenarios, the egress LSR discards
   the ICMP Echo Reply message rather than forwarding it.  In such
   scenarios, the calling application can set the source address of the
   ICMP Echo Reply message to a more appropriate value.

   LSP Self-ping also fails if ICMP Echo Reply messages cannot be
   delivered from the egress LSR to the ingress LSR.  For example, LSP
   Self-ping fails if the intervening network blocks ICMP Echo Reply
   messages.

3.  Rejected Approaches

   In a rejected approach, the ingress LSR uses LSP-Ping [RFC4379] to
   verify LSP readiness to carry traffic.  This approach was rejected
   for the following reasons.





Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   While an ingress LSR can control its control plane overhead due to
   LSP Ping, an egress LSR has no such control.  This is because each
   ingress LSR can, on its own, control the rate of the LSP Ping
   originated by the LSR, while an egress LSR must respond to all the
   LSP Pings originated by various ingresses.  Furthermore, when an MPLS
   Echo Request reaches an egress LSR it is sent to the control plane of
   the egress LSR, which makes egress LSR processing overhead of LSP
   Ping well above the overhead of its data plane (MPLS/IP forwarding).
   These factors make LSP Ping problematic as a tool for detecting LSP
   readiness to carry traffic when dealing with a large number of LSPs.

   By contrast, LSP Self-ping does not consume any control plane
   resources at the egress LSR, and relies solely on the data plane of
   the egress LSR, making it more suitable as a tool for checking LSP
   readiness when dealing with a large number of LSPs.

   In another rejected approach, the ingress LSR does not verify LSP
   readiness.  Alternatively, it sets a timer when it receives an RSVP
   RESV message and does not forward traffic through the LSP until the
   timer expires.  This approach was rejected because it is impossible
   to determine the optimal setting for this timer.  If the timer value
   is set too low, it does not prevent black-holing.  If the timer value
   is set too high, it slows down the process of LSP signalling and
   setup.

   Moreover, the above-mentioned timer is configured on a per-router
   basis.  However, its optimum value is determined by a network-wide
   behavior.  Therefore, changes in the network could require changes to
   the value of the timer, making the optimal setting of this timer a
   moving target.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.

5.  Security Considerations

   ICMP messages are easily forged.  Therefore, an attacker can send the
   ingress LSR a forged ICMP Echo Reply message, causing the ingress LSR
   to terminate the LSP Self-ping session prematurely.








Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


6.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Yakov Rekhter, Eric Rosen, Eric Osborne and Nobo Akiya for
   their contributions to this document.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September
              1981.

   [RFC0792]  Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", STD 5,
              RFC 792, September 1981.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC3032]  Rosen, E., Tappan, D., Fedorkow, G., Rekhter, Y.,
              Farinacci, D., Li, T., and A. Conta, "MPLS Label Stack
              Encoding", RFC 3032, January 2001.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4379]  Kompella, K. and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol
              Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", RFC 4379,
              February 2006.

   [RFC4443]  Conta, A., Deering, S., and M. Gupta, "Internet Control
              Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol
              Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", RFC 4443, March 2006.

   [RFC4594]  Babiarz, J., Chan, K., and F. Baker, "Configuration
              Guidelines for DiffServ Service Classes", RFC 4594, August
              2006.

Authors' Addresses

   Ravi Torvi
   Juniper Networks

   Email: rtorvi@juniper.net


   Ron Bonica
   Juniper Networks

   Email: rbonica@juniper.net



Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                 October 2014


   Michael Conn
   Verizon

   Email: michael.e.conn@verizon.com


   Dante Pacella
   Verizon

   Email: dante.j.pacella@verizon.com


   Luis Tomotaki
   Verizon

   Email: luis.tomotaki@verizon.com


   Mark Wygant
   Verizon

   Email: mark.wygant@verizon.com





























Torvi, et al.            Expires April 25, 2015                 [Page 8]