Network Working Group                                Donald Eastlake 3rd
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  Motorola
Expires: May 2001                                          November 2000



                Protocol versus Document Points of View
                -------- ------ -------- ------ -- ----
                 <draft-eastlake-proto-doc-pov-00.txt>



Status of This Document

   This draft is intended to become an Informational RFC.  It's
   distribution is unlimited. Please send comments to the author.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Abstract

   Two points of view are contrasted: the "document" point of view,
   where objects of interest are like pieces of paper, and the
   "protocol" point of view where objects of interest are like composite
   protocol messages.  While each point of view has its place,
   inappropriate adherence to a purely document point of view is
   detrimental to protocol design.











D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


Table of Contents

      Status of This Document....................................1
      Abstract...................................................1

      Table of Contents..........................................2

      1. Introduction............................................3
      2. Points of View..........................................3
      2.1 Basic Point of View....................................3
      2.2 The Question of Meaning................................4
      2.3 Processing or Lack Thereof.............................4
      2.4 Canonicalization and Security..........................4
      3. Examples................................................6
      4. Synthesis of the Points of View.........................6

      References.................................................7

      Author's Address...........................................8
      Expiration and File Name...................................8
































D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


1. Introduction

   Much of the IETF's traditional work has concerned low level binary
   protocol constructs.  These are almost always viewed from the
   protocol point of view as defined below.  But as higher level
   application constructs and syntaxes are involved in the standards
   process, difficulties can arise due to participants who are fixated
   on the document point of view.

   An example of something designed, to a significant extent, from the
   document point of view is the X.509v3 Certificate [X509v3].  An
   example of something that can easily be viewed both ways and where
   the best results frequently attention to not only the document but
   also the protocol point of view is the eXtensible Markup Language
   (XML [XML]).



2. Points of View

   The following subsections contrast the document and protocol points
   of view.  Each view is exaggerated for effect.

   The document point of view is indicated in paragraphs headed "DOCUM"
   while the protocol point of view is indicated in paragraphs headed
   "PROTO".



2.1 Basic Point of View

   DOCUM: What is important are complete digital documents viewed by
      people or things which are very close equivalents.  A major
      concern is to be able to present such documents as directly as
      possible to a court or adjudicator should a dispute arise.

   PROTO: What is important are bits on the wire generated and consumed
      by well defined computer processes or things which are very close
      equivalents.  Although pieces of such messages may end up being
      included in or influencing data displayed to a person, a protocol
      message as a whole is only viewed by a geek when debugging.  If
      you actually ever have to prove something about such a message is
      a court, there isn't any way to avoid having expert witnesses
      interpret it.








D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


2.2 The Question of Meaning

   DOCUM: The "meaning" of a document is a deep and interesting human
      question.  It is probably necessary for the document to include or
      reference human language policy and/or warranty/disclaimer
      information.  It is reasonable to consult attorneys and require
      some minimal human readable statements to be "within the four
      corners" of the document (i.e., actually embedded in the digital
      structure).

   PROTO: The "meaning" of a protocol message is clear from the protocol
      specification and is frequently defined in terms of the state
      machines of the sender and recipient.  Protocol messages are only
      truly meaningful to the processes producing and consuming them,
      which processes have additional context.  Adding human readable
      text that is not functionally required is silly.  Consulting
      attorneys may needlessly complicate the protocol and in the worst
      case tie any design effort in knots.



2.3 Processing or Lack Thereof

   DOCUM: The standard model of a document is as a quasi-static object
      somewhat like a piece of paper.  About all you do to documents is
      transfer them as a whole from one storage area to another or add
      attachments.  (Possibly you might want an extract from a document
      or to combine multiple documents into a summary but this isn't the
      common case.)

   PROTO: The standard model of a protocol message is as an ephemeral
      composite object created by a source process and consumed by a
      destination process.  Normally a message is constructed from
      information contained in or pieces of other messages previously
      received by the sending process, as well as local information.



2.4 Canonicalization and Security

   Canonicalization is the transformation of the information in a
   message into a "standard" form, discarding "insignificant"
   information.  For example, encoding into a standard character set or
   changing line endings into a standard encoding and discarding the
   information as to what the original character set or line ending
   encodings were.  Obvious, what is "standard" and what is
   "insignificant" varies with the application or protocol and can be
   tricky to determine.

   DOCUM: From the document point of view, canonicalization is extremely


D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


      suspect if not outright evil.  After all, if you have a piece of
      paper with writing on it, any modification to "standardize" its
      format can be an unauthorized change in the original message as
      created by the author.  From the document point of view, digital
      signatures are like authenticating signatures or seals or time
      stamps on the bottom of the "piece of paper".  They do not justify
      and should not depend on the slightest change in the message
      appearing above them.  Similarly, from the document point of view,
      encryption is just putting the "piece of paper" in a vault that
      only certain people can open, and does not justify any
      standardization or canonicalization of the message.

   PROTO: From the protocol point of view, you know that you just have a
      pile of bits that have never been seen and never will be seen by a
      person.  In some cases, a human sensible representation of some of
      the bits may be shown to a person.  But, for protocols of
      realistic complexity, most of the parts of the message will be
      artifacts of encoding, protocol structure, and computer
      representation rather than anything intended for a person to see.
      In theory, the "original" idiosyncratic form of any digitally
      signed part could be conveyed unchange through the computer
      processes which implement the protocol and usefully signed in that
      form, but in practical systems of any complexity, this always
      proves unreasonably difficult for at least some parts of some
      messages. Thus, the signed data must be canonicalized as part of
      the signing and verification processes.  Even if, miraculously, an
      initial system design avoids all cases of signed message part
      reconstruction based on processed data or re-encoding based on
      character set or line ending or capitalization or numeric
      representation or time zones or whatever, later revisions and
      extensions are almost certain to require such reconstruction
      and/or re-encoding.  Because of this, from the protocol point of
      view, canonicalization is always required.  It is just a question
      of exactly what canonicalization or canonicalizations.

   Thus, for protocol systems of practical complexity, you are faced
   with the choice of
      (1) doing no canonicalization and having brittle signatures,
   useless due to insignificant failures to verify, or
      (2) doing the sometimes difficult and tricky work of designing an
   appropriate canonicalization or caonnicalizaitons to be used as part
   of signature generation and verification producing robust and useful
   signatures.

   While the application of canonicalization is more obvious with
   digital signatures, it may also apply to encryption.  In particular,
   sometimes elements of the environment where the encrypted data is
   found effect its interpretation.  For example, the character encoding
   or bindings of dummy symbols.  When the data is decrypted, it may be
   into an environment with a different character encoding and dummy


D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


   symbol bindings.  With a plain text message part, it is usually clear
   what of these environmental elements need to be conveyed with the
   message.  But a encrypted message part is opaque.  Thus some
   canonical representation that incorporates such environmental factors
   may be needed.



3. Examples

   (to be added)



4. Synthesis of the Points of View

   There are some merits to each point of view.  Certainly the document
   point of view is simpler and easier and would thus be preferred if it
   meets the needs of an application.

   The protocol point of view can come close to encompassing the
   document point of view as a limiting case.  In particular, as

      the complexity of messages declines to a single payload (perhaps
      with attachments) and

      the mutability of the payload declines to some standard binary
      format that needs no canonicalization and

      the number of parties and amount of processing as messages are
      transferred declines and

      the portion of the message intended for more or less direct human
      consumption increases,

   the protocol point of view would be narrowed to something close to
   the document point of view.  Even when the document point of view is
   questionable, the addition of a few options to a protocol, such as
   minimal and/or no canonicalication or optional policy
   statement/pointer inclusion, will usually satisfy the perceived needs
   of those holding a strictly document point of view.

   On the other hand, the document point of view is hard to stretch to
   encompass the protocol case.  From an extreme document point of view,
   canonicalization is wrong, inclusion of human language policy test
   within every object should be mandatory, etc.  Failure to incorporate
   the protocol view point as described above in the design of protocols
   of realistic complexity may have fatal consequences.




D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


References

   [X509v3] ITU-T Recommendation X.509 version 3 (1997). "Information
   Technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory
   Authentication Framework"  ISO/IEC 9594-8:1997.

   [XML] Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 Recommendation. T. Bray,
   J. Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen. February 1998.
   <http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/REC-xml-19980210>











































D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 7]


INTERNET-DRAFT          Document versus Protocol            October 2000


Author's Address

   The author of this document is:

        Donald E. Eastlake 3rd
        Motorola
        155 Beaver Street
        Milford, MA 01757 USA

        Phone:  +1 508-261-5434 (w)
                +1 508-634-2066 (h)
        Fax:    +1 508-261-4777 (w)
        EMail:  Donald.Eastlake@motorola.com



Expiration and File Name

   This draft expires May 2001.

   Its file name is <draft-eastlake-proto-doc-pov-00.txt>.































D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 8]

