


SIPPING                                                        E. Sasaki
Internet-Draft                                                   T. Ohba
Expires: May 13, 2006                                                NTT
                                                                M. Dolly
                                                               AT&T Labs
                                                        November 9, 2005


                     SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary
            draft-sasaki-sipping-tispan-adhoc-summary-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 13, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This draft summarizes the discussion and outcome from the sipping
   working group ad hoc meeting to discuss TISPAN requirements held on
   November 9, 2005.

   The sipping working group held an ad hoc meeting on November 9, 2005
   to address TISPAN's requirements as outlined in [TISPAN-Reqts] and



Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


   [TISPAN-Anal].  During the meeting, the requirements were discussed
   and following are the comments made to address the requirements.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  TISPAN Requirements Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Progressing the discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Changes from previous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7



































Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


1.  Introduction

   On November 9, 2005, the sipping working group held an ad hoc meeting
   to address TISPAN requirements.  During the meeting several
   suggestions and comments were made to address these requirements.
   This document attempts to capture these suggestions and comments as a
   record of the meeting.


2.  TISPAN Requirements Discussion

   Anonymous Call Rejection (ACR) - Note that TISPAN no longer has a
      need for the override call rejection.  At the same time, Jonathan
      Rosenberg has written a new draft with a new status code to reject
      anonymous calls, draft-rosenberg-sipping-acr-code-00.  This draft
      seems to have good support that it would be acceptable in sipping
      and that it would meet TISPAN's needs.
   Terminating Identification Presentation(TIP)- The working group
      requests that this requirement be better defined and documented.
      It is also suggested that TISPAN consider reading
      draft-rosenberg-sip-identity-privacy-00 as it may solve the
      problem of calling into an 800 number, getting an operator, and
      being able to call back that operator and still protect the
      privacy of the operator.
      In addition, work is progressing on
      draft-elwell-sip-connected-identity-00.
   Advice of Charge (AoC) - The working group suggests that TISPAN read
      the app interaction framework found in
      draft-ietf-sipping-app-interaction-framework-05.txt as TISPAN may
      find it of use.
   Call Completion of Busy Subscriber (CCBS) - The working group
      acknowledges that this requirement is related to presence and is
      not easily solved.  Jonathan Rosenberg thought that Dialog Package
      could do it but it is lacking queuing.  The working group also has
      several questions including (but not limited to):
      oWhat sort of queuing is needed
      oIs multimedia a consideration, as this will add complexity
      oDoes this need to work when we have multiple devices for each
      user on each side
   Malicious Communication Identifier (MCID) - The working group
      suggests considering the use of http or some other method to
      report the malicious call using the call log.  As for requirement
      2, part of the solution (caller ID not available) the working
      group feels may be found in the
      draft-rosenberg-sip-identity-privacy as it would allow the logging
      system to make a tunneled query to the originating gateway.





Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


   Call Waiting (CW) - The working group feels that it may be able to
      assist on this requirement, but still has several questions of
      TISPAN.  It was felt that CW is invoked by the device, and
      therefore does not require a new capability.  The working group
      asks TISPAN for more clarity.
   Call Diversion (CDIV) - Although the regular SIPPING working group
      had scheduled to discuss the
      draft-elwell-sipping-service-retargeting-00.txt, based on off line
      discussions, the authors requested that the draft be taken off of
      the agenda.  The authors realized that work can be done working
      with the draft-jennings-sip-voicemail-uri-04.txt with some minor
      updates and continue on as an AD informational draft in the RFC
      queue.  The authors will meet to make the necessary updates.  The
      working group supports this action.
   Call Party Category/Origination Line Identification (CPC/OLI) - The
      working group discussed
      draft-rocky-sipping-calling-party-category-01.txt in the regular
      sipping working group meeting.  However, this solution was not
      accepted, and it was determined that a new draft for sipping to
      address this issue with SAML assertions would be a more favorable
      approach.  Hannes Tschofenig is leading a design team progressing
      the SAML based approach.
   Early Media indication - This is not in the requirements draft, but
      came up recently.  Proxies need to open/close gates with different
      point in time on session by session basis.  The working group asks
      TISPAN for more clarity.


3.  Progressing the discussion

   The meeting participants acknowledges that further clarity of the
   requirements are needed to proceed.  In order to expedite the
   process, and to create a better working model between the two groups,
   it was proposed by Jon Peterson, the Transport Area Director that an
   issue tracker be developed similar to that used between the IETF and
   3GPP.  This tracker would be used to help better facilitate
   communications between TISPAN and the sipping working group.  Dean
   Willis was kind enough to offer webspace at softarmor.com to host
   this tracker.

   The meeting participants also agreed to have this Internet Draft be
   written to document the output of this ad hoc meeting and to formally
   summarize the discussions and outcome of the meeting.


4.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations will be addressed in the individual drafts.



Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


5.  Changes from previous

   Not applicable.


6.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA considerations.

7.  References

   [TISPAN-Anal]
              Jesske, R., "Analysis of the Input Requirements for the
              Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) in support for the
              European Telecommunications  Standards Institute (ETSI)
              Next Generation Networks (NGN) simulation  services,
              draft-jesske-sipping-tispan-analysis-00.txt", June 2005.

   [TISPAN-Reqts]
              Jesske, R., "Input Requirements for the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) in support for the European
              Telecommunications Standards Institute,
              draft-jesske-sipping-tispan-requirements-02",
              October 2005.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank the participants of the sipping ad hoc
   meeting for TISPAN requirements.  Special thanks goes also to Cullen
   Jennings and Shida Schubert for their notes which of great help in
   the creation of this document.



















Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Erick Sasaki
   NTT
   3710 Penwood Place
   Dublin, CA  94568
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: esasaki@shui-usjapan.com
   URI:


   Takumi Ohba
   NTT
   9-11 Midor-Cho, 3 Chome
   Musashino, Tokyo,   180 8585
   Japan

   Phone:
   Email: ohba.takumi@lab.ntt.co.jp
   URI:


   Martin Dolly
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue
   Middletowm, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: mdolly@att.com
   URI:


















Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        SIPPING TISPAN Ad Hoc Summary        November 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Sasaki, et al.            Expires May 13, 2006                  [Page 7]


