
                                                             Angela Chiu 
                                                             John Strand 
                                                                    AT&T 
   Internet Draft 
   Document: draft-chiu-strand-unique-olcp-00.txt            July, 2000 
    
 
   Unique Features and Requirements for The Optical Layer Control Plane 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
   Working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Advances in the Optical Layer control plane is critical to ensure 
   tremendous amount of bandwidth generated by the DWDM technology be 
   provided to upper layer services in a timely, reliable, and cost 
   effective fashion. This document describes some unique features and 
   requirements for the Optical Layer control plane that protocol 
   designers need to take into consideration.  
    
    
1.        Introduction 
    
   The confluence of technical advances and service needs has focused 
   intense interest on optical networking.  Dense Wave Division 
   Multiplexing (DWDM) is allowing unprecedented growth in raw optical 
   bandwidth; cross-connect technologies, both electrical and optical, 
   promise the ability to establish very high bandwidth connections 
   within milliseconds; and the insatiable appetite of the Internet for 
    
   Chiu/Strand                                                [Page 1] 
    
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   high capacity "pipes" has caused transport network operators to tear 
   up their forecasts and add optical capacity as fast as they can.   
    
   Critical to these advances are improvements to the "Optical Layer 
   Control Plane"-the software used to determine routings and establish 
   and maintain connections. Traditional centralized transport 
   operations systems are widely acknowledged to be incapable of 
   scaling to meet exploding demand or to establish connections as 
   rapidly as needed.  Consequently in the last year much attention has 
   been paid to new control plane architectures based on data 
   networking protocols from IETF such as RSVP-TE and CR-LDP from MPLS, 
   IGPs including OSPF and IS-IS.  These architectures feature 
   distributed routing and control logic, auto discovery and self 
   inventorying, and many other advantages.   
    
   The potential of these new architectures for optical networking are 
   enormous; however, to be successful they need to be adapted to the 
   specific technological, service, and business context characteristic 
   of optical networking.  This document attempts to describe several 
   aspects of optical networking which differ from those in the data 
   networking environment inspiring these new architectures: 
     - Section 2 describes some distinctive technological and 
       networking aspects of optical networking that will constrain 
       routing in an optical network, and  
     - Section 3 gives a transport network operator∆s perspective on 
       business and operational realities that optical networks are 
       likely to face which are unlike those in data networking. 
    
   We most definitely are not claiming that these differences are fatal 
   to these new architectures, only that the new architectures must be 
   built upon a detailed appreciation of the unique characteristics of 
   the optical world. 
    
2.   Constraints On Routing 
    
   Optical Layer routing is less insulated from details of physical 
   implementation than routing in higher layers.  In this section we 
   give examples of constraints arising from the design of network 
   elements, from the accumulation of signal impairments, and from the 
   need to guarantee the physical diversity of some circuits. 
    
2.1       Reconfigurable Network Elements 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 2] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   Control plane architectural discussions (e.g, [Awduche99]) usually 
   assume that the only software reconfigurable network element is an 
   optical layer cross-connect (OLXC).  There are however other 
   software reconfigurable elements on the horizon, specifically 
   tunable lasers and receivers and reconfigurable optical add-drop 
   multiplexers (OADM∆s). These elements are illustrated in the 
   following simple example, which is modeled on announced Optical  
   Transport System (OTS) products: 
                
                 +                                       + 
     ---+---+    |\                                     /|    +---+--- 
     ---| A |----|D|          X              Y         |D|----| A |--- 
     ---+---+    |W|     +--------+     +--------+     |W|    +---+--- 
          :      |D|-----|  OADM  |-----|  OADM  |-----|D|      : 
     ---+---+    |M|     +--------+     +--------+     |M|    +---+--- 
     ---| A |----| |      |      |       |      |      | |----| A |--- 
     ---+---+    |/       |      |       |      |       \|    +---+--- 
                 +      +---+  +---+   +---+  +---+      + 
                  D     | A |  | A |   | A |  | A |      E 
                        +---+  +---+   +---+  +---+ 
                         | |    | |     | |    | | 
    
         Figure 2-1: An OTS With OADM's - Functional Architecture 
    
   In Fig.2-1, the part that is on the inner side of all boxes labeled 
   "A" defines an all-optical subnetwork. From a routing perspective 
   two aspects are critical: 
     - Adaptation: These are the functions done at the edges of the 
       subnetwork that transform the incoming optical channel into the 
       physical wavelength to be transported through the subnetwork. 
     - Connectivity: This defines which pairs of edge Adaptation 
       functions can be interconnected through the subnetwork. 
    
   In Fig. 2-1, D and E are DWDM∆s and X and Y are OADM∆s. The boxes 
   labeled "A" are adaptation functions. They map one or more input 
   optical channels assumed to be standard short reach signals into a 
   long reach (LR) wavelength or wavelength group which will pass 
   transparently to a distant adaptation function. Adaptation 
   functionality which affects routing includes: 
     - Multiplexing: Either electrical or optical TDM may be used to 
       combine the input channels into a single wavelength.  This is 
       done to increase effective capacity:  A typical DWDM might be 
       able to handle 100 2.5 Gb/sec signals (250 Gb/sec total) or 50 
       10 Gb/sec (500 Gb/sec total); combining the 2.5 Gb/sec signals 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 3] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       together thus effectively doubles capacity. After multiplexing 
       the combined signal must be routed as a group to the distant 
       adaptation function. 
     - Adaptation Grouping: In this technique, groups of k (e.g., 4) 
       wavelengths are managed as a group within the system and must be 
       added/dropped as a group. We will call such a group an 
       "adaptation grouping". 
     - Laser Tunability: The lasers producing the LR wavelengths may 
       have a fixed frequency, may be tunable over a limited range, or 
       be tunable over the entire range of wavelengths supported by the 
       DWDM. Tunability speeds may also vary. 
    
   Connectivity between adaptation functions may also be limited: 
     - As pointed out above, TDM and/or adaptation grouping by the 
       adaptation function forces groups of input channels to be 
       delivered together to the same distant adaptation function. 
     - Only adaptation functions whose lasers/receivers are tunable to 
       compatible frequencies can be connected. 
     - The switching capability of the OADM∆s may also be constrained.  
       For example: 
          o There may be some wavelengths that can not be dropped at 
            all. 
          o There may be a fixed relationship between the frequency 
            dropped and the physical port on the OADM to which it is 
            dropped. 
          o OADM physical design may put an upper bound on the number 
            of adaptation groupings dropped at any single OADM. 
    
   For a fixed configuration of the OADM∆s and  adaptation functions, 
   connectivity between the DWDM∆s and OADM∆s will be fixed: Each input 
   port will essentially be hard-wired to some specific distant port.  
   However this connectivity can be changed by changing the 
   configurations of the OADM∆s and adaptation functions. For example, 
   an additional adaptation grouping might be dropped at an OADM or a 
   tunable laser retuned. In each case the port-to-port connectivity is 
   changed.  
    
   This capability can be expected to be under software control. Today 
   the control would rest in the vendor-supplied Element Management 
   system (EMS), which in turn would be controlled by the operator∆s 
   OS∆s.  However in principle the EMS could participate in the routing 
   process. The constraints on reconfiguration are likely to be quite 
   complex, dependent on the vendor design and also on exactly what 
   line cards, etc. have been deployed. Thus the state information that 
   would need to be disseminated is likely to be voluminous, possibly 
   vendor specific, and likely to be hard to pin down. However it is 
   very desirable to solve these issues, possibly by advertising only 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 4] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   an abstraction of the complex configuration options to the external 
   world via the control plane. 
    
2.2       Wavelength Routed All-Optical Networks 
    
   The optical networks presently being deployed may be called "opaque" 
   ([Tkach98]) - each link is optically isolated by transponders doing 
   O/E/O conversions from other links.  These transponders are quite 
   expensive and they also constrain the rapid evolution to new 
   services - for example, they tend to be bit rate and format 
   specific.  Thus there are strong motivators to introduce "domains of 
   transparency" - all-optical subnetworks. 
    
   The routing of lightpaths through an all-optical network has 
   received extensive attention. (For recent reviews, see [Yates99], 
   [Ramaswami98], [Mukherjee97]).  One aspect of this problem that is 
   still troublesome is the impact of transmission impairments on 
   signal quality. When discussing routing in an all-optical network it 
   is usually assumed that all routes have adequate signal quality. 
   This may be ensured by limiting all-optical networks to subnetworks 
   of limited geographic size which are optically isolated from other 
   parts of the optical layer by transponders.  This approach is very 
   practical and has been applied to date, e.g. when determining the 
   maximum length of an Optical Transport System.  Furthermore 
   operational considerations like fault isolation also make limiting 
   the size of domains of transparency attractive. 
    
   There are however reasons to consider contained domains of 
   transparency in which not all routes have adequate signal quality: 
   Maximum private line bit rates have rapidly increased from DS3 (45 
   Mb/sec) through OC-3 (155 Mb/sec), OC-12 (622 Mb/s) and OC-48 (2.5 
   Gb/sec) to OC-192 (10 Gb/sec).  OC-768 (40 Gb/sec) is now under 
   discussion. As bit rates increase it is necessary to increase power.  
   This makes impairments and nonlinearities more troublesome. Thus a 
   contained domain of transparency sized so all routes can support an 
   OC-768 would necessarily be quite small (perhaps <100 km in 
   diameter). A domain sized for OC-192 very likely be significantly 
   smaller than one sized for OC-48. This suggests that more aggressive 
   domain sizing might have some benefits. 
    
   Optical technology is advancing very rapidly and is making ever-
   larger domains possible. Of particular importance in this respect 
   are advances in optical cross-connects (OXC∆s) and ultra-long OTS∆s 
   employing Raman amplification and other techniques. The use of all-
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 5] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   optical networking in metro and access applications is under very 
   rapid evolution also. 
    
   Optical layer control plane architectures are under intense 
   discussion in the ITU, IETF, OIF, and other standards bodies. The 
   general approach being considered for routing is to adapt the Open 
   Shortest Path First (OSPF) protocol from IP ([Moy98]). A number of 
   the specifics of this adaptation depend strongly on whether 
   transmission impairments need to be explicitly considered in the 
   routing process. To give one example, the link state information 
   advertised might need to contain information about the specific 
   impairments on the link.  
    
   In this document we assume that these considerations have led to the 
   deployment of a domain of transparency that is too large to ensure 
   that all potential routes have adequate signal quality. Our goal is 
   to understand the impacts of the various types of impairments in 
   this environment and to recommend a practical method for doing 
   routing in this situation. 
    
2.2.1     Problem Formulation 
    
   We consider a single domain of transparency. We wish to route a 
   unidirectional circuit from ingress client node X to egress client 
   node Y. At both X and Y, the circuit goes through an O/E/O 
   conversion which optically isolates the portion within our domain.  
   We assume that we know the bit rate of the circuit. Also, we assume 
   that the adaptation function at X applies some Forward Error 
   Correction (FEC) method to the circuit. We also assume we know the 
   launch power of the laser at X.  
    
2.2.2     Impairment Constraints ([Tkach98]) 
    
   Impairment constraints can be classified into two categories, linear 
   and nonlinear. Linear effects are independent of signal power and 
   affect wavelengths individually. Amplifier spontaneous emission 
   (ASE) and Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD) are examples. On the 
   other hand, fiber nonlinearities are significantly more complex: 
   they generate not only dispersion on individual channel, but also 
   crosstalk between channels which causes dependency across channels. 
   Examples include four-photon mixing, cross-phase modulation, self-
   phase modulation, stimulated Brillouin scattering, and stimulated 
   Raman scattering. Here, we assume that proper system design will 
   compensate for those effects (for example, Raman amplification and 
   FEC mechanisms both serve to allow lower power to be used and thus 
   move systems towards the linear regime) and/or simulation studies 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 6] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   can be used to rule out certain fiber type(s). We consider only the 
   linear regime in this document. We assume that chromatic dispersion 
   is compensated in fiber lines and can be neglected. Hence PMD and 
   signal to noise ratio (SNR) are the only impairment constraints that 
   need to be considered in determining the path of a lightpath through 
   a transparent optical subnetwork. We examine the role of each in 
   this regard. 
    
     - PMD: For a transparent fiber segment, the general rule for the 
       PMD requirement is that the time-average differential time delay 
       between two orthogonal state of polarizations should be less 
       than 10% of the bit duration [ITU]. (More aggressive designs to 
       compensate for PMD may allow higher than 10%. This would be a 
       system parameter known to the routing process.) This results in 
       a constraint on the maximum length of an M-fiber-span 
       transparent segment where a fiber span in a transparent network 
       refers to a segment between two optical amplifiers. The 
       constraint depends on a set of parameters including the length 
       and the fiber PMD parameter of each of the M fiber spans. (The 
       detailed equation is omitted due to the format constraint.) For 
       typical fibers with PMD parameter of 1 picosecond per square 
       root of km, based on the constraint, the maximum length of the 
       transparent segment should not exceed 100km and 6.75km for bit 
       rates of 10Gb/s and 40Gb/s, respectively. With newer fibers 
       assuming PMD parameter equals to 0.1 picosecond per square root 
       of km, the maximum length of the transparent segment should not 
       exceed 10000km and 675km for bit rates of 10Gb/s and 40Gb/, 
       respectively. In general, the PMD requirement is not an issue 
       for most types of fibers at 10Gb/s or lower bit rate. But it 
       will become an issue at bit rates of 40Gb/s and higher. 
      
     - SNR: Based on the bit rate and type of transmitter-receiver 
       technology (e.g., FEC), an acceptable optical SNR level (SNRmin) 
       needs to be maintained at the receiver. In order to satisfy this 
       requirement, vendors often provide some general engineering rule 
       in terms of maximum length of the transparent segment and number 
       of spans. For example, current transmission systems are often 
       limited to up to 6 spans with 80km long in each. Startups have 
       announced ultra long haul systems that are claimed to be able to 
       support up to thousands of km. Although these general rules are 
       helpful in network planning, more detailed information on the 
       SNR reduction in each component should be used to determine 
       whether the SNR level through a given transparent segment is 
       within the required value. This would provide flexibility in 
       provisioning or restoring a lightpath through a transparent 
       subnetwork. Here, we assume that the average optical power 
       launched at the transmitter is known as P. The lightpath from 
       the transmitter to the receiver goes through M optical 
       amplifiers, with each introducing some noise power. A constraint 
       on the maximum number of spans can be obtained [Kaminow97] which 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 7] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       depends on a set of parameters including SNRmin, P, optical 
       bandwidth B, amplifier gain G and spontaneous emission factor n 
       for each optical amplifier. (Again, the detailed equation is 
       omitted due to the format constraint.) Let∆s take a typical 
       example. Assuming P=4dBm, SNRmin=20dB with FEC, B=12.5GHz, 
       n=2.5, G=25dB, based on the constraint, the maximum number of 
       spans is at most 10. However, if without FEC where the 
       requirement on SNRmin becomes 25dB, the maximum number of spans 
       drops down to 3. 
      
2.2.3     Implications For Routing and Control Plane Design 
    
   Here, we describe the main implications that these two main 
   impairment constraints have on routing algorithm and control plane 
   design.  
    
   The optimal routing problem with the two constraints is in general 
   more computational intensive. However, relatively simple heuristics 
   can be used in practice. If the ingress node of a lightpath does 
   path selection, in order to check whether the two constraints are 
   satisfied or not for a given path, it needs to obtain all the 
   relevant parameters for each span on the path if they vary from one 
   span to another. These parameters typically do not change 
   dynamically, and are often stored in some database. So the ingress 
   node (or some other node that makes the path selection decision) can 
   retrieve the information from the database when needed, or the 
   information can be advertised by the node attached to the span at 
   the topology discovery stage. 
    
   Note that in some circumstances, it may be useful to consider 
   nonlinear effects also. Nevertheless, the two constraints described 
   here are enough to illustrate the impact of the impairment 
   constraints on the routing algorithm and control plane design in 
   transparent subnetworks. 
    
   Additionally, routing in an all-optical network without wavelength 
   conversion raises several additional issues: 
    
     - Since the route selected must have the chosen wavelength 
       available on all links, this information needs to be considered 
       in the routing process. This is discussed in [Chaudhuri00], 
       where it is concluded that advertising detailed wavelength 
       availabilities on each link is not likely to scale. Instead they 
       propose an alternative method which probes along a chosen path 
       to determine which wavelengths (if any) are available. This 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 8] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       would require a significant addition to the routing logic 
       normally used in OSPF. 
      
     - Choosing a path first and then a wavelength along the path is 
       known to give adequate results in simple topologies such as 
       rings and trees ([Yates99]).  This does not appear to be true in 
       large mesh networks under realistic provisioning scenarios, 
       however.  Instead significantly better results are achieved if 
       wavelength and route are chosen simultaneously.  This approach 
       would however also have a significant affect on the routing 
       logic normally used in OSPF. 
      
2.3       Diversity 
    
   "Diversity" is a relationship between lightpaths. Two lightpaths are 
   said to be diverse if they have no single point of failure. In 
   traditional telephony the dominant transport failure mode is a 
   failure in the interoffice plant, such as a fiber cut inflicted by a 
   backhoe.  
    
   To determine whether two lightpath routings are diverse it is 
   necessary to identify single points of failure in the interoffice 
   plant. To do so we will use the following terms: A fiber cable is a 
   uniform group of fibers contained in a sheath.  An Optical Transport 
   System will occupy fibers in a sequence of fiber cables. Each fiber 
   cable will be placed in a sequence of conduits - buried honeycomb 
   structures through which fiber cables may be pulled - or buried in a 
   right of way (ROW).  A ROW is land in which the network operator has 
   the right to install his conduit or fiber cable.  It is worth noting 
   that for economic reasons, ROW∆s are frequently obtained from 
   railroads, pipeline companies, or thruways.  It is frequently the 
   case that several carriers may lease ROW from the same source; this 
   makes it common to have a number of carriers∆ fiber cables in close 
   proximity to each other. Similarly, in a metropolitan network, 
   several carriers might be leasing duct space in the same RBOC 
   conduit.  There are also "carrier's carriers" - optical networks 
   which provide fibers to multiple carriers, all of whom could be 
   affected by a single failure in the "carrier's carrier" network. 
    
   In a typical intercity facility network there might be on the order 
   of 100 offices that are candidates for OLXC∆s. To represent the 
   inter-office fiber network accurately a network with an order of 
   magnitude more nodes is required.  In addition to Optical Amplifier 
   (OA) sites, these additional nodes include: 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001         [page 9] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
     - Places where fiber cables enter/leave a conduit or right of way; 
     - Locations where fiber cables cross; 
     - Locations where fiber splices are used to interchange fibers 
       between fiber cables. 
    
   An example of the first might be: 
    
                                            A                 B 
              A-------------B                 \             / 
                                                \         / 
                                                  X-----Y 
                                                /         \ 
              C-------------D                 /             \ 
                                            C                 D 
       
      (a) Fiber Cable Topology       (b) Right-Of-Way/Conduit Topology 
    
                Figure 2-2:  Fiber Cable vs. ROW Topologies 
    
   Here the A-B fiber cable would be physically routed A-X-Y-B and the 
   C-D cable would be physically routed C-X-Y-D.   This topology might 
   arise because of some physical bottleneck: X-Y might be the Lincoln 
   Tunnel, for example, or the Bay Bridge. 
    
   Fiber route crossing (the second case) is really a special case of 
   this, where X and Y coincide.  In this case the crossing point may 
   not even be a manhole; the fiber routes might just be buried at 
   different depths. 
    
   Fiber splicing (the third case) often occurs when a major fiber 
   route passes near to a small office. To avoid the expense and 
   additional transmission loss only a small number of fibers are 
   spliced out of the major route into a smaller route going to the 
   small office.  This might well occur in a manhole or hut.  An 
   example is shown in Fig. 2-3(a), where A-X-B is the major route, X 
   the manhole, and C the smaller office.  The actual fiber topology 
   would then look like Fig. 2-3(b), where there would typically be 
   many more A-B fibers than A-C or C-B fibers, and where A-C and C-B 
   might have different numbers of fibers. (One of the latter might 
   even be missing.) 
    
    
    
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 10] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
                    C                             C 
                    |                           /   \ 
                    |                         /       \ 
                    |                       /           \ 
             A------X------B              A---------------B 
    
        (a) Fiber Cable Topology         (b) Fiber Topology 
    
               Figure 2-3.  Fiber Cable vs Fiber Topologies 
    
   The imminent deployment of ultra-long (>1000 km) Optical Transport 
   Systems introduces a further complexity: Two OTS's could interact a 
   number of times.  To make up a hypothetical example: A New York - 
   Atlanta OTS and a Philadelphia - Orlando OTS might ride on the same 
   right of way for x miles in Maryland and then again for y miles in 
   Georgia. They might also cross at Raleigh or some other intermediate 
   node without sharing right of way. 
    
   Diversity is often equated to routing two lightpaths between a 
   single pair of points, or different pairs of points so that no 
   single route failure will disrupt them both. This is too simplistic, 
   for a number of reasons: 
    
     - A sophisticated client of an optical network will want to derive 
       diversity needs from his/her end customers' availability 
       requirements. These often lead to more complex diversity 
       requirements than simply providing diversity between two 
       lightpaths. For example, a common requirement is that no single 
       failure should isolate a node or nodes. If a node A has single 
       lightpaths to nodes B and C, this requires A-B and A-C to be 
       diverse. In real applications, a large data network with N 
       lightpaths between its routers might describe their needs in an 
       NxN matrix, where (i,j) defines whether lightpaths i and j must 
       be diverse.  
      
     - Two circuits that might be considered diverse for one 
       application might not be considered diverse for in another 
       situation. Diversity is usually thought of as a reaction to 
       interoffice route failures.  High reliability applications may 
       require other types of failures to be taken into account. Some 
       examples: 
          o Office Outages: Although less frequent than route failures, 
            fires, power outages, and floods do occur.  Many network 
            managers require that diverse routes have no (intermediate) 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 11] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
            nodes in common.  In other cases an intermediate node might 
            be acceptable as long as there is power diversity within 
            the office. 
          o Shared Rings: Many applications are willing to allow 
            "diverse" circuits to share a SONET ring-protected link; 
            presumably they would allow the same for optical layer 
            rings. 
          o Natural Disasters: Earthquakes and floods can cause 
            failures over an extended area.  Defense Department 
            circuits might need to be routed with nuclear damage radii 
            taken into account. 
          o Conversely, some networks may be willing to take somewhat 
            larger risks.  Taking route failures as an example: Such a 
            network might be willing to consider two fiber cables in 
            heavy duty concrete conduit as having a low enough chance 
            of simultaneous failure to be considered "diverse". They 
            might also be willing to view two fiber cables buried on 
            opposite sides of a railroad track as being diverse because 
            there is minimal danger of a single backhoe disrupting them 
            both even though a bad train wreck might jeopardize them 
            both. 
           
   These considerations strongly suggest that the routing algorithm 
   should be sensitive to the types of threat considered unacceptable 
   by the requester.  
     
   [Chaudhuri00] introduced the term "Shared Risk Link Group" (SRLG) to 
   describe the relationship between two non-diverse links.  The above 
   discussion suggests that an SRLG should be characterized by 2 
   parameters: 
     - Type of Compromise: Examples would be shared fiber cable, shared 
       conduit, shared ROW, shared optical ring, shared office without 
       power sharing, etc.) 
     - Extent of Compromise:  For compromised outside plant, this would 
       be the length of the sharing. 
    
   Two links could be related by many SRLG's (AT&T's experience 
   indicates that a link may belong to over 100 SRLG's, each 
   corresponding to a separate fiber group. Each SRLG might relate a 
   single link to many other links. For the optical layer, similar 
   situations can be expected where a link is an ultra-long (3000 km) 
   OTS). The mapping between links and different types of SRLG∆s is in 
   general defined by network operators based on the definition of each 
   SRLG type. Since SRLG information is not yet ready to be 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 12] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   discoverable by a network element and does not change dynamically, 
   it need not be advertised with other resource availability 
   information by network elements. It could be configured in some 
   central database and be distributed to or retrieved by the nodes, or 
   advertised by network elements at the topology discovery stage. On 
   the other hand, in order to be able to perform distribute path 
   selection at each node that satisfies certain diverse routing 
   criterion, each network element may need to propagate the 
   information of number of channels available for each channel type 
   (e.g., OC48, OC192) on each channel group, where channel group is 
   defined as a set of channels that are routed identically and should 
   be given unique identification. Each channel group can be mapped 
   into a sequence of fiber cables while each fiber cable can belong to 
   multiple SRLG∆s based on their definitions.  
    
2.4       Other Unique Features of Optical Networks 
    
   There are other major differences between optical networks and IP 
   networks that have significant impacts on the design of the Optical 
   Layer control plane. They include the following two areas. 
    
     - Bi-directionality: In an IP network, Label Switched Paths (LSPs) 
       are inherently unidirectional. However, current transport 
       networks are bi-directional oriented, mostly due to the 
       evolution of two-way transmission in Public Switched Telephone 
       Network and by SONET/SDH line protection schemes [Doverspike00]. 
       This often requires the bi-directional connections provided by 
       the optical layer to use the same numbered channel in each 
       direction. As a result, a channel contention problem may occur 
       between two bi-directional request traveling in opposite 
       directions. Signaling mechanisms have been proposed to resolve 
       this type of contention [Ashwood00].  
      
     - Protection and restoration: In an IP network, when a backup LSP 
       is pre-established to protect against failure(s) on a working 
       LSP, the backup LSP does not occupy any physical resources 
       before a failure occurs. However, in an optical network, a pre-
       established optical connection for backup does occupy the ports 
       and channels on the path of the connection. This can be used for 
       the 1+1 protection, but not for shared mesh protection. Instead 
       with shared mesh protection, the backup path can be pre-selected 
       with or without the associated channels being chosen prior to 
       any failure, then cross-connect ports/channels physically after 
       a failure on the working path has been detected. See 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 13] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       [Doverspike00] for more detailed discussions on various 
       protection/restoration schemes. 
    
3.        Business and Operational Realities 
    
   The Internet technologies being applied to define the new Optical 
   Layer control plane evolved in a very different business and 
   operational environment than that of today's transport network 
   provider.  The differences need to be clearly understood and dealt 
   with if the new control plane is going to be a success. The Optical 
   Interworking Forum, one of the principal standards groups in this 
   area, has recently formed a Carrier Subgroup to provide guidance 
   from this perspective for their standards activities.  
    
   In this section we touch on two aspects of this problem: Business 
   Models and the management of the introduction of new technology. 
    
3.1       Business Models 
    
   The cost of providing gigabit connections is expected to drop 
   rapidly, but will still require dedicated use of expensive and 
   periodically scarce capacity and equipments.  Therefore the ability 
   to control network access, and to measure and bill for usage, will 
   be critical. Also, lightpath connections are expected to have quite 
   long holding times (weeks-months) compared to LSPs in an IP network.  
   Therefore the collection of usage data and the nature of the 
   connection establishment process have very different characteristics 
   in the Optical Network than in an IP network. 
    
   In addition, industry revenues from legacy services (voice and 
   private line) are expected to dwarf those from IP transport for the 
   next few years. Meeting the needs of these services and migrating 
   them to the operator∆s newer service platforms will also be a 
   critical need for operators with extensive embedded revenues.  Thus 
   the needs of services based on SONET/SDH, Ethernet, ATM, etc. will 
   need to be given attention.  In addition most operators hope that 
   they will have many different ISP's and Intranets as customers. Thus 
   the customer base for most operators will be quite diverse. 
    
   Another area of prime concern is Operations  Systems (OS∆s). The 
   opportunity to create a thinner and more nimble network management 
   plane by off-loading many provisioning and data-basing functions 
   onto a vendor-provided control plane and/or Element Management 
   System (EMS) holds the promise of large and immediate benefits to 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 14] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   operators  in the form of reduced software development and more 
   rapid deployment of new functionality.  This is a critical area to 
   achieve scalability.  
    
   In the short term the principal benefits of the proposed control 
   plane are two: rapid provisioning and a reduction in the cost and 
   complexity of OS∆s and operations. Both of these benefits require 
   that circuits be controlled end-to-end by the new control plane, for 
   otherwise the provisioning times will be determined by those of the 
   older, much slower segments and OS costs and OS and operations 
   complexity may actually go up because of the need to interwork the 
   old and the new worlds. To avoid this the capabilities of the new 
   control plane need to be available end-to-end as soon as possible.  
   This will put a premium on the rapid development of standards for 
   interworking across trust boundaries, for example between Local 
   Exchange Carrier's and national networks. 
    
3.2       Managing The Introduction Of New Technology 
    
   We expect optical layer hardware technology to continue to evolve 
   very rapidly, with a very real possibility of additional 
   "disruptive" advances. The analog nature of optical technology 
   compounds this problem for the control planes because these advances 
   are likely to be accompanied by complex technology-specific 
   constraints on routing and functionality. (Sections 2.1 and 2.2 
   above provide examples of this.)  An architecture which allows the 
   gradual and seamless introduction of new technologies into the 
   network without time-consuming and costly changes to embedded 
   technologies and especially control planes is highly desirable. 
    
   When compared to the IP experience several distinctions stand out: 
     - The optical layer control plane seems more likely to be buffeted 
       by hardware changes than is the IP control plane. 
     - Optical layer innovations are currently being driven by start-up 
       companies, with product innovation well ahead of the standards 
       process.  Efforts at control plane standardization are much less 
       mature than comparable IP efforts.  This is a matter of 
       considerable concern because neither rapid provisioning nor the 
       operational improvements desired are likely if each vendor has a 
       proprietary control plane, with interworking between vendors 
       (and hence between networks, in most cases) left as a problem 
       for operators' OS's to solve. 
      
3.3       Service Framework Suggestions 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 15] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
    
   For the reasons given above and others, we expect that the best 
   model for an optical layer control plane within a trust domain is 
   one that pays heavy attention to the management of heterogeneous  
   technologies and associated service capabilities. This might be done 
   by hiding complexities in subnetworks. These subnetworks would then 
   advertise only a standardized abstraction of their connectivity, 
   capacity, and functionality capabilities. Hopefully this would allow 
   even disruptive technologies such as all-optical subnetworks to be 
   introduced with a minimum of impact on preexisting parts of the 
   trust domain. 
    
   Each network operator will have a need to define "branded" services 
   - bundles of service functionality and SLA's with a specific price 
   structure. In a heterogeneous network it will be necessary to map a 
   customer request for such a "branded" service onto the specific 
   capabilities of each subnetwork. This suggests a hierarchical model, 
   decisions about these mappings, and also about policies for peering 
   with other networks and overall management of the service offerings 
   available to specific customers managed centrally but application of 
   these policies handled at the local or subnetwork level. 
    
4.        Security Considerations 
    
   The solution developed to address the requirements defined in this 
   document must address security aspects. 
    
5.        Acknowledgments 
    
   This document has benefited from discussions with Michael Eiselt, 
   Mark Shtaif, Bob Tkach, and our other AT&T colleagues. 
 
References: 
    
   [Ashwood00] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al., "MPLS Optical/Switching 
   Signaling Functional Description", Work in Progress, draft-ashwood-
   generalized-mpls-signaling-00.txt. 
    
   [Awduche99] Awduche, D. O., Rekhter, Y., Drake, J., and Coltun, R., 
   "Multi-Protocol Lambda Switching: Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering 
   Control With Optical Crossconnects", Work in Progress, draft-
   awduche-mpls-te-optical-01.txt. 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 16] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   [Chaudhuri00] Chaudhuri, S., Hjalmtysson, G., and Yates, J., 
   "Control of Lightpaths in an Optical Network", Work in Progress, 
   draft-chaudhuri-ip-olxc-control-00.txt. 
    
   [Doverspike00] Doverspike, R. and Yates, J., "Challenges For MPLS 
   Protocols in the Optical Network Control Plane", submitted for 
   journal publication, June, 2000 (online at 
   http://www.research.att.com/~jyates/IPoverWDMpublications.html). 
    
   [ITU] ITU-T Doc. G.663, Optical Fibers and Amplifiers, Section 
   II.4.1.2. 
    
   [Kaminow97] Kaminow, I. P. and Koch, T. L., editors, Optical Fiber 
   Telecommunications IIIA, Academic Press, 1997. 
    
   [Moy98] Moy, John T., OSPF: Anatomy of an Internet Routing Protocol, 
   Addison-Wesley, 1998. 
    
   [Mukherjee97] Mukherjee, B., Optical Communication Networks, McGraw 
   Hill, 1997. 
    
   [Ramaswami98] Ramaswami, R. and Sivarajan, K. N., Optical Networks: 
   A Practical Perspective, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1998. 
    
   [Tkach98] Tkach, R., Goldstein, E., Nagel, J., and Strand, J., 
   "Fundamental Limits of Optical Transparency", Optical Fiber 
   Communication Conf., Feb. 1998, pp. 161-162. 
    
   [Yates99] Yates, J. M., Rumsewicz, M. P. and Lacey, J. P. R., 
   "Wavelength Converters in Dynamically-Reconfigurable WDM Networks", 
   IEEE Communications Surveys, 2Q1999 (online at 
   www.comsoc.org/pubs/surveys/2q99issue/yates.html). 
    
Authors' Addresses: 
    
   Angela Chiu 
   AT&T Labs 
   100 Schulz Dr., Rm 4-204  
   Red Bank, NJ 07701, USA 
   Phone: +1 (732) 345-3441 
   Email: alchiu@att.com 
    
   John Strand 
   AT&T Labs 
   100 Schulz Dr., Rm 4-212  
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 17] 
 
                                    
                   Unique Features and Requirements          July 2000  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   Red Bank, NJ 07701, USA 
   Phone: +1 (732) 345-3255 
   Email: jls@att.com 
    
   Chiu/Strand   Informational - Expires January 2001        [page 18] 
 
