è©¿
Network Working Group                                       T. Melanchuk
Internet-Draft                                               G. Sharratt
Expires: August 15, 2005                                        Convedia
                                                       February 14, 2005


                 Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)
                    draft-melanchuk-sipping-msml-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML) is used to control and
   invoke many different types of services on IP media servers.  Clients
   can use it define how multimedia sessions interact on a media server
   and to apply services to individual or groups of users.  MSML can be
   used, for example, to control media server conferencing features such
   as video layout and audio mixing, create sidebar conferences or
   personal mixes, and set the properties of media streams.  As well,
   clients can use MSML with other languages such as the Media Objects
   Markup Language (MOML) or VoiceXML to interact with individual users



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   or with groups of conference participants.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.   Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.   MSML SIP Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.   Language Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1  Execution Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2  MSML Root Element  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.3  Sending Events to a Media Server . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.3.1  <send> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.4  Transaction Results and Notifications  . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.4.1  <result> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.4.2  <event>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.   Media Server Object Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.1  Objects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2  Identifiers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6.   Media Streams  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     6.1  <join> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     6.2  <modifystream> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.3  <unjoin> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.4  <stream> Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
       6.4.1  Audio Stream Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
       6.4.2  Video Stream Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
       6.4.3  Implementing Properties as Operators . . . . . . . . .  27
     6.5  <monitor>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   7.   Conferences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     7.1  <createconference> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     7.2  <modifyconference> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     7.3  <destroyconference>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
     7.4  Audio Mix  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
       7.4.1  N-Loudest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
       7.4.2  Active Speaker Notification  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
     7.5  Video Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
       7.5.1  Root-Layout  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
       7.5.2  Regions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
       7.5.3  Stream Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
     7.6  Reserving Conference Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
   8.   Dialogs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
     8.1  <dialogstart>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
     8.2  <dialogend>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
   9.   Response Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
   10.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  48
     10.1   Establishing a Dial-In Conference  . . . . . . . . . . .  48
     10.2   Example of a Sidebar Audio Conference  . . . . . . . . .  52
     10.3   Example of Removing Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
     10.4   Example of Modifying a Video Layout  . . . . . . . . . .  54



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   11.  Change Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  56
     11.1   Deprecated Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
       11.1.1   <remove> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
       11.1.2   <cjoin>  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
   12.  Future Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
   13.  XML Schemas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60
   14.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72
   15.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
   15.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
   15.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  74
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  75







































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


1.  Introduction

   Media servers contain dynamic pools of media resources.  Application
   servers and other users of media servers (called media server
   clients) can define and create many different services based on how
   they configure and use those resources.  Often, that configuration
   and the ways in which those resources interact will be changed
   dynamically over the course of a call, to reflect changes in the way
   that an application interacts with a user.

   For example, a call may undergo an initial IVR dialog before being
   placed into a conference.  Calls may be moved from a main conference
   to a sidebar conference and then back again.  Individual calls may be
   directly bridged to create small n-way calls or simple sidebars.
   None of these change the SIP [1] dialog or RTP [8] session.  Yet
   these do affect the media flow internal to the media server.

   The Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML) is an XML [2] language used
   to change the flow of and services on media streams within a media
   server.  It is used to invoke many different types of services on
   individual sessions, groups of sessions, and conferences.  MSML
   allows the creation of conferences, bridging different sessions
   together, and bridging sessions into conferences.

   MSML can be used to apply IVR operations and dialogs to sessions or
   conferences, and to modify the media flowing on a session.  Dialogs
   may be specified in different languages depending on application
   requirements.  VoiceXML [9] allows complete single-party application
   interfaces to be executed by a media server.  Media Objects Markup
   Language (MOML) [10] can be used to specify individual user dialog or
   media control commands.

   A network connection is established with the media server using SIP.
   Media received and transmitted on that connection will flow through
   different media resources on the media server depending on the
   requested service.  Basic Network Media Services with SIP [12]
   defines conventions for associating a basic service with a SIP
   Request-URI.  MSML allows services to be dynamically applied and
   changed by an application server during the lifetime of the SIP
   dialog.

   MSML and MOML have been designed to work closely together: MOML
   addresses the control and manipulation of media processing operations
   (e.g., announcement, IVR, play and record, ASR/TTS, fax, video),
   while MSML addresses the relationships of media streams (e.g., simple
   and advanced conferencing).  Together, MSML and MOML create a
   general-purpose media server control architecture.  MSML can
   additionally be used to invoke other IVR languages such as VoiceXML.



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


2.  Glossary

   Media Server: a general-purpose platform for executing real-time
   media processing tasks.  It may be a single physical device or a
   logical function within a physical device.

   Media Server Client: an application residing on an external server
   which originates MSML requests to a media server.

   Object: the generic term for a media server entity that terminates,
   originates, or processes media.  This specification defines four
   classes of objects and specifies mechanisms to create them, join them
   together, and destroy them.

   Participant Object: an object in a media server that sources original
   media in a call or that receives and terminates media in a call.

   Intermediary Object: an object in a media server that acts on media
   within a call for the benefit of the participants.

   Independent Object: an object that can exist on a media server
   independent of other objects.

   Network Connection: a participant object class that represents the
   termination on a media server of one or more RTP [8] sessions (for
   example audio and video) associated with a call.  Network connections
   are established and removed using a session establishment protocol
   such as SIP.  An instance of a network connection is an independent
   object.

   Operator: an intermediary object class that modifies or transforms a
   media stream.  Examples of operators may be audio gain controls,
   video scaling, or voice masking.  Specific types of operators are not
   defined within MSML.  Operators may be defined in MOML [10] or other
   similar languages.

   Dialog: an automated participant object class.  Examples of dialogs
   may be announcement players, IVR interfaces, or voice recorders.
   Specific types of dialogs are not defined within MSML.  Dialogs may
   be defined in VoiceXML [9], MOML, or other similar languages.

   Conference: an intermediary object class that provides multimedia
   mixing and other advanced conferencing services.  This specification
   currently considers conferences with audio and/or video media types,
   but is extensible to other media types.  An instance of a conference
   is an independent object.

   Identifier: a name that is used to refer to a specific instance of an



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   object on the media server.  Identifiers are composed of one or more
   terms where each term identifies an object class and instance.

   Media Stream: a single media flow between two objects.  A media
   stream has a media type and may be uni-directional or bi-directional.

   Media Stream Collection: a set of associated media streams between
   two objects that are treated as a single logical unit.  An example of
   a media stream collection would be the audio and video streams
   between a network connection and a multimedia conference.









































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


3.  MSML SIP Usage

   SIP is used to create and modify media sessions with a media server
   according to the procedures defined in RFC 3261 [1].  Often, SIP
   third [11] party call control will be used to create sessions to a
   media server on behalf of end users.  MSML is used to define and
   change the service which a user connected to a media server will
   receive.  As such, MSML clients are expected to be application
   servers, which must have an authorized security relationship with the
   media server.  MSML itself does not define authorization mechanisms.

   MSML transactions are originated based upon events that occur in the
   application domain.  These events may be independent from any media
   or user interaction.  For example, an application may wish to play an
   announcement to a conference warning that its scheduled completion
   time is approaching.  Applications themselves are structured in many
   different ways.  Their structure and requirements contribute to their
   selection of protocols and languages.  To accommodate differing
   application needs, MSML has been designed to be neutral to other
   languages and independent of the transport used to carry it.

   Many alternatives exist for a transport mechanism for MSML.  There
   may be one or many transport channels used to carry MSML based upon
   the requirements and structure of applications.  SIP INVITE and INFO
   [5] requests and responses have been chosen to carry MSML in this
   release of the specification.  INFO requests allow asynchronous
   mid-call messages within SIP with few additional semantics.  In
   addition, there are existing widely deployed implementations of that
   method, it aids in initial developments which are closely coupled
   with SIP session establishment, and it allows MSML to be directly
   associated with user dialogs when third party call control is used.

   Although INFO is generally not considered to be a suitable general-
   purpose transport mechanism for messages within SIP, there have been
   proposals to make it more acceptable.  MSML is expected to evolve to
   include other SIP usage and/or to work with other protocols or as a
   stand-alone protocol established through SIP, in future releases of
   this document.

   MSML supports several models for client interaction.  When clients
   use 3PCC to establish media sessions on behalf of end users, clients
   will have a SIP dialog for each media session.  MSML may be sent on
   these dialogs.  However the targets of MSML actions are not inferred
   from the session associated with the SIP dialog.  The targets of MSML
   actions are always explicitly specified using identifiers as
   previously defined.

   An application, after interacting with a user, may want to affect



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   multiple objects within a media server.  For example, tones or
   messages are often played to a conference when connections are added
   or removed.  A separate message may also be played to a participant
   as they are joined, or to moderators.  Explicit identifiers not
   inferred from a transport mechanism allow these multiple actions to
   be easily grouped into a single transaction sent on any SIP dialog.

   MSML also supports a model of dedicated control associations.  This
   supports decoupled application architectures where a client can
   control media server services without also establishing all of the
   media sessions itself.  Control associations are created using SIP
   but they do not have any associated media session.  Although
   initially INFO messages will be sent on this SIP dialog, just as with
   dialogs associated with media sessions, it is expected that in the
   future, the SIP dialog will be used to establish a separate control
   session (defined in SDP [4]) that does not use SIP as the transport
   for MSML messages.

   A media server using MSML also sends asynchronous events to a client
   using SIP INFO.  Events are sent based on previous MSML requests and
   are sent within the SIP dialog on which the MSML request that caused
   the event to be generated was received.  If the dialog no longer
   exists when the event is generated, the event is discarded.

   Events may be generated during the execution of a dialog created by a
   "<dialogstart>" element.  For example, dialogs defined in MOML can
   send events based on user input.  VoiceXML dialogs on the other hand,
   generally interact with other servers outside of MSML using HTTP.

   An event is also generated when the execution of a dialog terminates,
   either because of completion or failure.  The exact information
   returned is dependent on the dialog language, the capabilities of the
   dialog execution environment, and what was specified by the dialog.
   Both MOML [10] and VoiceXML [9] allow information to be returned when
   they exit.  These events may be sent in a SIP INFO or a SIP BYE.  BYE
   is used when the dialog itself specifies that the connection should
   be disconnected such as through the use of <disconnect>.

   Conferences may also generate events based upon their configuration.
   An example of this is the notification of the set of active speakers.











Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


4.  Language Structure

4.1  Execution Flow

   MSML assumes a model where there is a single control context within a
   media server for MSML processing.  That context may have one or many
   SIP [1] dialogs associated with it.  It is assumed that any SIP
   dialogs associated with the MSML control context have been authorized
   by mechanisms outside the scope of MSML.

   A media server control context maintains information about the state
   of all media objects and media streams within a media server.  It
   receives and processes all MSML requests from authorized SIP dialogs
   and receives all events generated internally by media objects and
   sends them on the appropriate SIP dialog.  An MSML request is able to
   create new media objects and streams, and to modify or destroy any
   existing media objects and streams.

   An MSML request may simply specify a single action for a media server
   to undertake.  In this case, the document is very similar to a simple
   command request.  Often, though, it may be more natural for a client
   to request multiple actions at one time, or the client would like
   several actions to be closely coordinated by the media server.
   Multiple MSML elements received in a single request are processed
   sequentially in document order.

   An example of the first scenario would be to create a conference and
   join it with an initial participant.  An example of the second case
   would be to unjoin one or more participants from a main conference
   and join them to a sidebar conference.  In the first scenario,
   network latencies may not be an issue, but it is simpler for the
   client to combine the requests.  In the second case, the added
   network latency between separate requests could mean perceptible
   audio loss to the participant.

   Each MSML request is processed as a single transaction.  A media
   server must ensure that it has the necessary resources available to
   carry out the complete transaction before executing any elements of
   the request.  If it does not have sufficient resources, it should
   return a 520 response and not execute the transaction.

   The MSML request must be checked for well-formedness and validated
   against the schema prior to executing any elements.  This allows XML
   [2] errors to reported immediately and minimizes failures within a
   transaction and the corresponding execution of only part of the
   transaction.

   Each element is expected to execute immediately.  Elements such as



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   "<dialogstart>", which take time, are "forked" and executed in a
   separate thread.  Once successfully forked, execution continues with
   the element following the dialog.  As such, MSML does not provide
   mechanisms to sequence or coordinate other operations with dialog
   elements.

   Processing within a transaction stops if any errors occur.  Elements
   that were executed prior to the error are not rolled back.  It is the
   responsibility of the client to determine appropriate actions based
   upon the results indicated in the response.  Most elements may
   contain an optional "mark" attribute.  The value of that attribute
   from the last successfully executed element is returned in an error
   response.  Note that errors that occur during the execution of a
   dialog occur outside the context of an MSML transaction.  These
   errors will be indicated in an asynchronous event.

   Transaction results are returned as part of the SIP request response.
   The transaction results indicate the success or failure of the
   transaction.  It will also include identifiers for any objects
   created by a media server for which the client did not provide an
   instance name.  Additionally, if the transaction fails, the reason
   for the failure is returned, as well as an indication of how much of
   the transaction was executed before the failure occurred.

4.2  MSML Root Element

   "<msml>" is the root element.  When received by a media server, it
   defines the set of operations that form a single MSML transaction.
   Operations are requested by the contents of the element.  Each
   operation may appear zero or more times as children of "<msml>".
   Specific operations are defined in sections 6 through 8.

   The results of a request or the contents of events sent by a media
   server are also enclosed within the "<msml>"element.  The results of
   the transaction are included as a body in the response to the SIP
   request that contained the transaction.  This response will contain
   any identifiers that the media server assigned to newly created
   objects.  All messages that a media server generates are correlated
   to an object identifier.  Objects and identifiers are discussed in
   section 5.

   Attributes:

   version: "1.0" Mandatory

4.3  Sending Events to a Media Server





Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


4.3.1  <send>

   Events are used to affect the behavior of different objects within a
   media server.  The <send> element is used to send an event to the
   specified recipient.

   attributes:

   event: the name of an event.  Mandatory.

   target: an object identifier.  When the identifier is for a dialog or
   operator, it may optionally be appended with a slash "/" followed by
   the target to be included in a MOML <send>.  Mandatory.

   valuelist: a list of zero or more parameters that are included with
   the event.

   mark: a token that can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

4.4  Transaction Results and Notifications

4.4.1  <result>

   The <result> element is used to report the results of an MSML
   transaction.  It is included as a body in the final response to the
   SIP request which initiated the transaction.  An optional child
   element <description> may include text which expands on the meaning
   of error responses.  Response codes are defined in section 9.

   attributes:

   response: a numeric code indicating the overall success or failure of
   the transaction, and in the case of failure, an indication of the
   reason.  Mandatory.

   mark: in the case of an error, the value of the mark attribute from
   the last successfully executed element that included the mark
   attribute.

   In the case of failure, a description of the reason should be
   provided using the child element <description>.

   Three other child elements allow the response to include identifiers
   for objects created by the request but which did not have instance



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   names specified by the client.  Those elements are <confid>,
   <dialogid>, and <operid>, for objects created though a
   <createconference>, <dialogstart>, or <insert> respectively.

4.4.2  <event>

   The <event> element is used to notify an event to a media server
   client.  Two types of events are defined by MSML: "msml.dialog.exit",
   "msml.conf.nomedia", and "msml.conf.asn".  These correspond to the
   termination of an executing dialog, a conference being automatically
   deleted when the last participant has left, and the notification of
   the current set of active speakers for a conference, respectively.
   Events may also be generated by an executing dialog.  In this case
   the event type is specified by the dialog.

   attributes:

   name: the type of event.  Mandatory.

   id: the identifier of the conference or dialog that generated the
   event or caused the event to be generated.  Mandatory.

   <event> has two children, <name> and <value>, which contain the name
   and value respectively of each namelist item associated with the
   event.


























Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


5.  Media Server Object Model

   Media servers are general-purpose platforms for executing real-time
   media processing tasks.  These tasks range in complexity from simple
   ones such as serving announcements, to complex ones, such as speech
   interfaces, centralized multimedia conferencing, and sophisticated
   gaming applications.

   Calls are established to a media server using SIP.  Clients will
   often use SIP third party call control (3PCC) [11] to establish calls
   to a media server on behalf of end users.  However MSML does not
   require that 3PCC be used; only that the client and the media server
   share a common identifier for the call and its associated RTP [8]
   sessions.

   Objects represent entities which source, sink, or modify media
   streams.  A media streams is a bi-directional or uni-directional
   media flow between objects on a media server.  Media streams and
   operations on them are discussed in depth in section 6.  The
   following subsections define the classes of objects that exist on a
   media server and the way these are identified in MSML.

5.1  Objects

   A media object is an endpoint of one or more media streams.  It may
   be a connection that terminates RTP sessions from the network or a
   resource that transforms or manipulates media.  MSML defines four
   classes of media objects.  Each class defines the basic properties of
   how object instances are used within a media server.  However most
   classes require that the function of specific instances be defined by
   the client, using MSML or other languages such as VoiceXML, or the
   Media Objects Markup Language (MOML).

   The following classes of media processing objects are defined.  The
   class names are given in parentheses:

   o  network connection (conn)
   o  conference (conf)
   o  dialog (dialog)
   o  operator (oper)

   Network connection is an abstraction for the media processing
   resources involved in terminating the RTP session(s) of a call.  For
   audio services a connection instance presents a full-duplex audio
   stream interface within a media server.  Multimedia connections have
   multiple media streams of different media types, each corresponding
   to an RTP session.  Network connections get instantiated through SIP
   [1].



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   A conference represents the media resources and state information
   required for a single logical mix of each media type in the
   conference (e.g.  audio and video).  MSML models multiple mixes/views
   of the same media type as separate conferences.  Each conference has
   multiple inputs.  Inputs may be divided into classes that allow an
   application to request different media treatment for different
   participants.  For example, the video streams for some participants
   may be assigned to fixed regions of the screen while those for other
   participants may only be shown when they are speaking.

   A conference has a single logical output per media type.  For each
   participant, it consists of the audio conference mix, less any
   contributed audio of the participant, and the video mix shared by all
   conference participants.  Some video conferences may have an optional
   ability to show the previous speaker to the current speaker when
   voice activated switching is used to select the video stream to
   display.

   Conferences are instantiated using the "<createconference>" element.
   The content of the "<createconference>" element specifies the
   parameters of the audio and/or video mixes.  Conferences are
   discussed in depth in section 7.

   Dialogs are a class of objects that represent automated participants.
   They are similar to network connections from a media flow perspective
   and may have one or more media streams as the abstraction for their
   interface within a media server.  Unlike connections however, dialogs
   are created and destroyed through MSML, and the media server itself
   implements the dialog participant.

   The function that an instance of a dialog fulfills is defined by a
   client using a language such as VoiceXML or MOML.  As such, "dialog"
   is a generic reference to the set of resources, both media and
   control, that are used to create either a simple action, such as an
   atomic play or record operation, or more complex application
   interface components, such as a VoiceXML interpreter.  Dialogs are
   instantiated through the "<dialogstart>" element.  Dialogs operations
   are presented in section 8.

   Operators are a class of objects that are used to filter or transform
   a media stream.  The function that an instance of an operator
   fulfills is defined by a client using a language such as MOML.
   Operators may be uni-directional or bi-directional and have a media
   type.  Uni-directional operators reflect simple atomic functions such
   as automatic gain control or filtering tones from conferences.
   Uni-directional operators have a single media input, which is
   connected to the media stream from one object, and a single media
   output, which is connected to the media stream of a different object.



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   Bi-directional operators have two media inputs and two media outputs.
   One media input and output is associated with the stream to one
   object and the other input and output is associated with a stream to
   a different object.  Bi-directional objects may treat the media
   differently in each direction.  For example, an operator could be
   defined which changed the media sent to a connection based upon
   recognized speech or DTMF received from the connection.  Operators
   get instantiated when streams are created or modified using the
   elements "<join>" element and elements "<modifystream>" respectively.

   The relationships between the different object classes is shown in
   the figure below.

                   +--------------------------------------+
                   |           Media Server               |
                   |                                      |
                   |------+                      ,---.    |
                   |      |      +------+       /     \   |
        <== RTP ==>| conn |<---->| oper |<---->( conf  )  |
                   |      |      +------+       \     /   |
                   |------+                      `---'    |
                   |   ^                           ^      |
                   |   |                           |      |
                   |   |   +------+    +------+    |      |
                   |   |   |      |    |      |    |      |
                   |   +-->|dialog|    |dialog|<---+      |
                   |       |      |    |      |           |
                   |       +------+    +------+           |
                   +--------------------------------------+

   A single, full-duplex instance of each object class is shown together
   with common relationships between them.  An operator is shown between
   a connection and a conference and dialogs are shown participating
   both with an individual connection and with a conference.  The figure
   is not meant to imply only one to one relationships.  Conferences
   will often have hundreds of participants, and either connections or
   conferences may be interacting with more than one dialog.  For
   example, one dialog may be recording a conference while other dialogs
   announce participants joining or leaving the conference.

5.2  Identifiers

   Objects are referenced using identifiers that are composed of one or
   more terms.  Each term specifies an object class and names a specific
   instance within that class.  The object class and instance are
   separated by a colon ":" in an identifier term.

   Identifiers are assigned to objects when they are first created.  In



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   general, either the MSML client or a media server may specify the
   instance name for an object.  Objects for which a client does not
   assign an instance name will be assigned one by a media server.
   Media server assigned instance names are returned to the client as a
   complete object identifier in the response to the request that
   created the object.

   It is meaningful for some classes of objects to exist independently
   on a media server.  Network connections may be created through SIP at
   any time.  MSML can then be used to associate their media with other
   objects as required to create services.  Conferences may be created
   and have specific resources reserved waiting for participant
   connections.

   Objects from these two classes, connections and conferences, are
   considered independent objects since they can exist on a standalone
   basis.  Identifiers for independent objects consist of single term as
   defined above.  For example, identifiers for a conference and
   connection could be "conf:abc" or "conn:1234" respectively.  Clients
   which choose to assign instance names to independent objects must use
   globally unique instance names.  One way to create globally unique
   names is to include the domain name of the client as part of the
   name.

   Dialogs and operators are only created to provide a service to
   independent objects.  Dialogs may act as a participant in a
   conference or interact with a connection similar to a two participant
   call.  Operators modify the media flow between other objects, such as
   between a connection and a conference.  As such, dialogs and
   operators depend upon the existence of independent objects and this
   is reflected in the composition of their identifiers.

   Identifiers for dialogs and operators are composed of a structured
   list of slash ('/') separated terms.  The left-most term of the
   identifier must specify a conference or connection.  This serves as
   the root for the identifier.  An example of an identifier for a
   dialog acting as a conference participant could be:

      conf:abc/dialog:recorder

   Because operators may exist relative to two independent objects,
   different identifiers, with each independent object serving as the
   root, may be used to refer to the same operator.  This is discussed
   further below.

   All objects except connections are created using MSML.  Connections
   are created when media sessions get established through SIP.  There
   are several options clients and media servers can use to establish a



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   shared instance name for a connection and its media streams.

   When media servers support multiple media types, it is recommended
   that the instance name be a call identifier that can be used to
   identify the collection of RTP sessions associated with a call.  When
   MSML is used in conjunction with SIP and third party call control,
   the call identifier must be the same as the local tag assigned by the
   media server to identify the SIP dialog.  This will be the tag the
   media server adds to the "To" header in its response to an initial
   invite transaction.  RFC 3261 requires the tag values to be globally
   unique.

      Note: Previous drafts of MSML used the combination of IP address
      and UDP port number for the RTP session on the media server to
      identify a connection.  This notation is suitable only for
      representing a call with a single media session.  If this notation
      is used, it must only be used for audio sessions.

   An example of a connection identifier is: conn:74jgd63956ts.

   With third party call control, the MSML client acts as a back to back
   user agent (B2BUA) to establish the media sessions.  SIP dialogs are
   established between the client and the media server allowing the use
   of the media server local tag as a connection identifier.  If this is
   not the case, a SIP event package could be used to allow a media
   server to notify new sessions to a client that has subscribed to this
   information.

   Identifiers as described above allow every object in a media server
   to be uniquely addressed.  They can also be used to refer to multiple
   objects.  There are two ways in which this can currently be done:

   o  wildcards
   o  common instance names

   An identifier can reference multiple objects when a wildcard is used
   as an instance name.  MSML reserves the instance name comprised of a
   single asterisk ('*') to mean all objects that have the same
   identifier root and class.  Instance names containing an asterisk
   cannot be created.  Wildcards must only be used as the the right most
   term of an identifier and must not be used as part of the root for
   dialog or operator identifiers.  Wildcards are only allowed where
   explicitly indicated below.

   The following are examples of valid wildcards:






Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


      conf:abc/dialog:*
      conn:*

   Examples of illegal wildcard usage are:

      conf:*/oper:73849

   Operators that are inserted in a media stream, such as between a
   conference and a connection, can be identified using either
   independent object as the root for its identifier as described above.
   All operators can thus be uniquely referenced through connections,
   even if they have the same instance name.  An operator identifier
   that uses a conference as the root may resolve to multiple objects.
   This allows common control for operators on multiple media streams.

   Although identifiers share a common syntax, MSML elements restrict
   the class of objects which are valid in a given context.  As an
   example, although it is valid to join two connections together, it is
   not valid to join two IVR dialogs.
































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


6.  Media Streams

   Objects have at least one media input and output for each type of
   media that they support.  Each object class defines the number of
   inputs and outputs objects of that class support.  Media streams are
   created when objects are joined, either explicitly using "<join>", or
   implicitly when dialogs are created using "<startdialog>".  Dialog
   creation has two stages, allocating and configuring the resources
   required for the dialog instance, and implicitly joining those
   resources to the dialog target during the dialog execution.

   A join operation by default creates a bi-directional audio stream
   between two objects.  Video and uni-directional streams may also be
   created.  A media stream is created by connecting the output from one
   object to the input of another object and vice versa (assuming a
   bi-directional or full-duplex join).

   Many objects may only support a single input for each type of media.
   Within this specification, only the conference object class supports
   an arbitrary number of inputs.  When a stream is requested to be
   created to an object that already has a stream of the same type
   connected to its single input, the result of the request depends upon
   the type of the media stream.

   Audio mixing is done by summing audio signals.  Automatically mixing
   audio streams has common and straight forward applications.  For
   example, the ability to bridge two streams allows for the easy
   creation of simple three-way calls or to bridge private announcements
   with a [whispered] conference mix for an individual participant.  In
   the case of general conferences however, an MSML client should create
   an audio conference and then join participants to the conference.
   Conference mixers subtract the audio of each participant from the mix
   so that they do not hear themselves.

   A media server that receives a request that requires joining an audio
   stream to the single audio input of an object that already has an
   audio stream connected, should automatically bridge the new stream
   with the existing stream, creating a mix of the two audio streams.
   The maximum number of streams that may be bridged in this manner is
   implementation-specific.  It is recommended that a media server
   support bridging at least two streams.  A media server that cannot
   bridge a new stream with any existing streams must fail the operation
   requesting the join.

   Unlike audio mixing, there are many different ways that two video
   streams may be combined and presented.  For example, they may be
   presented side by side in separate panes, picture in picture, or in a
   single pane which displays only a single stream at a time based on a



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   heuristic such as active speaker.  Each of these options creates a
   very different presentation and require significantly different media
   resources.

   A join operation does not describe how a new stream can be combined
   with an existing stream.  Therefore automatic bridging of video is
   not supported.  A media server must fail requests to join a new video
   stream to an object that only supports a single video input and
   already has a video stream connected to that input.  For an object to
   have multiple video streams joined to it, the object itself must
   directly support multiple video streams.  Conference objects can
   support multiple video streams and provide a way to specify the
   mixing presentation for the video streams.

   A media server must not establish any streams unless the media server
   is able to create all the streams requested by an operation.  Streams
   are only able to be created if both objects support a media type and
   at least one of the following conditions is true:

   1.  each object that is to receive media is not already receiving a
       stream of that type.
   2.  any object that is to receive media and is already receiving a
       stream of that type supports receiving an additional stream of
       that type.  The only class of objects defined in this
       specification that directly support receiving multiple streams of
       the same type are conferences.
   3.  the media server is able to automatically bridge media streams
       for an object that is to receive media and that is already
       receiving a stream of the requested type.  The only type of media
       defined in this specification that may be automatically bridged
       is audio.

   The directionality of media streams associated with a connection are
   modeled independently from what SDP [4] allows for the corresponding
   RTP [8] sessions.  Media servers must respect the SDP in what they
   actually transmit but must not allow the SDP to affect the
   directionality when joining streams internal to the media server.

   The following three sub-sections describe the elements that
   establish, modify, and remove streams.  These are followed by
   sub-sections describing stream properties and specialized methods for
   establishing a stream.

6.1  <join>

   "<join>" is used to create one or more streams between two
   independent objects.  Streams may be audio or video and may be
   bi-directional or uni-directional.  A bi-directional stream is



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   implicitly composed of two uni-directional streams that can be
   manipulated independently.  The streams to be established are
   specified by "<stream>" elements (section 6.4) as the content of
   "<join>".

   Without any content, "<join>" by default establishes a bi-directional
   audio stream.  When only a stream of a single type has previously
   been created between two objects, or when only a uni-directional
   stream exists, "<join>" can be used to add a stream of another media
   type or make the stream bi-directional by including the necessary
   "<stream>" elements.  Bi-directional streams are made uni-directional
   by using "<unjoin>" (section 6.3) to remove the uni-directional
   stream for the direction that is no longer required.

   In addition to defining the media type and direction of streams,
   "<stream>" elements are also used to establish the properties of
   streams, such as gain, voice masking, or tone clamping of audio
   streams, or labels and other visual characteristics of video streams.
   Properties are often defined asymmetrically for a single direction of
   a stream.  Creating a bi-directional stream requires two "<stream>"
   elements within the "<join>", one for each direction, if one
   direction is to have different properties from the other direction.

   Properties may be implemented by inserting an operator into a stream
   (see section 6.4.3).  When operators are used, the result of the join
   will return the name of the operator if it was assigned by the media
   server.

   If a media server can provide services using both compressed or
   uncompressed media, the MSML client may need to distinguish within
   requests which format is to be used.  When compressed streams are
   created, both objects must use the same media format or an error
   response (450) is generated.

   attributes:

   id1: an identifier of either a connection or conference.  Wildcards
   must not be used.  Any other object class results in a 440 error.

   id2: an identifier of either a connection or conference.  Wildcards
   must not be used.  Any other object class results in a 440 error.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   For example, consider a call center coaching scenario where a
   supervisor can listen to the conversation between an agent and a
   customer, and provide hints to the agent, which are not heard by the
   customer.  One join establishes a stream between the agent and the
   customer and another join establishes a stream between the agent and
   the supervisor.  A third join is used to establish a half-duplex
   stream from the customer to the supervisor.  The media server
   automatically bridges the media streams from the customer and the
   supervisor for the agent, and from the customer and the agent for the
   supervisor.

   Assuming the following connections, each with a single audio stream:

   o  conn:supervisor
   o  conn:agent
   o  conn:customer

   The following would create the media flows previously described:

      <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
      <msml version="1.0">
         <join id1="conn:supervisor" id2="conn:agent"/>
         <join id1="conn:agent" id2="conn:customer"/>
         <join id1="conn:supervisor" id2="conn:customer">
            <stream media="audio" dir="to-id1"/>
         </join>
      </msml>

   The following example, shows joining a participant to a multimedia
   conference.  It assumes that the conference has a video presentation
   region named "topright".  The "display" attribute is explained in
   section 6.4.2.

      <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
      <msml version="1.0">
         <join id1="conn:hd83t5hf7g3" id2="conf:example">
            <stream type="audio"/>
            <stream type="video" dir="from-id1" display="topright"/>
            <stream type="video" dir="to-id1"/>
      </msml>


6.2  <modifystream>

   Media streams can have different properties such as the gain for an
   audio stream or a visual label for a video stream.  These properties
   are specified as the content of "<stream>" elements (see section
   6.4).  "<modifystream>" is used to change the properties of a stream



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   by including one or more "<stream>" elements that are to have their
   properties changed.

   Streams that are included within "<modifystream>" have their
   properties set to exactly that stated by their "<stream>" element.
   Any properties not included are remain unchanged.  Setting a property
   for only one direction of a bi-directional stream does not affect the
   other direction.  The directionality of streams are changed using
   "<join>" and "<unjoin>".  Any streams that exist between the two
   objects that are not included within "<modifystream>" must not be
   affected.

   When a new property is specified by inserting an operator into a
   stream (see section 6.4.3), the result of the operation will return
   the name of the operator if it was assigned by the media server.

   attributes:

   id1: an identifier of either a conference or a connection.  The
   instance name must not contain a wildcard if "id2" contains a
   wildcard.  Mandatory.

   id2: an identifier of either a conference or a connection.  The
   instance name must not contain a wildcard if "id1" contains a
   wildcard.  Mandatory.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

6.3  <unjoin>

   Unjoin removes one or more media streams between two objects.
   Without any "<stream>" elements as content, "<unjoin>" removes all of
   the streams between the objects.  Individual streams may be removed
   by specifying them using "<stream>" elements.  A bi-directional
   stream is changed to a uni-directional stream by unjoining the
   direction that is no longer required.

   "<unjoin>" and "<join>" may be used together to move a media stream,
   such as from a main conference to a sidebar conference.

   attributes:

   id1: an identifier of either a conference or a connection.  The
   instance name must not contain a wildcard if "id2" contains a



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   wildcard.  Mandatory.

   id2: an identifier of either a conference or a connection.  The
   instance name must not contain a wildcard if "id1" contains a
   wildcard.  Mandatory.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

   The following removes a participant from a conference and plays a
   leave tone for the remaining participants in the conference.

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <msml version="1.0">
               <unjoin id1="conn:jd73ht89sf489f" id2="conf:1"/>
               <dialogstart target="conf:1" type="application/moml+xml">
                  <play>
                     <audio uri="file://leave_tone.wav"/>
                  </play>
               </dialogstart>
            </msml>


6.4  <stream> Elements

   Individual streams are specified using the "<stream>" element.  They
   may be included as a child in any of the stream manipulation elements
   "<join>", "<modifystream>", or "<unjoin>".

   The type of the stream is specified using a "media" attribute that
   uses values corresponding to the top-level MIME media types as
   defined in RFC 2046 [6].  This specification only addresses audio and
   video media.  Other specifications may define procedures for
   additional types.

   A bi-directional stream is identified when no direction attribute
   "dir" is present.  A uni-directional stream is identified when a
   direction attribute is present.  The "dir" attribute must have a
   value of "from-id1" or "to-id1" depending on the required direction.
   These values are relative to the identifier attributes of the parent
   element.

   The compressed attribute is used to distinguish the compressed nature
   of the stream when necessary.  It is implementation specific what is
   used when the attribute is not present.  Joining compressed streams



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   acts much like an RTP [8] relay.

   The properties of the media streams are specified as the content of
   "<stream>" elements when the element is used as a child of "<join>"
   or "<modifystream>".  Stream elements must not have any content when
   they are used as a child of "<unjoin>" to identify specific streams
   to remove.

   Some properties are defined within MSML as additional attributes or
   child elements of "<stream>" that are media type specific.  Those for
   audio streams and video streams are defined in the following two
   sub-sections.  Other properties may be defined in MOML [10] and
   inserted as operators into a media stream when the stream is created
   or modified.  Operators are inserted using the "<insert>" element
   (see section 6.4.3 as a child of "<stream>", similar to specifying
   MSML defined properties.

   attributes:

   media: "audio" or video".

   dir: "from-id1" or "to-id1".

   compressed: "true" or "false".  Specifies whether the stream uses
   compressed media.  Default is implementation specific.

6.4.1  Audio Stream Properties

   Audio mixes can be specified to only mix the N-loudest participants.
   However there may be some "preferred" participants that are always
   able to contribute.  When audio streams are joined to a conference
   that uses N-loudest audio mixing, preferred streams need to be
   identified.

   A preferred audio stream is identified using the "preferred"
   attribute.  The "preferred" attribute may only used for an audio
   stream that is input to a conference and must not be used for other
   streams.

   Additional attributes of the "<stream>" element for audio streams
   are:

   preferred: a boolean value that defines whether the stream does not
   contend for N-loudest mixing.  A value of "true" means that the
   stream is always mixed while a value of "false" means that the stream
   contends when N-loudest mixing is enabled for the conference.
   Default "false".




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   There are two elements that can be used to change the characteristics
   of an audio stream as defined below.

6.4.1.1  Gain

   The "<gain>" element can be used to adjust the volume of an audio
   media stream.  It may be set to a specific gain amount, to
   automatically adjust the gain to a desired target level, or to mute
   the stream.

   Attributes of the "<gain>" element are:

   amt: a specific gain to apply specified in dB or the string "mute"
   indicating that the stream should be muted.

   agc: boolean indicating whether automatic gain control is to be used.
   This attribute must not be used if "amt" is present.

   tgtlvl: the desired target level for AGC specified in dBm0.  This
   attribute must be specified if "agc" is present.

   maxgain: the maximum gain that AGC will apply specified in dB.  This
   attribute must only be used if "agc" is present.

6.4.1.2  Tone Removal

   The "<clamp>" element is used to filter tones and/or audio-band dtmf
   from a media stream.

   Attributes of the "<clamp>" element are:

   dtmf: boolean indicating whether DTMF tones should be removed.

   tone: boolean indicating whether other tones should be removed.

6.4.2  Video Stream Properties

   Video mixes define a presentation that may have multiple regions,
   such as a quad-split.  Each region displays the video from one or
   more participants.  When video streams are joined to such a
   conference, the region that will display the video needs to be
   specified as part of the join operation.

   The region that will display the video is specified using the
   "display" attribute.  The "display" attribute must be used for a
   video stream that is input to a conference and must not be used for
   other streams.  The value of the attribute must identify a "<region>"
   (section 7.5.2) or a "<selector>" (section 7.5.3) that is defined for



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   the conference.  A stream must not be directly joined to a region
   that is defined within a selector.  Changing the value of the
   "display" attribute can be used to change where in a video
   presentation layout a video stream is displayed.

   Additional attributes of the "<stream>" element for audio streams
   are:

   display: the identifier of a video layout region or selector that is
   to be used to display the video stream.

6.4.2.1  Visual Characteristics

   Some regions of video conferences may display different streams
   automatically, such as when voice activated switching is used.
   Connections may also be joined directly without the use of video
   mixing.  In these cases, the "<visual>" element may be used to define
   visual display properties for a stream.

   The "<visual>" element may use any of the visual attributes defined
   for regions (see section 7.5.2).  This allows the visual aspects of
   regions within a "<selector>" to be tailored to the selected video
   stream, or for streams that are directly joined to display a name or
   logo.

6.4.3  Implementing Properties as Operators

   "<insert>" allows media stream properties to be implemented by
   placing a media processing operator into the stream.  Operators may
   be bi-directional or uni-directional and are defined using a separate
   language.  Media servers that support "<insert>" must support
   operators defined in MOML.  Media servers may support operators
   defined using other languages.  Operators may be referenced by a URI
   or defined inline.

   Uni-directional operators may be as simple as individual MOML
   transform primitives such as <gain> or <clamp> which explicitly
   adjust gain and filter DTMF tones respectively.  However the value of
   operators is their ability to define more complex user controlled
   media operations for a bi-directional stream.  For example, automatic
   gain control may be applied to media going to a conference mix but a
   participant may have the ability to explicitly control the volume of
   the conference mix that they hear.

   Only objects which operate with the compressed media format may be
   inserted into a compressed media stream or an error response (451) is
   generated.




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   attributes:

   src: the URL of a document defining the media operator.  Must not be
   used if the operator is inline or an error (422) will result and MSML
   document execution will stop.

   type: a MIME type [6] which identifies the type of language used to
   describe the operator.  The type "application/moml+xml" must be
   supported and is the default.

   name: an instance name for the object.

6.5  <monitor>

   Monitor is a specialized uni-directional join that copies the media
   that is destined for a connection object.  One example of the use for
   <monitor> may be quality monitoring within a conference.  The media
   stream may be removed using the <unjoin> element described in section
   6.3.

   attributes:

   id1: an identifier of the connection to be monitored.  Any other
   object class results in a 440 error.  Wildcards must not be used.

   id2: an identifier of the object which is to receive the copy of the
   media destined to id1.  id2 may be a connection or a conference.  Any
   other object class results in a 440 error.  Wildcards must not be
   used.

   compressed: "true" or "false".  Specifies whether the join should
   occur before or after compression.  When "true", id2 must be a
   connection using the same media format as id1 or an error response
   (450) is generated.  Default is "false.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.











Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


7.  Conferences

   A conference has a mixer for each type of media that the conference
   supports.  Each mix has a corresponding description that defines how
   the media from participants contributes to that mix.  A mixer has
   multiple inputs that are combined in a media specific way to create a
   single logical output.

   The elements that describe the mix for each media type are called
   mixer description elements.  They are:

   o  "<audiomix>" defines the parameters for mixing audio media.
   o  "<videolayout>" defines the composition of a video window.

   These elements, defined in sections 7.4 and 7.5 respectively, are
   used as content of the "<createconference>" element to establish the
   initial properties of a conference.  The elements are used within the
   "<modifyconference>" element to change the properties of a conference
   once it has been created, or within the "<destroyconference>" element
   to remove individual mixes from the conference.

   Conferences may be terminated by an MSML client using the
   "<destroyconference>" element to remove the entire conference or by
   removing the last mixer(s) associated with the conference.
   Conferences can also be terminated automatically by a media server
   based on criteria specified when the conference is created.  When the
   conference is deleted, any remaining participants will have their
   associated SIP dialogs left unchanged or deleted based on the value
   of the "term" attribute specified when the conference was created.

   The following three sub-sections describe the elements that create,
   modify, and delete conferences.  These are followed by sub-sections
   describing the properties for the mixers of each media type.

7.1  <createconference>

   "<createconference>" is used to allocate and configure the media
   mixing resources for conferences.  A description of the properties
   for each type of media mix required for the conference is defined
   within the content of the "<createconference>" element.  Mixer
   descriptions are described section 7.4 and 7.5.

   Clients can request that a media server automatically delete a
   conference when a specified condition occurs by using the
   "deletewhen" attribute.  A value of "nomedia" indicates the
   conference should be deleted when the last participant leaves.  When
   this occurs, an "msml.conf.nomedia" event is notified to the MSML
   client.  A value of "nocontrol" indicates the conference should be



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   deleted when the SIP [1] dialog that carries the "<createconference>"
   element is terminated.  When this occurs, a media server must
   terminate all participant dialogs by sending a BYE for their
   associated SIP dialog.  A value of "never" leaves conference deletion
   under the control of the MSML client.

   attributes:

   name: the instance name of the conference.  If the attribute is not
   present, the media server will assign a globally unique name for the
   conference.  If the attribute is present but the name is already in
   use, an error (432) will result and MSML document execution will
   stop.  Events which the conference generates use this name as the
   value of their "id" attribute (see section 4.4.2).

   deletewhen: defines whether a media server should automatically
   delete the conference.  Possible values are "nomedia", "nocontrol",
   and "never".  Default is "nomedia".

   term: when true, the media server will send a BYE request on all SIP
   dialogs still associated with the conference when the conference is
   deleted.  Setting term equal to false allows clients to start dialogs
   on connections once the conference has completed.  Default true.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

   An example of creating an audio conference is shown below.  This
   conference allows at most two participants to contend to be heard and
   reports the set of active speakers no more frequently than every ten
   seconds.

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <msml version="1.0">
               <createconference name="example">
                  <audiomix>
                     <n-loudest n="3"/>
                     <asn ri="10s"/>
                  </audiomix>
               </createconference>
            </msml>







Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


7.2  <modifyconference>

   All of the properties of an audio mix or the presentation of a video
   mix may be changed during the life of a conference using the
   "<modifyconference>" element.  Changes to an audio mix are requested
   by including an "<audiomix>" element (see section 7.4) as a child of
   "<modifyconference>".  This will also add an audio mixer to the
   conference if none was previously allocated.  Changes to a video
   presentation are requested by including a "<videolayout>" element
   (see section 7.5) as a child of "<modifyconference>".  Similar to an
   audio mixer, this will add a video mixer if none was previously
   allocated.

   Mixers are removed by including a mixer description element within
   "<destroyconference/>".

   Features and presentation aspects are enabled/added or modified by
   including the element(s) that define the feature or presentation
   aspect within a mixer description.  The complete specification of the
   element must be included just as it would be included when the
   conference is created.  The new definition completely replaces any
   previous definition that existed.  Only things that are defined by
   elements included in the mixer descriptions are affected.  Features
   and presentation aspects that are not included must maintain their
   current configuration.

   This behavior differs from that of stream properties.  The "<stream/
   >" element requires all of the stream properties to be stated
   whenever a stream is modified.  However media streams are expected to
   have relatively few properties compared with the features and
   capabilities of mixers, especially those associated with video.
   Hence only those element actually included within the
   "<modifyconference>" element will effect any changes.

   For example, if an MSML client wanted to change the minimum reporting
   interval for active speaker notification from that shown in the
   example in section 7.1 it would send the following to the media
   server:

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <msml version="1.0">
               <modifyconference id1="conf:example">
                  <audiomix>
                     <asn ri="4">
                  </audiomix>
               </modifyconference>
            </msml>




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   This would also enable active speaker notification if it had not
   previously been enabled.  The N-loudest mixing is unaffected.

   Multiple elements may be included in the mixer descriptions similar
   to when conferences are created.  For example, in a video conference,
   the video mix description ("<videolayout>") could specify that the
   layout of the video being displayed should change such that the
   regions currently displaying participants get smaller and new
   region(s) are created to support additional participants.  A media
   server must make all of the requested changes or none of the
   requested changes.

   Additional examples of modifying conferences are presented in section
   10.

   attributes:

   id: the identifier for a conference.  Wildcards must not be used.
   Mandatory.

7.3  <destroyconference>

   Destroy conference is used to delete mixers or to delete the entire
   conference and all state and shared resources.  When a mixer is
   removed, all of the streams joined to that mixer are unjoined.  When
   a conference is destroyed, SIP dialogs for any remaining participants
   will be maintained or removed based on the value of the "term"
   attribute when the conference was created..

   By default, when there is no element content, "<destroyconference/>"
   deletes the entire conference.  Mixers are removed by including a
   mixer description element identifying the mix(es) to be removed as
   content to "<destroyconference/>".  "<audiomix/>" is used remove
   audio mixers and "<videolayout/>" is used remove video mixers.  When
   the last mixer is removed from a conference, a media server must
   remove all conference state, leaving or removing any remaining SIP
   dialogs as described above.

   attributes:

   id: the identifier for a conference.  Mandatory.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


7.4  Audio Mix

   The properties of the overall audio mix are specified using the
   "<audiomix>" element.

   Attributes:

   id: an optional identifier for the audio mix.

   An example of the description for an audio mix is:

      <audiomix id="mix1">
         <asn ri="10s"/>
         <n-loudest n="3">
      </audiomix>


7.4.1  N-Loudest

   The "<n-loudest>" element defines that participants contend to be
   included in the conference mix based upon their audio energy.  When
   the element is not present or is removed, all participants are mixed.

   Attributes:

   n: the number of participants that will be included in the audio mix
   based upon having the greatest audio energy.

7.4.2  Active Speaker Notification

   The "<asn>" element enables notification of active speakers.  Active
   speakers are notified using the "<event>" element (section 4.4.2)
   with an event name of "msml.conf.asn".  The namelist of the event
   consists of the set of active speakers.  The name of each item is the
   string "speaker" with a value of the connection identifier for the
   connection.

   Attributes:

   ri: the minimum reporting interval defines the minimum duration of
   time which must pass before changes to active speakers will be
   reported.  A value of zero disables active speaker notification.









Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   An example of an active speaker notification is:

      <event name="msml.conf.asn" id="conf:example">
         <name>speaker</name>
         <value>conn:hd93tg5hdf</value>
         <name>speaker</name>
         <value>conn:w8cn59vei7</value>
         <name>speaker</name>
         <value>conn:p78fnh6sek47fg</value>
      </event>


7.5  Video Layout

   A video layout is specified using the "<videolayout>" element.  It is
   used as a container to hold elements that describe all of the
   properties of a video mix.  The parameters of the window that
   displays the video mix are defined by the "<root>" element.  When the
   video mix in composed of multiple panes, the location and
   characteristics of the panes are defined by one or more "<region>"
   elements.  A "<region>" element is not required when only a single
   video stream is displayed at one time and none of the visual
   attributes of regions are required.

   Some regions may be used to display a video stream based on a
   selection criteria rather than having a video stream of a single
   participant continuously presented in the region.  One such an
   example is a distance learning lecture where the instructor sees each
   of the students periodically displayed in a region.  When a region is
   used to display one of a number of streams, it is placed as a child
   of a "<selector>" element.

   Attributes:

   type: specifies the language used to define the layout.  Layouts
   defined using MSML must use the value "text/msml-basic-layout".  This
   is the same convention as defined for the layout module from the W3C
   SMIL 2.0 specification [13].  The default when omitted is "text/
   msml-basic-layout".

   id: an optional identifier for the video layout.

7.5.1  Root-Layout

   The "<root>" element describes the root window or virtual screen in
   which the conference video mix will be displayed.  Simple conferences
   can display participant video directly within the root window but
   more complex conferences will use regions for this purpose.  Areas of



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   the window which are not used to display video will show the root
   window background.

   All video presentations require a root window.  It must be present
   when a video mix is created and it cannot be deleted.  A media server
   must fail a request and return an error if a "<root>" element with no
   attributes is included the video mix description of
   "<modifyconference>".

   Attributes:

   size: the size of the root window specified as one of the five
   standard common intermediate formats (e.g.  CIF, QCIF, etc.).

   backgroundcolor: the color for the root window background defined
   using the values for the "background-color" property of the CSS2
   specification [7].

   backgroundimage: the URI for an image to be displayed as the root
   window background.  Transparent portions of the image allow the
   background color to show through.

7.5.2  Regions

   "<region>" elements define video panes that are used to display
   participant video streams.  Regions are rendered on top of the root
   window.

   The size of a region is specified relative to the size of the root
   window using the "relativesize" attribute.  Relative sizes are
   expressed as fractions (e.g.  1/4, 1/3) that preserve the aspect
   ratio of the original video stream while allowing for efficient
   scaling implementations.

      Open Issue: should there be the ability to allow the size of
      regions to be specified as absolute values for height and width?
      Independent height and width values change the aspect ratio and
      would also require a way to define how the video stream is
      displayed in the region.  This could be left to more sophisticated
      layout languages such as SMIL 2.0 [13].

   Regions are located on the root window based on the value of the
   position attributes "top" and "left".  These attributes define the
   position of the top left corner of the region as an offset from the
   top left corner of the root window.  Their values may be expressed
   either as a number of pixels or as a percent of the vertical or
   horizontal dimension of the root window.  Percent values are appended
   with a percent ('%') character.  Percent values of "33%" and "67%"



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   should be interpreted as "1/3" and "2/3" to allow easy alignment of
   regions whose size is expressed relative to the size of the root
   window.

   An example of a video layout with six regions is:

   +-------+---+
   |       | 2 |
   |   1   +---+
   |       | 3 |
   +---+---+---+
   | 6 | 5 | 4 |
   +---+---+---+

      <videolayout type="text/msml-basic-layout">
         <root size="CIF"/>
         <region id="1" left="0" top="0" size="2/3"/>
         <region id="2" left="67%" top="0" size="1/3"/>
         <region id="3" left="67%" top="33%" size="1/3">
         <region id="4" left="67%" top="67%" size="1/3"/>
         <region id="5" left="33%" top="67%" size="1/3"/>
         <region id="6" left="0" top="67%" size="1/3"/>
      </videolayout>

   The area of the root window covered by a region is a function of the
   region's position and its size.  When areas of different regions
   overlap, they are layered in order of their "priority" attribute.
   The region with the highest value for the "priority" attribute is
   below all other regions and will be hidden by overlapping regions.
   The region with the lowest non-zero value for the "priority"
   attribute is on top of all other regions and will not be hidden by
   overlapping regions.  The priority attribute may be assigned values
   between 0 and 1.  A value of zero disables the region, freeing any
   resources associated with the region, and unjoining any video stream
   displayed in the region.

   Regions that do not specify a priority will be assigned a priority by
   a media server when a conference is created.  The first region within
   the "<videolayout>" element that does not specify a priority will be
   assigned a priority of one, the second a priority of two, etc.  In
   this way, all regions that do not explicitly specify a priority will
   be underneath all regions that do specify a priority.  As well,
   within those regions that do not specify a priority, they will be
   layered from top to bottom, in the order they appear within the
   "<videolayout>" element.






Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   For example, if a layout was specified as follows:

      <videolayout>
         <root-layout size="CIF"/>
         <region id="a" ... priority=".3" .../>
         <region id="b" ... />
         <region id="c" ... priority=".2" ...>
         <region id="d" ... />
      </videolayout>

   Then the regions would be layered, from top to bottom, c,a,b,d.

   Portions of regions that extend beyond the root window will be
   cropped.  For example, a layout specified as:

      <videolayout>
         <root-layout size="CIF"/>
         <region id="foo" left="50%" top="50%" size="2/3"/>
      </videolayout>

   would appear similar to:

   +-----------+
   |   root    |
   |background |
   |     +-----+--
   |     |     |//
   |     | foo |//
   +-----+-----+//
         |////////

   Visual attributes are used to define aspects of the visual appearance
   of individual regions.  A border may be defined together with a title
   and/or logo.  Text and logos are displayed as images on top of the
   region's video, below all regions with a lower priority..  The visual
   attributes are "title", "titletextcolor", "titlebackgroundcolor",
   "bordercolor", "borderwidth", and "logo".

   Visual attributes can also be defined for individual streams (section
   6.4.2.  When visual attributes are specified as part of both a region
   and a stream, those associated with the stream must take precedence.
   This allows streams that are chosen for display automatically (see
   7.5.3 to have proper text and logos displayed.  The region visual
   attributes are displayed when no stream is associated with the
   region.

   Two other attributes associated with a region, "blank" and "freeze",
   define the state of the video displayed in the region.  When either



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   attribute is assigned the value "true", then the regions displays
   either a blank region, or the video image frozen at the last received
   frame.

      Open Issue: these attributes are specified for a region and not
      allowed for streams because that appears to be the common use
      case.  Applying them to streams would allow only that stream to be
      affected within a selector while other streams continue to display
      normally.  Except for personal mixing scenarios, the same effect
      can be achieved by having the participant mute their own
      transmission to the media server.

   Attributes associated with each region are:

   id: a name that can be used to refer to the region.

   left: the position of the region from the left side of the root
   window.

   top: the position of the region from the top of the root window.

   relativesize: the size of the region expressed as a fraction of the
   root window size.

   priority: a number between 0 and 1 that is used to define the
   precedence when rendering overlapping regions.  A value of zero
   disables the region.

   title: text to be displayed as the title for the region

   titletextcolor: the color of the text

   titlebackgroundcolor: the color of the text background

   bordercolor: the color of the region border

   borderwidth: the width of the region border

   logo: the URI of an image file to be displayed

   freeze: a boolean value that defines whether the video image should
   be frozen at the currently displayed frame

   blank: a boolean value that defines whether the region should display
   black instead of the associated video stream






Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


      Open Issue: regions have many attributes which must all be
      restated every time a region is modified.  Would it be better to
      create several child elements for these attributes instead.  For
      example one element could have the position attributes, another
      the visual attributes, and a third the state attributes such as
      freeze.  This would allow only the group of attributes that
      changed to be restated.

7.5.3  Stream Selection

   It is often desired that one of several video streams be
   automatically selected to be displayed.  The "<selector>" element is
   used to define the selection criteria and its associated parameters.
   The selection algorithm is specified by the "method" attribute.
   Currently defined selection methods allow for voice activated
   switching and to iterate sequentially through the set of associated
   video streams.

   The regions that will display the selected video stream are placed as
   child elements of the "<selector>" element.  Including regions within
   a "<selector>" element does not affect their layout with respect to
   regions not subject to the selection.  For simple video conferences
   that display the video directly in the root window, the "<root>"
   element can be placed as a child of "<selector>".  Region elements
   must not be used in this case.

   For example, below is a common video layout that allows the video
   stream from the currently active speaker to be displayed in the large
   region ("1") at the top left of the layout while the streams from
   five other participants are displayed in regions located at the
   layout periphery.

   +-------+---+
   |       | 2 |
   |   1   +---+
   |       | 3 |
   +---+---+---+
   | 6 | 5 | 4 |
   +---+---+---+

      <videolayout type="text/msml-basic-layout">
         <root size="CIF"/>
         <selector id="switch" method="vas">
            <region id="1" left="0" top="0" size="2/3"/>
         </selector>
         <region id="2" left="67%" top="0" size="1/3"/>
         <region id="3" left="67%" top="33%" size="1/3">
         <region id="4" left="67%" top="67%" size="1/3"/>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


         <region id="5" left="33%" top="67%" size="1/3"/>
         <region id="6" left="0" top="67%" size="1/3"/>
      </videolayout>

   All selector methods must be defined so that they work if only a
   single region is a child of the selector.  Selector methods that
   support more than one child region must specify how the method works
   across multiple regions.  Media server implementations may support
   only a single region for methods that are defined to allow multiple
   regions.

   The selector or region for a participant's video is defined using the
   "display" attribute of "<stream>" during a join operation.
   Specifying a selector allows the stream to be displayed according to
   the criteria defined by the selector method.  Specifying a region
   supports continuous presence display of participants.  Some streams
   may be joined with both a selector and a region.  In this case, the
   value of the blank attribute defines whether the streams associated
   with a continuous presence region should be blanked when the stream
   is selected for display in one of the selector regions.

   Attributes common to all selector methods are:

   id: a name that can be used to refer to the selector.

   method: the name of the method used to select the video stream.

   status: specifies whether the selector is "active" or "disabled".

   blankothers: when "true", video streams that are also displayed in
   continuous presence regions will have the continuous presence regions
   blanked when the stream is displayed in a selection region.

7.5.3.1  Voice Activated Switching

   Voice activated switching (VAS) is used to display the video stream
   that correlates with the participant who is currently speaking.  It
   is specified using a selector method value of "vas".

   If the video stream associated with the active speaker is not
   currently displayed in a selection region, then it replaces the video
   in the region that is displaying the video of the speaker that was
   least recently active.  If the video of the active speaker is
   currently displayed in a selection region, then there is no change to
   any region.  When VAS is applied to a single region, this has the
   effect that the current speaker is displayed in that region.

   Attributes associated with voice activated switching are:



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   si: switching interval is the minimum period of time that must elapse
   before allowing the video to switch to the active speaker.

   speakersees: defines whether the active speaker sees the "current"
   speaker (themselves) or the "previous" speaker.

      Open Issue: the ability to display the previous speaker is likely
      constrained by media server resources to limited use cases such as
      a simple voice activated switch conference.  Because of this,
      should this attribute be include as part of a VAS selector or
      should there be a mechanism specific to that specific use case?

7.5.3.2  Sequencing Video Streams

   to be completed later.

7.6  Reserving Conference Resources

   Conference resources may be reserved by including the "<reserve>"
   element as a child of "<createconference>".  "<reserve>" allows the
   specification of a set of resources which a media server will reserve
   for the conference.  Any requests for resources beyond those that
   have been reserved should be honored on a best-effort basis by a
   media server.

   attributes:

   required: boolean that specifies whether <createconference> should
   fail if the requested resources are not available.  When set to
   false, the conference will be created, with no reserved resources, if
   the complete reservation cannot be honored.  Default true.

   The resources to be reserved are defined using "<resource>" The
   contents of these elements describe a resource that is to be
   reserved.  Descriptions are implementation- dependent.  Media servers
   that support MOML may use the elements from that language as the
   basis for resource descriptions.  Each resource element may use the
   attribute "n" to define the quantity of the resource to reserve.













Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   For example, the following creates a conference and reserves two
   types of resources.  One resource element may represent resources
   that are shared by all participants of the conference with the other
   may represent resources that are reserved for each of the expected
   participants.

      <createconference>
         <reserve>
            <resource n="20">
               <!-- description of resources used by each participant -->
            </individual>
            <resource n="2">
               <!-- description of the shared conference resources -->
            </shared>
         </reserve>
      </createconference>



































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


8.  Dialogs

   Dialogs are used for interaction with a user.  A dialog may consist
   of a simple atomic command such as playing an announcement, or it may
   be an entire sequence of interactions.  Dialogs may be speech or IVR
   dialogs with human participants, of fax dialogs with a machine.  A
   media server must support MOML [10] to allow command driven and fax
   interactions, and should support VoiceXML to allow execution of
   complex user interfaces.  Other dialog languages may also be
   supported.

   The control resources associated with dialogs are separate from the
   MSML thread of execution.  When a dialog is started, MSML allocates
   the dialog control resources, and if successful, starts those
   resources executing.  MSML execution then continues without waiting
   for the dialog to complete.

   Media streams are created between the dialog target and other
   internal media server resources as part of dialog execution.  Stream
   creation is subject to the requirements defined in section 6.

8.1  <dialogstart>

   "<dialogstart>" is used to instantiate media dialog on connections or
   conferences.  The dialog is specified either inline or by a URI [3].
   The dialog description must not be inline if the src attribute is
   present.

   The originator of the dialog is notified using a "msml.dialog.exit"
   event when the dialog completes.  Any results returned by the dialog
   when it exits are sent as a namelist to the event.

   The "msml.dialog.exit" event is also used when dialogs fail due to
   errors encountered fetching external documents or errors that occur
   within the dialog execution thread.  In this case, a namelist
   containing the items "dialog.exit.status" and
   "dialog.exit.description" is returned with the event to inform the
   client of the failure and the failure reason.  The values of these
   items are defined in section 9.  Information from the failed dialog
   may be returned as additional namelist items.

   attributes:

   target: an identifier of a connection or a conference which will
   interact with the dialog.  The identifier must not contain wildcards.
   Mandatory.

   src: the URL of the dialog description.  Must not be used if the



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   dialog description is inline.  Otherwise  an error (422) will result
   and MSML document execution will stop.

   type: a MIME type which identifies the type of language used to
   describe the dialog.  application/moml+xml and application/vxml+xml
   are used to identify MOML and VoiceXML [9] respectively.

   name: an instance name for the dialog.  If the attribute is not
   present, the media server will assign an identifier to the dialog.
   If the attribute is present but the name is already associated with
   the target, an error (431) will result and MSML document execution
   will stop.  Any results that a dialog generates will be correlated to
   its identifier.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

   The following example starts a VoiceXML dialog on a connection.

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <msml version="1.0">
               <dialogstart target="conn:abcd1234"
                   type="application/vxml+xml"
                   name="sample"
                   src="http://server.example.com/scripts/foo.vxml"/>
            </msml>

   If this dialog failed once its execution thread had begun, for
   example the fetch of the VoiceXML document failed, an example of the
   event which would be returned would be:

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <event name="msml.dialog.exit"
                   id="conn:abcd1234/dialog:sample">
               <name>dialog.exit.status</name>
               <value>423</value>
               <name>dialog.exit.description</name>
               <value>External document fetch error</value>
            </event>


8.2  <dialogend>

   Dialog end is used to terminate a dialog created through
   <dialogstart> before it completes of its own accord.  The operation



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   of <dialogend> depends on the dialog language being used by the
   executing context.  When that context is VoiceXML, a
   "connection.disconnected" event will be thrown to the VoiceXML
   application.  When that context is MOML, a "terminate" event will be
   sent to the MOML context.

   <dialogend> allows the executing dialog the opportunity to gracefully
   complete before generating a "msml.dialog.exit" event.  Dialog
   results may be returned and will be contained as a namelist to that
   event.

   attributes:

   id: the identifier of a dialog.  Mandatory.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.

   For example, if the dialog from the previous example was still
   executing, the following would terminate the dialog and generate a
   "msml.dialog.exit" event.

            <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <msml version="1.0">
               <dialogend id="conn:abcd1234/dialog:sample"/>
            </msml>






















Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


9.  Response Codes

   The response codes defined in this section are returned as the value
   of the response attribute to the <result> element.  Some values may
   also be returned as part of a namelist to an "msml.dialog.exit" event
   generated when an executing dialog fails.

   Informational (1xx)

   Reserved for future use

   Success

      200  Ok

   Client Error (4xx)

      400  Bad Request
      401  Unknown Element
      402  Unsupported Element
      403  Missing mandatory element content
      404  Forbidden element content
      405  Invalid element content
      406  Unknown attribute
      407  Attribute not supported
      408  Missing mandatory attribute
      409  Forbidden attribute is present
      410  Invalid attribute value

      420  Unsupported media description language
      421  Unknown media description language
      422  Ambiguous request (both URI and inline description)
      423  External document fetch error
      424  Syntax error in foreign language
      425  Semantic error in foreign language
      426  Unknown error executing foreign language

      430  Object does not exist
      431  Object instance name already used
      432  Conference name already in use
      433  reserved
      434  External document fetch error

      440  Cannot join objects of the specified class
      441  Objects have incompatible media types






Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


      442  reserved
      443  reserved
      444  Number of media inputs exceeded

      450  Objects have incompatible media formats
      451  Incompatible media stream format

   Server Error (5xx)

      500  Internal media server error
      510  Not in service
      511  Service Unavailable
      520  No resource to fulfill request
      521  Internal limit exceeded





































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


10.  Examples

   These examples focus on the MSML used by an Application Server (AS)
   to control services on a Media Server (MS).  They show the
   relationship between SIP signalling to establish media sessions and
   MSML service control commands.  For brevity, only the content of MSML
   messages is shown.  The examples assumes that the AS and MS use the
   IPv4 address and UDP port number of the audio stream (on the MS) to
   identify the MSML connection.

10.1  Establishing a Dial-In Conference



           UA                 Application Server        Media Server
           |                         |                           |
           |                         |        INVITE F1          |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |           200 F2          |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |                         |           ACK F3          |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |                           |
           |                         |     createconference> F4  |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |           200 F5          |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |    INVITE (SDP UA) F6   |                           |
           |------------------------>|                           |
           |                         |      INVITE (SDP UA) F7   |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |        200 (SDP MS) F8    |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |                         |           ACK F9          |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |     200 (SDP MS) F10    |                           |
           |<------------------------|                           |
           |        ACK F11          |                           |
           |------------------------>|                           |
           |                         |     <startdialog> F12     |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |           200 F13         |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |                         |    HTTP interactions F14  |
           |                         |<------------------------->|
           |                         |  <event>(dialog.exit) F15 |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |                         |         <join> F16        |



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 48]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |           200 F17         |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |         ...             |            ...            |
           |                         |                           |
           |                         |     <startdialog> F18     |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |           200 F19         |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |                         |    HTTP interactions F20  |
           |                         |<--------------------------|
           |                         |  <event>(dialog.exit) F21 |
           |                         |-------------------------->|
           |         ...             |            ...            |
           |                         |                           |

   Steps 1-3: establish an MSML control channel for the conference.
   Alternatively, a control channel could already have been established
   which was used for all AS/MS interactions.  A control channel per
   conference is only one possible model.  Currently MSML uses SIP INFO
   requests and responses on this SIP dialog.  There is a proposal to
   use this message exchange to establish a TCP channel for MSML similar
   to the approach used for MRCPv2.  This approach would require that a
   request identifier be added to the <msml> element to correlate
   requests and responses.  This currently relies on the SIP INFO
   request and response for this property.  MSML messages are shown
   without specifying the transport in this example but it assumes a
   request/response correlation based on transport messages.

   Step 4: create a conference that will mix the loudest two speakers
   and report those speakers to the application server every ten
   seconds.  The media server will automatically terminate remaining
   media sessions and delete the conference and associated resources and
   when the control channel is terminated.  An <agc> operator is
   inserted to so that every participant will have their volume
   automatically adjusted to a similar level.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <createconference name="exampleConf" deletewhen="nocontrol"/>
             <audiomix>
                <n-loudest n="3"/>
                <asn ri="10s"/>
             </audiomix>
         </createconference>
      </msml>






Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 49]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   Step 5: conference created successfully

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
      </msml>

   Steps 6-11: standard 3PCC establishment of a user initiated media
   session to a media server.  This is the equivalent of a dial-in
   conference participant.  The "To:" header returned by the MS in the
   200 response of Step F8 was:

   To: <sip:msml@ms.example.com>;tag=jd87dfg4h

   Step 12: request an initial dialog with the participant to prompt for
   their name, desired conference, etc.  The dialog completes by
   informing the participant they are joining the conference.  If this
   was not the first participant, the dialog could also announce the
   other participants.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <dialogstart target="conn:jd87dfg4h"
             type="application/vxml+xml"
             src="http://server.example.com/scripts/initial.vxml"/>
      </msml>

   Step 13: dialog started successfully.  The dialog identifier is
   returned.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
         <dialogid>conn:jd87dfg4h/dialog:12v5tq9</dialogid>
      </msml>

   Step 14: sequence of HTTP VoiceXML dialog interactions.

   Step 15: the VoiceXML browser exits (but does not disconnect).  If a
   namelist had been specified within the VoiceXML <exit> element, it
   would have been included in the <event> sent to the AS.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <event name="msml.dialog.exit"
                id="conn:jd87dfg4h/dialog:12v5tq9"/>
      </msml>








Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 50]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   Step 16: join the participant to the conference and have the volume
   of their contributing audio automatically adjusted to a target level
   of -20 dBm0.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <join id1="conn:jd87dfg4h" id2="conf:exampleConf">
            <stream media="audio" dir="from-id1">
                <gain agc="true" tgtlvl="-20"/>
            </stream>
            <stream media="audio" dir="to-id1"/>
      </msml>

   Step 17: successfully joined to conference

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
      </msml>

   Steps 6 through 17 are repeated for the second participant.

   Step 18: play a join tone or message announcing the new participant
   to the conference.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <dialogstart target="conf:exampleConf"
             type="application/vxml+xml"
             src="http://server.example.com/scripts/joinmsg.vxml"/>
      </msml>

   Step 19: dialog started successfully.  The dialog identifier is
   returned.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
         <dialogid>conf:ExampleConf/dialog:j6fs8745</dialogid>
      </msml>

   Step 20: HTTP VoiceXML dialog interaction(s).

   Step 21: the VoiceXML browser exits.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <event name="msml.dialog.exit"
                id="conf:ExampleConf/dialog:j6fs8745"/>
      </msml>

   Steps 6 through 21 are repeated for the third and subsequent
   participants.



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 51]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


10.2  Example of a Sidebar Audio Conference

   This example assumes that a conference has already been established
   as in the previous example.  It creates a sidebar conference that
   hears the main conference as a whisper.  Three participants are moved
   to the side bar.  After some period of time, the sidebar participants
   are returned to the main conference and the sidebar is deleted.

   Step1: the sidebar conference is created.  It is joined half-duplex
   to the main conference and a manual gain object is inserted in the
   media stream.  Three participants are then moved from the main
   conference to the sidebar.  Although not shown, an AS could include
   the "mark" attribute in each element to allow recovery in the event
   of a mid- transaction error.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <createconference name="sidebarConf"
                           deletewhen="nomedia">
             <audiomix/>
         </createconference>
         <join id1="conf:sidebarConf" id2="conf:exampleConf">
             <stream media="audio" dir="to-id1">
                 <gain amt="-20"/>
             </stream>
         </join>
         <unjoin id1="conn:gs5s4-1" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:gs5s4-1" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
         <unjoin id1="conn:hd764gr9-2" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:hd764gr9-2" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
         <unjoin id1="conn:h37frdvgs65-3" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:h37frdvgs65-3" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
      </msml>

   Step 2: sidebar conference created successfully and participants
   joined.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
      </msml>












Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 52]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   Step 3: once the sidebar conference has completed, the participants
   are rejoined to the main conference.  The sidebar is destroyed
   automatically by the MS when the last media stream is removed as
   specified when the sidebar conference was created.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <unjoin id1="conn:gs5s4-1" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:gs5s4-1" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
         <unjoin id1="conn:hd764gr9-2" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:hd764gr9-2" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
         <unjoin id1="conn:h37frdvgs65-3" id2="conf:sidebarConf"/>
         <join id1="conn:h37frdvgs65-3" id2="conf:exampleConf"/>
      </msml>

   Step 4: participants successfully moved to main conference and
   sidebar destroyed.

      <msml version="1.0">
         <result response="200"/>
      </msml>


10.3  Example of Removing Conference

   This example assumes a conference created similar to the first
   example where there is an MSML control channel specific to the
   conference and the conference has been configured to be deleted when
   that channel is removed (using SIP).

   Steps 1-2: the AS signals BYE for the dialog used to establish the
   conference control channel.

   Steps 3-6: the MS initiates terminating the media sessions for each
   participant remaining in the conference.

   The MS deletes the conference and removes all resources when the last
   participant has been removed.














Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 53]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


10.4  Example of Modifying a Video Layout

   Assume that a conference named "example" is created using the
   following mixer descriptions.

       +---+---+
       | 1 | 2 |
       +---+---+
       | 3 | 4 |
       +---+---+

   <createconference name="quad-split">
      <audiomix>
         <n-loudest n="3"/>
         <asn ri="10s"/>
      </audiomix>
      <videolayout>
         <root size="CIF" background="white" />
         <selector id="default" method="vas" si="500ms">
            <region id="1" left="0" top="0" size="1/4"/>
         </selector>
         <region id="2" left="50%" top="0" size="1/4"/>
         <region id="3" left="0%" top="50%" size="1/4">
         <region id="4" left="50%" top="50%" size="1/4"/>
      </videolayout>
   </createconference>

   The following would change the size of the video window to QCIF and
   the background color to the default "black".

   <modifyconference id1="conf:example">
      <videolayout>
         <root size="4CIF"/>
      </videolayout>
   </modifyconference>

   The relative location of the regions does not change.  However the
   sizes of the regions do change because they are relative to the size
   of the root window.  The result is a layout that looks identical but
   half the size.

   The following would freeze the video displayed in in region "2"
   without affecting any other attributes of that region.

   <modifyconference id1="conf:example">
      <videolayout>
         <region id="2" left="50%" top="0" size="1/4" freeze="true"/>
      </videolayout>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 54]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   </modifyconference>


















































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 55]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


11.  Change Summary

   The following are the primary changes between the -03 version of the
   draft and the -02 version:

   o  added framework for multimedia streams and defined video streams.
   o  added descriptions for audio mixes and video presentation layouts.
      The audio mix description replaces the "<createconference>"
      attributes "n", "asn" and, "ri".
   o  added the "<stream>" element to define a stream and several child
      elements that define properties of a stream.  Made the "<insert>"
      element a child of "<stream>".
   o  added the elements "<modifystream>" and "<modifyconference>" to
      modify streams and conferences respectively.
   o  moved the "term" attribute from "<destroyconference>" to
      "<createconference>" so that it can affect the behaviour when
      conferences are automatically deleted.
   o  deprecated the "<remove>" and "<cjoin>" elements.  Removing
      operators is now accomplished as part of "<modifystream>".
      Compressed join is no longer necessary because "<stream>" elements
      allow compressed media to be identified and a compressed join can
      be accomplished using the standard "<join>" element.

   The following are the primary changes between the -02 version of the
   draft and the -01 version:

   o  added the specialized join operations <cjoin> and <monitor>
   o  added "deletewhen" attribute to <createconference> to allow a
      media server to automatically delete conferences when the
      specified condition occurs
   o  clarified that <join> is used to change the duplexity of a media
      stream

   The following are the primary changes between the -01 version of the
   draft and the -00 version.

   o  added a glossary
   o  rewrote the description of objects to precisely distinguish
      between classes and instances.  All classes are now defined in
      MSML.  The "oper" class replaces "application defined classes".
   o  rewrote the description of identifiers.  All terms must use
      "class:instance" where the instance may be assigned by the client
      or media server.  "/" replaces ";" as the term separator for
      identifiers.
   o  clarified the definition of connection identifiers and require
      that "conn" be the class for all forms of the identifier.
   o  '*' wildcard allowed for an instance name in limited situations.




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 56]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   o  alias only names a single connection.
   o  clarified SIP usage and transport neutrality.  All actions use
      mandatory explicit identifiers rather than inferring targets from
      a SIP dialog.
   o  changed the attribute name from "id" to "name" for client assigned
      instance names.
   o  fixed <destroy> so that MOML target is appended to the MSML target
      rather than the MSML event.
   o  changed xml+moml to moml+xml and xml+vxml to vxml+xml.
   o  changed "namelist" to "valuelist" in send.
   o  removed explicit "lhs" / "rhs" labeling of full duplex objects.
   o  added specification of result codes and when they are returned.

11.1  Deprecated Elements

11.1.1  <remove>

   Deprecated in -03.  The remove element is used to remove objects
   which have been placed in a media stream using <insert>.  Remove
   restores the original media stream.

   attributes:

   id: the identifier of the object to remove.  If id refers to multiple
   objects affecting multiple media streams, then all objects are
   removed from all affected media streams.  Mandatory.

11.1.2  <cjoin>

   Deprecated in -03.  Compressed join is used to create media streams
   between two connections when no transcoding is required.  As such, it
   functions much like an RTP relay.  By default a full-duplex
   compressed media stream is created for each media type referenced for
   the connections.  However a half-duplex stream may be created by
   setting a duplex attribute to "half".  <cjoin> establishes the
   specified relationship between the two objects and does not change
   any pre-existing relationships.

   Both connections must use the same media format or an error response
   (450) is generated.  At most one media stream of the same type,
   whether compressed or transcoded, may be created between the same two
   objects.  Only objects which operate with the compressed media format
   may be inserted into a compressed media stream or an error response
   (451) is generated.

   attributes:

   id1: an identifier of a connection.  Any other object class results



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 57]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


   in a 440 error.

   id2: an identifier of a connection.  Any other object class results
   in a 440 error.

   duplex: "half" or "full".  When "half" is specified the object
   identified by id1 receives media from the object identified by id2
   but not vice versa.  Default is full.

   mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress in the
   case of errors.  The value of the mark attribute from the last
   successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error response.
   Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an MSML document
   should be unique.





































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 58]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


12.  Future Work

   The following work is planned:

   o  format the document according to the conventions defined in RFC
      2119.
   o  add security considerations section.
   o  identify mandatory versus optional language capabilities.  For
      example all media servers using MSML must support audio media but
      video and other media types will be optional.
   o  define a mechanism to audit the current state of a media server.
   o  define MSML operation over other transport(s).







































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 59]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


13.  XML Schemas

   The MSML schema uses one core schema which includes two other
   schemas; one defines the MSML datatypes, the other is for MOML which
   is optionally used for dialogs and is required to define operators.

   The core schema is:

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
     elementFormDefault="qualified"
     attributeFormDefault="unqualified">
     <xs:include schemaLocation="moml.xsd"/>
     <xs:include schemaLocation="msml-datatypes.xsd"/>
     <xs:element name="msml">
       <xs:complexType>
         <xs:choice>
           <xs:group ref="msmlRequest" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
           <xs:element name="event">
             <xs:complexType>
               <xs:choice maxOccurs="unbounded">
                 <xs:sequence>
                   <xs:element name="name"
                     type="msmlEventNameValue.datatype"/>
                   <xs:element name="value">
                     <xs:simpleType>
                       <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
                         <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.]+"/>
                       </xs:restriction>
                     </xs:simpleType>
                   </xs:element>
                 </xs:sequence>
               </xs:choice>
               <xs:attribute name="name"
                 type="msmlEventName.datatype" use="required"/>
               <xs:attribute name="id"
                 type="msmlEventSource.datatype" use="required"/>
             </xs:complexType>
           </xs:element>
           <xs:element name="result">
             <xs:complexType>
               <xs:sequence>
                 <xs:element name="description" minOccurs="0">
                   <xs:simpleType>
                     <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
                       <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.-_]+"/>
                     </xs:restriction>
                   </xs:simpleType>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 60]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


                 </xs:element>
                 <xs:choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded">
                   <xs:element name="confid" type="confID.datatype"/>
                   <xs:element name="dialogid"
                     type="dialogID.datatype"/>
                   <xs:element name="operid"
                     type="operatorID.datatype"/>
                 </xs:choice>
               </xs:sequence>
               <xs:attribute name="response">
                 <xs:simpleType>
                   <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
                     <xs:pattern value="\d{3}"/>
                   </xs:restriction>
                 </xs:simpleType>
               </xs:attribute>
             </xs:complexType>
           </xs:element>
         </xs:choice>
         <xs:attribute name="version" type="xs:string"
           use="required" fixed="1.0"/>
       </xs:complexType>
     </xs:element>
     <xs:group name="msmlRequest">
       <xs:choice>
         <xs:element name="createconference">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:all>
               <xs:element name="audioMix" type="audioMixType"/>
               <xs:element name="videoLayout"
                 type="videoLayoutType"/>
               <xs:element name="reserve">
                 <xs:complexType>
                   <xs:sequence>
                     <xs:element name="resource" maxOccurs="unbounded">
                       <xs:complexType>
                         <xs:sequence>
                           <xs:any namespace="##other"
                             processContents="lax" minOccurs="0"
                             maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
                         </xs:sequence>
                         <xs:attribute name="n"
                           type="xs:positiveInteger" default="1"/>
                         <xs:anyAttribute namespace="##any"/>
                       </xs:complexType>
                     </xs:element>
                   </xs:sequence>
                   <xs:attribute name="required"



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 61]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


                     type="boolean.datatype" default="true"/>
                 </xs:complexType>
               </xs:element>
             </xs:all>
             <xs:attribute name="name" type="msmlInstanceID.datatype"/>
             <xs:attribute name="deletewhen" default="never">
               <xs:simpleType>
                 <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
                   <xs:enumeration value="nomedia"/>
                   <xs:enumeration value="nocontrol"/>
                   <xs:enumeration value="never"/>
                 </xs:restriction>
               </xs:simpleType>
             </xs:attribute>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="modifyconference">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:all>
               <xs:element name="audioMix" type="audioMixType"/>
               <xs:element name="videoLayout" type="videoLayoutType"/>
             </xs:all>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="destroyconference">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="id" type="confID.datatype"
               use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="term" type="boolean.datatype"
               default="true"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="dialogstart">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:sequence>
               <xs:group ref="momlRequest"/>
               <xs:group ref="sendType" minOccurs="0"/>
             </xs:sequence>
             <xs:attribute name="target"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="type" type="dialogLanguage.datatype"
               use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="name"
               type="msmlInstanceID.datatype"/>
             <xs:attribute name="src" type="xs:anyURI"
               use="optional"/>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 62]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="dialogend">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="id" type="dialogID.datatype"
               use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="join">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:sequence>
               <xs:element name="stream" type="streamType"
                 minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="4"/>
             </xs:sequence>
             <xs:attribute name="id1"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="id2"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark" type="mark.datatype"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="modifystream">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:sequence>
               <xs:element name="stream" type="streamType"
                 maxOccurs="4"/>
             </xs:sequence>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="unjoin">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:sequence>
               <xs:element name="stream" type="streamType"
                 minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="4"/>
             </xs:sequence>
             <xs:attribute name="id1"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="id2"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="monitor">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="id1"
               type="connID.datatype" use="required"/>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 63]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


             <xs:attribute name="id2"
               type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="compressed"
               type="boolean.datatype" default="false"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark" type="mark.datatype"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="send">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="event"
               type="msmlEvent.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="target"
               type="msmlTarget.datatype" use="required"/>
             <xs:attribute name="valuelist" type="xs:string"/>
             <xs:attribute ref="mark"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
       </xs:choice>
     </xs:group>
     <xs:complexType name="streamType">
       <xs:choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded">
         <xs:element name="gain">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="amt" use="optional">
               <xs:simpleType>
                 <xs:restriction base="xs:integer">
                   <xs:minInclusive value="-96"/>
                   <xs:maxInclusive value="96"/>
                 </xs:restriction>
               </xs:simpleType>
             </xs:attribute>
             <xs:attribute name="agc" type="boolean.datatype"/>
             <xs:attribute name="tgtlvl" use="optional">
               <xs:simpleType>
                 <xs:restriction base="xs:nonPositiveInteger">
                   <xs:minInclusive value="-40"/>
                   <xs:maxInclusive value="0"/>
                 </xs:restriction>
               </xs:simpleType>
             </xs:attribute>
             <xs:attribute name="maxgain" default="10">
               <xs:simpleType>
                 <xs:restriction base="xs:nonNegativeInteger">
                   <xs:minInclusive value="0"/>
                   <xs:maxInclusive value="40"/>
                 </xs:restriction>
               </xs:simpleType>
             </xs:attribute>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 64]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="clamp">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="dtmf" type="boolean.datatype"/>
             <xs:attribute name="tones" type="boolean.datatype"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:element name="visual"/>
         <xs:element name="insert">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:group ref="momlRequest"/>
             <xs:attribute name="type"
               type="xs:string" use="required"
               fixed="application/moml+xml"/>
             <xs:attribute name="name"
               type="msmlInstanceID.datatype"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
       </xs:choice>
       <xs:attribute name="dir">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="to-id1"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="from-id1"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="media">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="audio"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="video"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="preferred" type="boolean.datatype"/>
       <xs:attribute name="display" type="xs:string"/>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:complexType name="audioMixType">
       <xs:all>
         <xs:element name="asn" minOccurs="0">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:attribute name="ri" type="posDuration.datatype"/>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
       </xs:all>
       <xs:attribute name="contrib">



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 65]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="n-loudest"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="all"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="n" type="xs:unsignedInt"/>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:complexType name="videoLayoutType">
       <xs:choice>
         <xs:element name="selector">
           <xs:complexType>
             <xs:complexContent>
               <xs:extension base="selectorType">
                 <xs:sequence>
                   <xs:element name="root" type="rootType"/>
                 </xs:sequence>
               </xs:extension>
             </xs:complexContent>
           </xs:complexType>
         </xs:element>
         <xs:sequence>
           <xs:element name="root" type="rootType"/>
           <xs:choice maxOccurs="unbounded">
             <xs:element name="selector" minOccurs="0"
               maxOccurs="unbounded">
               <xs:complexType>
                 <xs:complexContent>
                   <xs:extension base="selectorType">
                     <xs:sequence>
                       <xs:element name="region"/>
                     </xs:sequence>
                   </xs:extension>
                 </xs:complexContent>
               </xs:complexType>
             </xs:element>
             <xs:element name="region" minOccurs="0"
               maxOccurs="unbounded">
               <xs:complexType>
                 <xs:complexContent>
                   <xs:extension base="regionType"/>
                 </xs:complexContent>
               </xs:complexType>
             </xs:element>
           </xs:choice>
         </xs:sequence>
       </xs:choice>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 66]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


       <xs:attribute name="type" type="xs:string"
         use="required" fixed="text/msml-basic-layout"/>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:complexType name="regionType">
       <xs:attribute name="id" type="xs:string" use="required"/>
       <xs:attribute name="left" type="xs:positiveInteger"/>
       <xs:attribute name="top" type="xs:positiveInteger"/>
       <xs:attribute name="relativeSize">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="1/4"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="1/3"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="2/3"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="3/4"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="1"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="priority">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:float">
             <xs:minInclusive value="0"/>
             <xs:maxExclusive value="1"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="title" type="xs:string"/>
       <xs:attribute name="titleTextColor" type="xs:string"/>
       <xs:attribute name="titleBackgroundColor" type="xs:string"/>
       <xs:attribute name="borderColor" type="xs:string"/>
       <xs:attribute name="borderWidth" type="xs:positiveInteger"/>
       <xs:attribute name="logo" type="xs:anyURI"/>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:complexType name="selectorType">
       <xs:attribute name="id" type="xs:string" use="required"/>
       <xs:attribute name="method" use="required">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="vas"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="sequence"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="status" default="active">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="active"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="disabled"/>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 67]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="si" type="posDuration.datatype"
         default="1s"/>
       <xs:attribute name="blankothers" type="xs:boolean"
         default="false"/>
       <xs:attribute name="speakersees" default="current">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="current"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="previous"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:complexType name="rootType">
       <xs:attribute name="size" default="CIF">
         <xs:simpleType>
           <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
             <xs:enumeration value="16CIF"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="4CIF"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="CIF"/>
             <xs:enumeration value="QCIF"/>
           </xs:restriction>
         </xs:simpleType>
       </xs:attribute>
       <xs:attribute name="backgroundcolor" type="xs:string"
         default="black"/>
       <xs:attribute name="backgroundimage" type="xs:anyURI"/>
     </xs:complexType>
     <xs:attribute name="mark" type="mark.datatype"/>
   </xs:schema>

   Following is the schema which defines the basic datatypes used by the
   other schema.  Note that several regular expressions required them to
   be split across two lines for formatting reasons.


   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
      elementFormDefault="qualified"
         attributeFormDefault="unqualified">
      <xs:simpleType name="conferenceType.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:enumeration value="audio.basic"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="audio.advanced"/>
         </xs:restriction>



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 68]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlInstanceID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="connID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="confID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="operatorID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern
            value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)+"/>
            <xs:pattern
            value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="dialogID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern
            value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
            <xs:pattern
            value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="independentID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
            <xs:pattern value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="insertID.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern
            value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)*"/>
            <xs:pattern
            value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)*"/>
            <xs:pattern value="all"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="duplex.datatype">



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 69]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:enumeration value="half"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="full"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="confclass.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:enumeration value="standard"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="preferred"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="dialogLanguage.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:enumeration value="application/moml+xml"/>
            <xs:enumeration value="application/voicexml+xml"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEvent.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"/>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventName.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="msml.dialog.exit"/>
            <xs:pattern value="msml.conf.asn"/>
            <xs:pattern value="msml.dialog.exit"/>
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlTarget.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern
            value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+|\*)*"/>
            <xs:pattern
            value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+|\*)+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventSource.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/>
            <xs:pattern
            value="(conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+| \
            conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+)/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventNameValue.datatype">
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"/>
      </xs:simpleType>
      <xs:simpleType name="mark.datatype">



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 70]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


         <xs:restriction base="xs:string">
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/>
         </xs:restriction>
      </xs:simpleType>
   </xs:schema>














































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 71]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


14.  Acknowledgements

   Adnan Saleem and Yong Xin of Convedia, have provided key insights,
   both theoretic and through development experience.  Gilles Compienne
   and Ben Smith, both of Ubiquity Software, provided feedback on
   several versions of this draft.  Chris Boulton of Ubiquity, and
   Michael Rice of VocalData helped clarify several issues in the -00
   draft, while Bruce Walsh and Kevin Fitzgerald, both of Spectel,
   provided important feedback on that draft.  Peter Danielsen of Lucent
   has contributed thoughtful and detailed reviews for several versions
   of the draft.








































Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 72]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


15.  References

15.1  Normative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, C. and E. Maler,
        "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition)", W3C
        FirstEdition REC-xml-20001006, October 2000.

   [3]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August 1998.

   [4]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [5]  Donovan, S., "The SIP INFO Method", RFC 2976, October 2000.

   [6]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
        Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November
        1996.

   [7]  Bos, B., Lie, H., Lilley, C. and I. Jacobs, "Cascading Style
        Sheets, level 2 (CSS2) Specification", W3C REC
        REC-CSS2-19980512, May 1998.

15.2  Informative References

   [8]   Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R. and V. Jacobson,
         "RTP Profile for Audio and Video Conferences with Minimal
         Control", RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [9]   Ferrans, J., Hunt, A., Lucas, B., Porter, B., Rehor, K.,
         Tryphonas, S., McGlashan, S., Burnett, D., Carter, J. and P.
         Danielsen, "Voice Extensible Markup Language (VoiceXML) Version
         2.0", W3C REC REC-voicexml20-20040316, March 2004.

   [10]  Melanchuk, T. and G. Sharratt, "Media Objects Markup Language
         (MOML)", draft-melanchuk-sipping-moml-02 (work in progress),
         February 2004.

   [11]  Rosenberg, J., Peterson, J., Schulzrinne, H. and G. Camarillo,
         "Best Current Practices for Third Party Call Control (3pcc) in
         the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3725, April 2004.

   [12]  Van Dyke, J., Burger, E. and A. Spitzer, "Basic Network Media



Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 73]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


         Services with SIP", draft-burger-sipping-netann-09 (work in
         progress), March 2004.

   [13]  Ossenbruggen, J., Rutledge, L., Saccocio, B., Schmitz, P.,
         Kate, W., Ayars, J., Bulterman, D., Cohen, A., Day, K., Hodge,
         E., Hoschka, P., Hyche, E., Jourdan, M., Kubota, K., Lanphier,
         R., Laya»Øda, N., Michel, T. and D. Newman, "Synchronized
         Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL 2.0) Specification", W3C
         REC REC-smil20-20010807, August 2001.

   [14]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
         Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
         HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.


Authors' Addresses

   Tim Melanchuk
   Convedia
   4190 Still Creek Drive, Suite 300
   Vancouver, BC  V5C 6C6
   Canada

   Phone: +1 604 918 6401
   EMail: timm@convedia.com
   URI:   http://www.convedia.com/


   Garland Sharratt
   Convedia
   4190 Still Creek Drive, Suite 300
   Vancouver, BC  V5C 6C6
   Canada

   Phone: +1 604 918 6401
   EMail: gsharratt@convedia.com
   URI:   http://www.convedia.com/














Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 74]

Internet-Draft    Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)    February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Melanchuk & Sharratt    Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 75]


