Internet-Draft                       C. Tocci             
<draft-tocci-ip-over-atm-00.txt>     P. Conforto                                 
Expires: February 2001               G. Losquadro    
                                        Alenia Spazio         
                                              
                                                           
                                           

               
         ACCORD mobile multi-segment system: IP over ATM                                                                                        
          performance and QoS trial results evaluation                                                              
          

                                       
STATUS OF THIS DOCUMENT                                                                                       
          
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance                                    
with all provisions of section 10 of RFC 2026.                   
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering               
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that                      
other groups may also distribute working documents as                                                                      
Internet-Drafts.                                                                            
                                                                        
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six          
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other              
documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts       
as reference material or to cite them other than as                     
"work in progress".                                  
                                                                        
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at                  
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.                             
                                                                        
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at        
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.                                        
                                                                        
                                                                                                                                              
ABSTRACT                                                                
                                                                        
This document reports upon the ACCORD Trial activity which aims at      
investigating support of TCP/IP over mobile multi-segment system.
IP based applications and IP over ATM measurements have been 
executed in order to obtain significant information about 
intersegment service mobility.
                
                                       
1    Introduction 
                                                     
The ACCORD project, developed in the Advanced Communications
Technology and Services (ACTS) framework funded by the European
Union, is an integration project of four different Access Systems
and a Core Network, all coming from different ACTS projects: 
SECOMS (Broadband Satellite Access System), MEDIAN ATM (Broadband 
W-LAN Access System) SAMBA (Cellular W-ATM Access System)  and 
EXODUS (Enhanced-DECT Access System and Mobile Broadband Core 
Network).       

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 1]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000  
  
                                  
The main goal of the ACCORD project is to investigate and validate
the possibility to create a Global Mobile Broadband (GMB) 
communication system, consisting of multiple 
(satellite/terrestrial) system components (or segments), able to 
support a wide range of multimedia services (ATM native and IP 
oriented applications).          
The project has targeted its objectives through both a theoretical 
and experimental activities, aiming at designing a Target Network 
and executing field measurements on a trial platform, 
respectively.         
The scope of ACCORD Trial is to study and measure the 
multi-coverage terrestrial and satellite environment. To this end 
appropriate measurements, at various level (Physical, ATM, TCP/IP)
have been executed and the performance of the support of the ATM 
network to the TCP/IP applications in the ACCORD environment has 
been evaluated.        
                                                                        
                                                                        
2     Overall Trial Strategy definition                                 
                                                                        
Given that the ACCORD Trial aims at gathering as much as possible
significant information about the parameters involved in the 
InterSegment HandOver (ISHO) between a variety of radio 
terrestrial and  the satellite radio access networks, the maximum 
attention has been put on selecting combinations of coverage in  
which the satellite access is available. Therefore the selected  
trial scenarios are:                  
                                                                        
SECOMS/DECT trial which involves InterSegment HandOver (ISHO)/Dual 
Mode Terminal Roaming (DMTR) study in the context of transitions 
from Rural to Urban environment, from Outdoor to Dual coverage and 
from Broadband to Narrowband and, of course, viceversa;  
                         
SECOMS/SAMBA trial which involves ISHO/DMTR study in the context 
of transitions from Rural to Urban environment and from Broadband 
to Wideband;   
                                                            
DECT/MEDIAN trial which aims at collecting data to characterise
typical transient coverage situations in the context of indoor 
ISHO and transition from Narrowband to Wideband.                         
                                                                        
The DECT/MEDIAN trial has been selected instead of the                  
SECOMS/MEDIAN trial which, as there is not overlapping of indoor 
MEDIAN and satellite SECOMS coverage, does not provide significant
results. The SECOMS/MEDIAN trial can be obtained from the logical
combination of the SECOMS/DECT and DECT/MEDIAN trials relying on
the intermediate "bridge" coverage provided by DECT.
                                     
The three trials SECOMS/DECT, SECOMS/SAMBA and DECT/MEDIAN, 
consist in running two parallel connections with the simultaneous 
execution of TCP/IP measurements on both the radio access systems 
involved in the trial. 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 2]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000  
 
In both SECOMS/DECT and SECOMS/SAMBA trials 
the Dual Mode Terminal is in movement along 
a predefined path, chosen in such a way to provide characteristics 
ISHO and Dual Mode Terminal conditions. The goal is to take an 
adequate number of measurements in significant conditions and for 
validation purposes. In particular the measurements have been 
executed at low speed (pedestrian) since the environment where the 
measurement execution takes place is the near building area. 
This environment has been chosen because it is the more 
interesting as for the satellite/terrestrial complementary              
access networks.                                                                        
                                                                        
3     TCP/IP level measurement approach

The goal of the trial measurement campaign execution is to find 
out what applications could be provided over a mobile multi-access
system. With reference to the OSI protocol stack the point for 
measurement is on the User-Plane at application level. This is the
basic step to be done to identify the features of the applications
that can run over the system.
The followed approach foresees that the measurements are executed 
with a spatial and temporal correlation. The spatial correlation 
(measurements executed on same points/path) is intrinsically 
provided by the Dual Mode Terminal emulation (co-location of two 
mobile terminals) and the temporal correlation is guaranteed by 
executing the two access system measurements at same time. This 
approach not only studies what of the currently available 
applications can be used over a Multi-mode/Multi-access platform, 
but also allows to start considering applications specifically
designed for such platform. These applications are capable to run 
over multiple user-plane belonging to different networks and take 
full advantage as for user QoS both for bandwidth, mobility and 
cost. 

4     Measurement Tests executed over the ACCORD platform

In order to select a significant set of measurements to be done 
during the ACCORD trials and in order to set up and tune a number 
of tools to be used, preliminary tests, where only fixed systems 
are involved in communication chain and no radio access are 
included, have been executed.
The performance parameters selected for trial measurements are: 
Throughput and Round Trip Delay at TCP/UDP/ICMP level, the 
tools used are the netperf program and the ping program 
respectively.
                                                                                                       
5     SECOMS/DECT joint-trial execution

SECOMS/DECT Trial aims at validating a mobile environment scenario 
where an open area / urban area (near building) coverage is 
assured by a dual-mode access network consisting of the 
Broadband Satellite and of the DECT segments.  


Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 3]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000  

The equipment for the SECOMS/DECT Trial consists of a dual 
mode ACCORD Mobile Terminal (DECT and SECOMS), the corresponding 
Base Stations, the ACCORD Core Network (ATM switch) and two 
EXODUS Fixed Broadband Terminals (FBTs). The ACCORD Mobile 
Terminal consists of two co-located subsystems: a SECOMS 
Terminal and a DECT Portable Part. The Base Stations for 
SECOMS and DECT are connected via ATM to the ACCORD Core Network.
The SECOMS/DECT joint-trial execution mainly aims at evaluating 
the impact that different radio coverage environments have on 
ATM connection, IP and TCP/UDP connection throughput and 
transfer delay. The ACCORD mobile Terminal is mounted on 
a van and two simultaneous calls towards the two different 
EXODUS FBTs are established: one through the SECOMS access and 
the other one through the DECT access. 
The ATM switch is properly set in order to support two ATM 
permanent cross-connections both identified by the couple 
VPI/VCI=10/10 (as a required by the ATM card installed 
in the EXODUS FBT). The same IP applications run on the two 
connections. Once the two connections (one between the 
SECOMS Terminal and FBT1 and one between the DECT Portable 
Part and the FBT2) are set-up and the two applications 
started up, the van is moved along a predefined path 
which includes three different coverage areas: area A where the 
sole satellite coverage is available (outdoor out of buildings 
shadow area); area B where there is SECOMS/DECT coverage 
overlapping; area C where the sole DECT coverage is 
available. At each step data concerning TCP/IP are stored.
Tests to obtain throughput data at TCP/IP level are executed 
while the van is actually mobile. The first run 
(slow moving test) is done as slowly as possible and the 
second run (fast moving test) is performed 
at about 15 - 20 km/h. DECT worked well for both runs and we 
got a few results from SECOMS for the second run. Data as 
for DECT have been collected both at the Inter Working  
Unit (IWU) and at FBT in the Laboratory.


6     SECOMS/SAMBA joint-trial execution

SECOMS / SAMBA Trial aims at validating a mobile environment 
scenario where an open area / urban area (near and far building) 
coverage is assured by a dual-mode access network consisting of 
the Broadband Satellite and of the Digital Cellular W-ATM 
segments. The equipment for the SECOMS/SAMBA Trial consists of a 
dual mode ACCORD Mobile Terminal (SAMBA and SECOMS), the  
corresponding Base Stations, the ACCORD Core Network (ATM switch) 
and two EXODUS Fixed Broadband Terminals (FBTs). The ACCORD  
Mobile Terminal consists of two co-located subsystems: a SECOMS  
MBT (Mobile Broadband Terminal) and a SAMBA MBT. 
The Base Stations for SECOMS and SAMBA are connected via ATM to 
the ACCORD Core Network.
The dual-mode terminal consisting of both the SECOMS MBT and 
the SAMBA MBT is mounted on a van. The SECOMS MBT consists 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 4]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000  
  
of an EXODUS FBT (Fixed Broadband Terminal) interconnected 
to the SECOMS IWU connected to a CommQuest TDMA modem, model 
CQM-248A. The SAMBA MBT consists of an EXODUS FBT interconnected 
with the SAMBA MTA (Mobile Terminal Adapter).
The two EXODUS FBTs can be implemented either by 133 MHz PC's 
running Windows NT 4.0 Operating System (OS) and containing NTUA 
ATM card or by SUN workstations running UNIX OS and containing 
commercial ATM card.
Two simultaneous calls towards two different EXODUS FBTs 
(network side) are established: one through the SECOMS access 
and the other one through the SAMBA access. Once the two 
connections (one between the SECOMS MBT and FBT1 and the other
one between the SAMBA MBT and the FBT2) are set-up and the two 
IP-based applications started up, the van is moved along a 
predefined path . At each step data concerning TCP/IP 
are stored. The van circulates in a predetermined 
path were 3 different coverage areas are available: SAMBA only, 
SAMBA and SECOMS simultaneously, SECOMS only.



7     DECT/MEDIAN joint-trial execution

The DECT/MEDIAN trial considers the indoor nature of 
MEDIAN coverage and aims at testing it with the DECT 
indoor coverage. The trial layout consists of a MEDIAN 
Terminal, a DECT Portable Part, the corresponding Base 
Stations, the ACCORD Core Network (ATM switch) and two 
Fixed Terminals: a SUN Workstation running UNIX Operating 
System (OS), an EXODUS Fixed Broadband Terminal (FBT) running 
Windows NT 4.0 OS. The Base Stations for MEDIAN and DECT are 
connected via ATM to the ACCORD Core Network.        
One of the objective of this configuration is to evaluate 
the TCP throughputs of two simultaneous calls evolving in 
parallel on the two access systems.
Moreover, various test configurations have been used to 
characterise the performance of the MEDIAN demonstrator 
at TCP/IP level, both in stand-alone mode and in combination 
with EXODUS equipment. 
The comparison of the retrieved information with the 
information collected on the other access systems 
(especially for SECOMS) are very useful to investigate service 
mobility through different access segments.

The configuration used for MEDIAN (stand-alone) TCP/IP 
level testing includes two HP PCs which serve as 
User Terminals, a MEDIAN Portable Station, a MEDIAN Base Station, 
an ATM switch and an Internet Advisor inserted between the HP PC 
and the MEDIAN Portable Station. The MEDIAN Base Station is 
connected via ATM to the ATM switch. The PCs that serve as User 
Terminals are equipped with ForeRunner PCA-200E ATM adapter 
cards. The driver software for these cards allows the 
specification of Peak Cell Rates on a per-PVC basis. 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 5]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000
   
The operation of Internet protocols over ATM is enabled on the
basis of the 'Classical IP' approach (PVC's) as specified in 
RFC1577, using LLC/SNAP encapsulation of the IP packets as per 
RFC1483. The Internet Advisor is put in monitor mode, thus making 
it possible to inspect the bi-directional traffic flow at ATM and 
higher levels. 'Ping' and 'Netperf' were used as tools for 
TCP/IP level testing. Applications that were run over this 
configuration include a Web browser / Web server with video 
content, FTP and NetMeeting.

The MEDIAN/EXODUS test configuration consists of two SUN 
Workstations which serve as User Terminals, a MEDIAN Portable 
Station, a MEDIAN Base Station and a LightStream ATM switch. 
The MEDIAN Base Station is connected via ATM to the LightStream 
ATM switch. This configuration was used for TCP/IP level testing, 
using 'Ping' and 'Netperf' as test tools. The 'Netperf' version 
running on the SUN workstations made it possible to run UDP_STREAM 
tests as well as TCP_STREAM tests. (Using the MEDIAN  
configuration in stand-alone mode attempts to run UDP_STREAM tests 
only produced error messages, despite the fact that NetMeeting (UDP) 
worked). The overall transmit rate of the  
SUN workstations had to be reduced to 40 Mbit/s to prevent cell   
buffer overflows in the MEDIAN system.  



8     ATM Level Measurement execution for SECOMS, SAMBA and 
      MEDIAN Access Networks

In the framework of the ACCORD trial activity, besides to evaluate
the network performance at TCP/IP level, also ATM level 
measurements have been executed for satellite SECOMS, Digital 
Cellular W-ATM SAMBA and W-LAN MEDIAN access segments.
As matter of fact the above mentioned access networks can be seen 
as mobile (SECOMS and SAMBA) and portable (MEDIAN) wireless ATM 
networks which access an Internet core network.
In order to evaluate the ATM connectivity performance that each
access segment is able to provide a set of ATM performance 
parameters has been selected for trial measurements. These 
parameters are: Cell Transfer Delay (CTD), Cell Delay Variation
(CDV), Cell Loss Ratio (CLR), Cell Error Ratio (CER).
The performance evaluation at ATM level of the different access
networks includes the verification of the ACCORD network 
compliance with the ITU-T network performance objectives defined 
in the ITU-T Recommendation I.356. Therefore in the ACCORD trial 
activities only the ATM user information transfer performance 
parameters are measured, moreover no international backbone  
capabilities are taken into account. 

The SECOMS, SAMBA and MEDIAN test-bench configurations set to 
execute the ATM measurements have been implemented following the 
same approach: each test-bench configuration consists of the 
relevant access segment integrated with the ACCORD ATM switch 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 6]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000

which in turn is connected to a Protocol Analyzer (ATM 
Measurement Equipment) configured in the loop-back mode.  
The protocol analyzer performs the twofold task of generating
ATM traffic and analyzing the network performance.



9     IP over ATM performance and QoS trial results evaluation

On the basis of the measurements executed in the above described 
trials, ATM and TCP/IP over ATM performance in multi-segment 
application can be evaluated. Moreover both subjective and 
objective QoS evaluation can be derived.

As far as the DECT system is concerned the TCP Throughput 
measurements executed on the DECT access show that the actual 
rate available at TCP level is about 15 Kbps for single 
slot DECT available in the demonstrator. 
This is likely to be enough for signalling and control in 
the frame of Multi-access Multi-media network. Anyway limitation 
to single slot DECT was only for the demonstrator and the rate 
can be easily increased using Multi-slot DECT in the Target 
System. The available throughput over DECT is always quite 
good even with the terminal in motion. There can be anyway 
drop in the throughput and this implies that it has to foresee 
buffering and re-transmission in the data or signalling 
application to cope with instantaneous gaps in the throughput, 
and it has to limit the actual speed of the mobile.
The second issue is likely not to be a problem in the actual 
context of complementary terrestrial satellite coverage that 
is near building. Also the use of multi-slots could significantly 
improve the behaviour of DECT. Moreover the throughput of the 
DECT despite being low has a high availability also where no 
Line of Sight is present, this suggests the use of DECT as 
preferred application control channel in the design of 
multi-segment/multi-access specific applications.

As far as the SECOMS system is concerned the data gathered 
and processed show that the delay is a significant issue 
for satellite since it is higher than terrestrial links. 
The Round Trip Delay is not dependent on either the terminal 
position or the ICMP packet size, it is a constant delay of 
510-530 ms. This implies that ATM transport does not affect 
the delay figures. 
Also the same is for IP if we do not exceed the MTU size 
(here MTU size at IP level was 1500 bytes). Anyway the effect of 
IP fragmentation on Round Trip Delay is not very impressive 
(consider also that the path is run two times). As a hint on 
Target Network signalling this means that the signalling message 
used on satellite will suffer significant delay (impact on 
signalling state machine timers). The effect of satellite link 
delay actually sums up for each fragment but is not dramatic 
(that is ~ 10 msec over 520 msec that is 2%). It is estimated 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 7]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000

that also fragmentation in 2 or 3 fragment can be supported 
(packet size exceeding 2 times the MTU size).

The ATM level measurements executed for the SECOMS access 
segment show that the CTD parameter is 252 ms, the CDV is 
0.584 ms, the CLR is 2.41E-7, the CER is 1.3E-6.  

The measurements on SAMBA were targeted to have information 
for the case in which a complete access network inclusive of its 
own ATM switch interfaces with a Global Core Network supporting 
multi-segment mobility. The above allowed to study the impact 
of multi access radio when more than a network and operator 
is involved. This pointed out that problems can arise in ATM 
buffer management (ATM switches owned by different players). 
In turn this indicated that high level protocols need to have 
packet handling as TCP while datagram protocols as UDP do not 
behave well unless a fine tuning of all the resources on 
the transmission path is performed.

As for round trip delay the executed measurement clearly
show that for the SAMBA access segment the mobile terminal 
position and the ICMP packet size have significant impact on
round trip delay.  
The SAMBA round trip delay figures are all not exceeding 
250 ms (half of the average on SECOMS access); this implies 
that the delay impairment at SECOMS/SAMBA radio access change 
is foreseen to be a major requirement to be handled in design 
of both multi-segment/multi-access application as well as in 
design of target network signalling. The TCP throughput of 
SAMBA is good whenever good coverage is provided. 
The measurements show that the actual value for TCP throughput 
is 5 Mbps nevertheless when the radio condition worsened the 
actual average TCP throughput figure dropped to 2 Mbps.

The ATM level measurements executed for the SAMBA access 
segment show that the CTD parameter is 1.1 ms, the CDV is 
1.37 ms, the CLR is 1.32E-4, the CER is 1.95E-4.  


As far as the MEDIAN system is concerned the TCP Throughput 
measurements executed on the MEDIAN/EXODUS test configuration
show that the actual rate available at TCP level is about 30 
Mbps in downlink and 14 Mbps in uplink direction respectively.

The ATM level measurements executed for the MEDIAN access 
segment show that the CTD parameter is 1.4 ms, the CDV is 
1.7 ms, the CLR is 7.4E-6 and it includes also the errored 
cells. 

>From the obtained results of the ATM level measurements 
executed for broadband satellite, W-LAN and cellular W-ATM
access segments, it can be deduced that the network 
performances guaranteed by the satellite SECOMS 

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 8]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000

and W-LAN MEDIAN access segments are compliant with the 
ITU-T network performance objectives defining the 
QoS class 1 and class 2. This implies that a network
configuration for portable services obtained complementing 
the broadband satellite with the W-LAN segment, can 
support, on both access networks, services requiring QoS 
class 1 and 2. Service mobility between open and indoor
environment is therefore assured.  
On the contrary SAMBA access segment performances are not
compliant with the QoS class 1 and class 2 recommended 
figures. This implies that service mobility in a network
configuration for mobile services based on the broadband 
satellite and cellular W-ATM segment, is not guaranteed.
A possible reason of this situation can be found in the 
still prototypal nature of the SAMBA demonstrator and in the 
hostile atmospheric conditions at the moment of measurements.


The above described ACCORD trial execution and the relevant 
obtained results along with the ACCORD Target Network design 
represent a first step toward the definition 
and the implementation of an advanced network supporting 
mobile IP QoS sensitive services. 
The ACCORD project results will be further expanded in the 
framework of the IST SUITED project which aims at developing 
and demonstrating an Internet based multi-segment (satellite/
terrestrial) network for business class and mobile services.  

   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
10     References

[1]   Gianfranco Ferrari, Lino Moretti, Paolo Conforto, 
      Vincenzo Schena, Stefan Wolters, Steve Pitchers, 
      Eliseu Macedo, Manuel Dinis, Nikolas Georgantas, 
      "Trial Strategy Description", CEC Deliverable Number 
      AC348-IT-ITL-DS-DS-R-031. 

[2]   AC348 ACCORD Annual Project Review Report
      (Parts A1 and A2), November 1999.

[3]   ITU-T Recommendation series I.350, "B-ISDN ATM layer 
      cell transfer performance".

[4]   M. Laubach, "Classical IP and ARP over ATM",
      RFC 1577, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, January 1994.

[5]   J. Heinanen, "Multiprotocol Encapsulation over ATM
      Adaptation Layer 5", RFC 1483, Telecom Finland, 
      July 1993.

      
            

Expires: February 2001                                 [Page 9]  

Internet-Draft        IP over ATM                   August 2000

11    Contact

      Clementina Tocci
      Alenia Spazio  
      Via G. V. Bona, 85
      00156 - Roma

      Phone: +39/06/ 4151-275
      Fax:   +39/06/ 4151-297
      E-mail: c.tocci@rmmail.alespazio.it












































Expires: February 2001                                [Page 10]  

