


Diameter Maintenance and                               J. Korhonen (ed.)
Extensions (DIME)                                            TeliaSonera
Internet-Draft                                                  M. Jones
Intended status: Standards Track                     Bridgewater Systems
Expires: April 30, 2009                                        L. Morand
                                                             Orange Labs
                                                                 T. Tsou
                                                                  Huawei
                                                        October 27, 2008


   Diameter User-Name and Realm Based Request Routing Clarifications
                 draft-korhonen-dime-nai-routing-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This specification clarifies the Diameter realm based request
   routing.  We focus on the case where a Network Access Identifier in
   the User-Name AVP is used to populate the Destination-Realm AVP and



Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   the Network Access Identifier contains more than one realm.  This
   particular case is possible when the Network Access Identifier
   decoration is used to force a routing of request messages through a
   predefined list of realms.  However, this functionality is not
   unambiguously specified in the Diameter Base Protocol specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology and Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Solution Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Interpretation of Decorated NAIs . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Enhanced Request Routing Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Backwards Compatibility Considerations . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11



























Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


1.  Introduction

   This specification clarifies the Diameter realm based request routing
   defined in RFC 3588 [1].  We focus on the case where the Network
   Access Identifier (NAI) [2] in the User-Name AVP is used to populate
   the Destination-Realm AVP and the NAI contains more than one realm.
   This particular case is possible when the NAI decoration is used to
   force a routing of request messages through a predefined list of
   realms.

   According to the Diameter request routing processing rules in RFC
   3588, the request originator may populate the Destination-Realm AVP
   with the realm part of the NAI available in the User-Name AVP.
   Unfortunately, there is no unambiguous mandatory language in RFC 3588
   how Diameter agents participating to the request routing should
   update the Destination-Realm AVP at each realm.

   This specification presents both the issue regarding to the Diameter
   realm based request routing with NAI decoration and also a solution
   for the problem.  The solution would only apply to Diameter Base
   Protocol implementations that take the solution presented in this
   specification into account.  The solution, however, is fully
   backwards compatible with the RFC 3588 Diameter Base Protocol.


2.  Terminology and Abbreviations

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [3].

   Network Access Identifier (NAI):

      The Network Access Identifier (NAI) is the user identity submitted
      by the client during access authentication.  In roaming, the
      purpose of the NAI is to identify the user as well as to assist in
      the routing of the authentication request.

   Decorated NAI:

      A NAI specifying a source route.  See Section 2.7 of RFC 4282 for
      more information.

   Network Access Provider (NAP):

      A business entity that provides network access infrastructure to
      one or more realms.  A NAP infrastructure constitutes of one or
      more NASes.



Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   Network Access Server (NAS):

      The device that peers connect to in order to obtain access to the
      network.



3.  Problem Overview

   The Diameter Base Protocol RFC 3588 Section 6.1 defines the request
   routing in detail.  This specification concerns only those cases
   where a Destination-Realm AVP is included in a request message.  A
   Diameter peer originating a request message MAY retrieve the realm
   information from the User-Name AVP and use that realm to populate the
   Destination-Realm AVP.  The User-Name AVP is in form of a NAI (in
   this case a NAI with the realm part).  The realm based request
   routing, as described in RFC 3588, does not discuss how to handle
   Decorated NAIs.  The original NAI RFC 2486 [4] that RFC 3588
   references to, does not defined how to construct a NAI with multiple
   realms.  Since then RFC 2486 has been obsoleted by RFC 4282 which in
   turn defines how to construct Decorated NAIs.

   Decorated NAIs are used to force routing of messages through a
   predefined list of realms and in that way force certain inter-realm
   roaming arrangements, see Section 2.7. of RFC 4282 [2].  For example,
   a terminal (e.g., a mobile host) may learn based on some application
   or implementation specific manner that its network access
   authentication signaling must traverse through certain realms in
   order to reach the home realm.  In this case the terminal would
   decorate its NAI during the network access authentication with the
   list of intermediating realms and the home realm.  As a result, the
   network access server (NAS) and intermediating Diameter agents would
   make sure that all subsequent request messages traverse through the
   desired realms as long as the request messages contain the User-Name
   AVP with a Decorated NAI.

   NAI Decoration has previously been used, for example, in RADIUS [5]
   based roaming networks using RFC 2486 NAIs in a proprietary manner.
   There is a need to replicate the same NAI based routing enforcement
   functionality also in Diameter based roaming networks.  There are
   also publicly available specifications (e.g., see [6], [7] and [8])
   that assume NAI Decoration based request routing enforcement is fully
   supported by RFC 3588.  The same assumption is carried over to NASREQ
   [9] and EAP [10] Diameter applications.

   Figure 1 illustrates an example deployment scenario where Decorated
   NAIs would be used to force a certain route through desired realms.
   A roaming terminal (e.g., a mobile host) discovers a number of



Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   Network Access Providers (NAP): NAP A and NAP B. None of the NAPs are
   able to provide direct connectivity to roaming terminals home realm
   (i.e.  Realm-H).  However, the roaming terminal learns, somehow, that
   NAP B is able to provide connectivity to the Realm-H through the
   Realm-X (i.e. the visited realm from the roaming terminal point of
   view).  During the network access authentication, the roaming
   terminal would decorate its NAI as Realm-H!username@Realm-X.  The
   roaming terminal has also an alternative route to its home realm
   through NAP A, Realm-Z and Realm-X.  If the roaming terminal were to
   choose to use NAP A, then it would decorate its NAI as Realm-X!Realm-
   H!username@Realm-Z.  Diameter agents should now be able to route the
   request message through desired realms using the Decorated NAI
   originally found in the User-Name AVP.


         .--.                 .--.                   .--.
       _(.   `)             _(.   `)               _(.   `)
     _(Visited`)_         _(Visited`)_           _(  Home `)_
    (   Realm-Z  `)<---->(   Realm-X  `)<------>(   Realm-H  `)
   ( `  .       )  )    ( `  .       )  )      ( `  .       )  )
    `--(_______)--'      `--(_______)--'        `--(_______)--'
          |                 __ /
          |               /
         .--.          .--.
       _(    `.      _(    `.
      (  NAP A )    (  NAP B )
     ( `  .  )  )  ( `  .  )  )
      `--(___.-'    `--(___.-'
                     )
            (  (   )
              (  |
                 +-+
                 |M|
                 +-+

    Figure 1: Example roaming scenario with intermediating realms. The
      mobile host authenticates to the home realm through one or more
                              visited realms.

   NAI Decoration is not limited to the network access authentication
   and authorization procedures.  It can be used with any Diameter
   application whose commands are proxiable and include the User-Name
   AVP with a NAI.  Generally NAI Decoration can be used to force a
   certain route for all request messages at a realm granularity.

   As a problem summary we have two main issues:





Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   o  Updating both Destination-Realm and User-Name AVPs based on the
      Decorated NAI extracted from the User-Name AVP.  The update would
      be done by intermediating Diameter agents that participate to
      realm based request routing.  Specifically, this would concern
      Diameter proxies.

   o  How Diameter agents could implement the handling of the NAI
      Decoration based routing enforcement in a way that is still
      backwards compatible with RFC 3588.

   RFC 5113 [11] Section 2.3 also discusses NAI decoration related
   issues with EAP [12] in general.


4.  Solution Overview

   This specification defines a solution for Diameter realm based
   request routing with routing enforcement using the User-Name AVP NAI
   Decoration.  Diameter proxy agent implementations can claim
   compliance using the solution described in this specification.

4.1.  Interpretation of Decorated NAIs

   Implementations compliant to this specification MUST have an uniform
   way of interpreting decorated NAIs.  That is, in the case of
   decoration, the character '!' is used to separate realms in the list
   of decorated realms in the NAI (as shown in examples in [2]).

4.2.  Enhanced Request Routing Solution

   When a Diameter agent receives a request message containing a
   Destination-Realm AVP with a realm that the agent is configured to
   process locally (and in the case of proxies the Diameter application
   is locally supported), it MUST do the following further processing
   before handling the message locally:

   o  If the User-Name AVP is available in the request message, then the
      Diameter agent MUST inspect whether the User-Name AVP contains a
      Decorated NAI.  If the NAI is not decorated then the Diameter
      agent proceeds with a normal RFC 3588 message processing.

   o  If the User-Name AVP contains a Decorated NAI, then the Diameter
      agent MUST process the NAI as defined in RFC 4282 and update the
      value of the User-Name AVP accordingly.  Furthermore, the Diameter
      agent MUST update the Destination-Realm AVP to match the new realm
      in the User-Name AVP.





Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   o  The request message is then sent to the next hop using the normal
      request routing rules as defined in RFC 3588.

   Figure 2 illustrates an example of a roaming terminal originated
   signaling with the home realm (Realm-H) through a NAP and two
   intermediating realms (Realm-Z, Realm-X) before reaching the home
   realm (Realm-H).  The example shows how the User-Name AVP and the
   Destination-Realm AVP change at each realm before reaching the final
   destination.  If the signaling were originated from the NAS/NAP only,
   then the step 1) can be omitted.


   1) Roaming Terminal -> NAS/NAP
          Identity/NAI = realm-X!realm-H!username@realm-Z

   2) NAS/NAP -> Realm-Z
          User-Name = realm-X!realm-H!username@realm-Z
          Destination-Realm = realm-Z

   3) Realm-Z -> realm-X
          User-Name = realm-H!username@realm-X
          Destination-Realm = realm-X

   4) Realm-X -> Realm-H
          User-Name = username@realm-H
          Destination-Realm = realm-H

     Figure 2: The roaming terminal decides that the Diameter messages
             must be routed via Realm-Z, Realm- X and Realm-H.

4.3.  Backwards Compatibility Considerations

   Obviously, the functionality described in Section 4.2 cannot be
   guaranteed to work with the existing implementations of RFC 3588 or
   any other strictly RFC 3588 compliant existing application (such as
   NASREQ and EAP).  An incompliant implementation would automatically
   fall back to the normal RFC 3588 request routing behavior that,
   unfortunately, cannot offer desired enhanced request routing
   functionality.  Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that the solution
   defined in this specification is only applied to newly specified
   Diameter applications.  A Diameter agent MAY implement the solution
   defined in this specification also for the existing application.  A
   Diameter client SHOULD NOT assume the functionality described in
   Section 4.2 from Diameter applications that do not comply with this
   specification.






Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


5.  IANA Considerations

   This specification has no actions to IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   A malicious node initiating (or indirectly causing initiation of)
   Diameter request may purposely create malformed list of realms in the
   NAI.  This may cause the routing of requests through realms that
   would normally have nothing to do with the initiated Diameter message
   exchange.  Furthermore, a malformed list of realms may contain non-
   existing realms causing the routing of Diameter messages that cannot
   ultimately be routed anywhere.  However, the request message might
   get routed several hops before such non-existent realms are
   discovered and thus creating unnecessary overhead to the routing
   system in general.

   The NAI decoration is used in AAA infrastructures where the Diameter
   messages are transported between the NAS and the Diameter server via
   one or more AAA brokers or Diameter proxies.  In this case the NAS to
   the Diameter server AAA communication rely on the security properties
   of the intermediate AAA brokers and Diameter proxies.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Victor Fajardo and Stefan Winter for
   their comments on this draft.

   Jouni Korhonen would like to thank TEKES WISEciti project for
   providing funding to work on this document.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J. Arkko,
         "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

   [2]   Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The Network
         Access Identifier", RFC 4282, December 2005.

   [3]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.





Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


8.2.  Informative References

   [4]   Aboba, B. and M. Beadles, "The Network Access Identifier",
         RFC 2486, January 1999.

   [5]   Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson, "Remote
         Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2865,
         June 2000.

   [6]   3GPP, "3GPP system to Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
         interworking; System description", 3GPP TS 23.234 6.10.0,
         October 2006.

   [7]   3GPP, "3GPP system to Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
         interworking; WLAN User Equipment (WLAN UE) to network
         protocols; Stage 3", 3GPP TS 24.234 6.7.0, October 2006.

   [8]   3GPP, "Numbering, addressing and identification", 3GPP
         TS 23.003 3.15.0, October 2006.

   [9]   Calhoun, P., Zorn, G., Spence, D., and D. Mitton, "Diameter
         Network Access Server Application", RFC 4005, August 2005.

   [10]  Eronen, P., Hiller, T., and G. Zorn, "Diameter Extensible
         Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application", RFC 4072,
         August 2005.

   [11]  Arkko, J., Aboba, B., Korhonen, J., and F. Bari, "Network
         Discovery and Selection Problem", RFC 5113, January 2008.

   [12]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
         Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
         RFC 3748, June 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Jouni Korhonen
   TeliaSonera

   Email: jouni.nospam@gmail.com










Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


   Mark Jones
   Bridgewater Systems
   303 Terry Fox Drive
   Ottawa,  Ontario  K2K 3J1
   Canada

   Email: Mark.Jones@bridgewatersystems.com


   Lionel Morand
   Orange Labs
   38-40 rue du general Leclerc
   Issy-moulineaux Cedex 9,  92794
   France

   Email: Lionel.morand@orange-ftgroup.com


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei
   R&D Center, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Bantian,  Shenzhen
   P.R. China

   Email: tena@huawei.com


























Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Diameter Realm Based Routing          October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Korhonen (ed.), et al.   Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 11]

