Internet Draft                                    K. Rosenbrock
15 November 2000                                 3GPP PCG Chair
Expires: May 2001                                   R. Sanmugam
                                                       Ericsson
                                                     S. Bradner
                                             Harvard University                                                                                                            
                                                     J. Klensin
                                                          AT&T 
		   3GPP-IETF Standardization Collaboration
		       draft-3gpp-collaboration-00.txt



Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].
This memo provides information for the Internet community. Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
 Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Abstract

This document describes the standardization collaboration between 
3GPP and IETF.  



2. Conventions used in this document

This document uses significant terminology that is specialized to IETF,
3GPP, or their areas of work.  See appendix A for definitions of
acronyms. The organizational definitions can be found in their
respective web-sites.


3. Introduction

This document contains a set of principles and guidelines that serves
as the basis for establishing the collaboration between 3GPP and IETF,
with the objective of securing timely development of technical
specification that facilitate maximum interoperability with existing
(fixed and mobile) Internet systems, devices, and protocols.


Each organization will operate according to their own rules and
procedures including rules governing IPR policy, specification
elaboration, approval and maintenance.

4. Reasons For Collaboration

4.1 3GPP use of IETF Internet Standards

In the further development of 3GPP specifications, the benefit of 
adopting Internet specifications has been identified.

The preferred 3GPP approach is to use the Internet standards unchanged,
if feasible. In any case, 3GPP has no intention to duplicate work
performed in IETF.

However, while this document recognizes the importance of 3GPP
interoperability with the existing Internet and hence the use of IETF
standards, 3GPP recognizes that additions or modifications might be
needed in order to make the IETF internet specification fulfil the
needs of 3GPP.  4.2 IETF access to 3GPP Wireless expertise

The technical work in 3GPP is organized in Technical Specification
Groups TSGs each with their area of responsibilities. TSG-RAN and
TSG-GERAN are responsible for the Radio Access networks based on UTRAN
and GERAN and thus the experts in the areas of the characteristics of
the physical transport. TSG CN is responsible for the Mobility
Management and other core network protocol and functionalities. TSG-T
is responsible for Terminal aspects and applications. TSG-SA is
responsible for the service and system aspects including the overall
architecture, security and O&M aspects. Contacts for the TSGs can be
found on the 3GPP web-site www.3gpp.org.

5. Document Sharing

Both 3GPP and IETF encourage the sharing of draft documents that are of
mutual interest.

3GPP documents are available on its official web-site
(http://WWW.3GPP.ORG/) and is open to anyone. IETF documents, including
preliminary working documents ("Internet Drafts") are available on its
web-site (http://www.ietf.org/ and various shadow sites.

IETF representatives can obtain information about the 3GPP document and
web-site structures by contacting the relevant 3GPP contact points
indicated at the 3GPP web-site www.3gpp.org.

3GPP representatives can obtain information about the IETF document and
web-site structures by contacting the relevant IETF contact points ?
the Area Directors indicated at the IETF web- site www.ietf.org .

6. Communication
	
Whenever possible, informal communication at working level is
encouraged.  The vast majority of the technical discussions and
decision making in both IETF and 3GPP is done over mailing lists. Both
3GPP and IETF web sites contain information concerning the associated
mailing lists.

It is recommended that interested individuals subscribe to and
participate in these lists.


When deemed necessary, formal communication between 3GPP and IETF is
also permitted.  Relevant IETF Area Directors and 3GPP technical
leadership are encouraged and authorized to facilitate such
communications when needed.



7. Rapporteurs/coordinators

7.1 IETF coordination support in 3GPP

An IETF rapporteur function is established in 3GPP TSG-SA.

The individual(s) appointed to undertake the responsibility of this
function should be the initial contact point in 3GPP for matters
pertaining to the 3GPP-IETF cooperation. Of course, the chairman of
TSG-SA can always be contacted.

The 3GPP-IETF rapporteur function, therefore, is expected to work with
the concerned working groups and TSGs and support the interaction
between 3GPP and IETF.



7.2 3GPP Liaison in IETF

The preferred way for organizations to work with IETF is through the
working groups. However, IETF has a limited number of liaison
relationships with other organizations when conditions warrant the
appointment of a specific person.

The appointment of a specific person in IESG to function as a "3GPP
liaison" is proposed.


The role of the 3GPP Liaison is to act as an initial contact point in
IETF for administrative aspects of this collaboration that cannot
easily be handled in other ways (e.g., at a technical
level by interactions with IETF Working Groups or Area Directors). It
is agreed that the role does not carry the expectation of attendance at
3GPP meetings or participation in 3GPP administrative processes and
anticipated that all liaison efforts assigned to this individual will
be carried out by electronic mail.  It is understood that the liaison
will not have the ability to make exceptions to, or special provisions
for, IETF policies and procedures.

8. Participation

In order to assist the information flow between the organizations, IETF
can on per case basis appoint a rapporteur to participate and represent
IETF at 3GPP technical meetings.

IETF meetings are open to any interested individuals.

3GPP partners (OPs, MRPs) or individual members can participate in any
of the IETF meetings, in accordance with the existing IETF procedures.

9. Security Considerations
   This type of non-protocol document does not directly affect the security
of the Internet.
10. References

[1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


11. Authors' Addresses

Karl Heinz Rosenbrock
ETSI
06921 Sophia Antipolis
CEDEX			Phone: +33 492 94 4212
France			Email: rosenbrock@etsi.fr






Appendix A:  Acronyms

Glossary Of Acronyms:

3GPP		Third Generation Partnership Project
BCP		Best Current Practice
IAB		Internet Architecture Board
IESG		Internet Engineering Steering Group
IETF		Internet Engineering Task Force
IPR		Intellectual Property rights
MRP		Market Representation Partner
OP		Organizational Partner
O&M		Operation and Maintenance
PCG		Project coordination Group
RFC		Request for Comments

TSG		Technical Specification Group
TSG-SA	TSG Services and systems aspects
TSG-CN	TSG Core Network
TSG-RAN	TSG Radio Access Network
TSG-GERAN	TSG GSM Radio Access Network
TSG-T	TSG Terminals
UTRAN	Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network
WWW		World Wide Web
