Network Working Group                                        S. Schubert
Internet-Draft                                                    sip101
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 15, 2006
Expires: April 18, 2007


           Requirements for Header Integrity Protection for 
                the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
          draft-schubert-sipping-header-integrity-reqs-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document lays out a set of requirements related to integrity
   protection over the headers for the Session Initiation Protocol
   (SIP).  While mechanism such as SIP-Identity and S/MIME may be used
   to provide integrity protection between the end-points, it can not
   provide integrity protections over some of the headers which may
   benefit from having an integrity protection.





Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for Header            October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Possible Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   7.  Normative Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 6








































Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for Header            October 2006


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119[1].


2.  Introduction

   This document explores requirements of the Session Initiation
   Protocol (SIP) [2] for enabling integrity protection over the SIP
   headers.  This effort stems from the recent specifications that are
   looking into using the SIP header as a way to reference a resource
   which may be located outside of the requestor's domain(e.g. location
   conveyance).  Any other information placed in the SIP headers used
   for routing but is desirably protected for its integrity end-to-end
   may benefit from this specification as well.

   SIP-Identity[3] can be used to provide integrity protection over the
   message body and some of the headers but it can not selectively
   choose the headers to be protected.  S/MIME can alos be used to
   provide integrity protection over the body and with the use of
   SIPfrag can even provide protection over the selected headers, but
   due to its complexity and lack of deployments it is not likely to be
   a solution anytime soon.

   This document lays out a set of requirements for providing integrity
   protection over selected headers and provides a quick overview of the
   solution in mind.


3.  Requirements

   Followings are some of the numbers describing the SIPPING WG.

   Req 1:   The mechanism MUST support a way to provide an integrity
            protection over the SIP headers in SIP requests.
   Req 2:   The mechanism MUST allow SIP UACs to indicate to an
            authentication service those SIP headers that need to be
            protected for its integrity.  The mechanism SHOULD also
            provide a way for SIP intermediaries to recognize that an
            integrity protection will be needed, and either forward
            requests to an authentication service themselves or notify
            the UAC of the need to do so.







Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for Header            October 2006


   Req 3:   The mechanism MUST allow SIP UACs to indicate to an
            authenticatino service whether it desires integrity
            protection or not.
   Req 4:   Authenticatino services MUST have a way to authenticate SIP
            UAC.
   Req 5:   Intermediaries and UAS MUST have a way to verify the
            integrity of the SIP headers that are indicated protected.
   Req 6:   The mechanism MUST have a single baseline mandatory-to-
            include-headers/message-body-part to make sure it covers
            enough information that the assertin cannot be replayed.
   Req 7:   It MUST be possible for a UAS or proxy server to reject a
            request that does not verify in its verification process and
            inform the sending UAC that it must resend the request or
            send it without the integrity protection.
   Req 8:   he recipient of a request MUST be able to ascertain which
            authentication service and domain provided the integrity
            protection.


4.  Possible Solution

   The idea is to do sip-identity over the headers which UAC desires
   integrity protection.

   1:   UAC would indicate the headers to be protected in a new header
        which lists the target headers to be protected and forward the
        message to an authentication service.
   2:   The authentication service authenticates the UAC and generates a
        signature over the target headers indicated in the new SIP
        header and other mandatory-to-incude message parts.
   3:   The authentication service inserts the signature in yet another
        new SIP header and includes identity-info header with the
        location of certificate used to generate a signature.
   4:   The UAS or proxy receiving the message would verify the
        signature as it would with SIP-Identity, with an exception of
        its need to look up the new header for the headers to include in
        its computation of signature for verification.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


6.  IANA Considerations

   There is no IANA Considerations.




Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for Header            October 2006


7.  Normative Reference

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Peterson, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Jennings, C. and J. Peterson, "Enhancements for Authenticated
        Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
        RFC 4474, Aug 2006.


Author's Address

   Shida Schubert
   SIP101
   1094 15 Ave W
   Vancouver, BC  V6H 1R6
   Canada

   Phone: +1 604 762 5606
   Email: shida@sip101.net
   URI:   http://www.sip101.net/


























Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for Header            October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Schubert                 Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 6]


