Internet Engineering Task Force                     Olivier Bonaventure
INTERNET DRAFT                                              Steve Uhlig
                                                          Bruno Quoitin
                                                                    UCL
                                                             July, 2004


            The case for more versatile BGP Route Reflectors
            <draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt>


Status of this Memo




   By submitting this Internet-Draft, we certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which we are aware of have been
   disclosed, and any of which we become aware will be disclosed, in
   accordance with RFC 3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2004.


Copyright Notice


     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract




     The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is the standard interdomain
   routing protocol in the Internet. Inside an Autonomous System (AS),
   the interdomain routes are often distributed by using BGP Route
   Reflectors (RR). Today, most RR are simple BGP routers. We show that
   by adding intelligence to the RR, it is possible to improve both the




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 1]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   routing and the packet forwarding in ASes. We show how a versatile RR
   can help an AS to engineer the flow of its incoming or outgoing
   interdomain traffic. We also discuss how a versatile RR could help to
   reduce the BGP convergence time or reduce the size of the routing
   tables when  providing BGP/MPLS VPN services.


 1  Introduction




     The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [1] is used today by more than
   16.000 Autonomous Systems (AS) to exchange their interdomain routes.
   The stability and performance of BGP are key factors for the
   stability and performance of the global Internet. Although BGP
   suffers from a low convergence in case of failure and some BGP
   routers tend to transmit too many routing messages,  recent studies
   have shown that BGP routing is stable [2, 3], at least when
   considering the routes towards destinations receiving lots of
   packets.  BGP is also used inside many ISPs to distribute several
   other types of information such as BGP/MPLS VPN routes  [4] or flow
   specifications [5].
     When used for interdomain routing, BGP relies on two types of
   sessions that are established over TCP connections. Two BGP routers
   from different  domains connected with a physical link will use an
   eBGP session to  exchange their interdomain routes. The interdomain
   routes received by the  border routers of an AS need to be propagated
   through the AS. This is usually done by relying on iBGP sessions. The
   initial BGP specification  assumed that a full-mesh of iBGP sessions
   would be established inside each AS to distribute the interdomain
   routes. A consequence of this full-mesh  of iBGP sessions is that a
   BGP router will not distribute over an iBGP session a route received
   over another iBGP session. However, this full-mesh quickly appeared
   unscalable since an AS with N routers needs to support N Ú (N-1)/2
   iBGP sessions.
     Two solutions have been proposed to solve this scaling problem.
   With the confederation approach, each AS is divided into smaller sub-
   ASes containing each about a few tens of routers. Inside each sub-AS,
   a full mesh of iBGP sessions are established between the routers of
   the sub-AS and special eBGP sessions are used between routers of
   different sub-ASes. A second approach, which, based on discussions
   with ISP operators, appears to be more often used by large ASes, is
   to rely on BGP Route Reflectors (RR)  [6]. A RR is a special BGP
   router which is allowed to redistribute over iBGP sessions routes
   that it has received over some iBGP sessions.  A RR has two types of
   iBGP peers : its client-peers and its non-client peers. The non-
   client peers are usually other RR. A RR will receive routes from all
   its iBGP peers and will use its BGP decision process and its IGP
   table to determine the best routes to reach each destination. If the




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 2]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   best route was received on an iBGP session  with a client peer, it
   will be advertised to all the iBGP peers. On the other hand, if the
   route  was received from a non-client peer it will only be advertised
   to client-peers.
     The number of RRs in an IP network is much smaller than the number
   of routers [7].  A network with several tens of routers would
   typically have one (or two for redundancy reasons) RR.  Larger
   networks with several hundred of routers in various countries may use
   up to a few tens of RRs connected in a full mesh or with a RR
   hierarchy.
     Discussions with ISPs indicate that there are three ways to deploy
   RR.  The first solution is to place the RR function on existing
   backbone routers.  In this case, the router needs to have enough CPU
   and memory capabilities to support the RR function while handling its
   normal load.  Another approach is to use a  dedicated router that
   does not forward IP packets but is equipped with a good CPU and large
   memory. Finally, smaller ASes sometimes rely on PCs or workstations
   running open-source RRs.
     In most deployments of RRs today, the goal is often to minimise the
   CPU load on the RR. RRs are often only considered as a way to solve
   the iBGP distribution problem. In this paper, we assume that the RR
   service is provided by a carrier-class workstation or a cluster of
   workstations where the CPU and the memory are not as limited as on
   current routers.
     We show in this article that by correctly exploiting the knowledge
   of the RR, it is possible to provide new services both inside and
   between ASes. We discuss several examples that could each lead to
   entire papers on the topic. We show in section 2  that a more
   intelligent RR could avoid the forwarding loops that may occur with a
   badly placed current RR. Then, in section 3 we show how a versatile
   RR could allow a transit AS to efficiently engineer  its interdomain
   traffic. Finally, in section 4, we discuss the role that versatile
   RRs could play in ASes using MPLS to support VPN services or
   interdomain LSPs.


2  Limitations of current RR



     The currently deployed RRs advertise their own best route to each
   of their client peers. This allows the RR to compute a single best
   route, but this creates several problems. The first problem is that
   routing and even forwarding loops can occur when RR are used. Several
   of those problems have been described in the literature [8] and
   reported in real networks [9].
     As an example, consider the topology shown in Figure 1 based on
   [8].  The arrows show the BGP sessions.  The IGP weight of each
   physical link is also shown. In this network, RX and RY advertise the
   prefix P. The two RRs prefer  the route learned via eBGP and




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 3]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   advertise it to their client. If R1 receives a packet destined to P,
   its BGP table forces it to send it to RR1. However, the IGP topology
   will cause the packet to be sent to R2. R2's BGP table forces it to
   send the packet to RR2, but to reach this nexthop, R2 will send the
   packet via R1 ...



                 <See PostScript version of this document>
         Figure 1: Simple network topology with a forwarding loop



     Extensions to BGP [10]  have been proposed to solve this problem,
   but they are not implemented and deployed. The current solution is to
   apply guidelines when designing iBGP topologies  [11, 12, 7]. Those
   guidelines impose restrictions on the graph of the iBGP sessions.
   Those restrictions depend on the IGP topology and the location of the
   RR.  In practice, the IGP topology changes frequently as links or
   routers fail or are added to the network or when traffic engineering
   tools are used to engineer the intradomain traffic by setting the IGP
   weights [13].  Ensuring that the guidelines are preserved after each
   IGP change is not an easy task.
     If the CPU of the RR is not a severe bottleneck, a solution to
   avoid the  routing and forwarding loops induced by RRs would be to
   change the behaviour of the RR. Instead of computing its own best
   route which is then distributed to all its clients, a RR could
   compute the best route that would be computed by each client if it
   had the same BGP table as the RR. Since one step of the BGP decision
   process uses the IGP distance between the router and the nexthop
   contained in each BGP route, the RR would need to know the IGP
   distance between each of its clients and each BGP nexthop. This
   information can be obtained by computing the  IGP table of each
   client or by defining a new protocol to allow a client to report this
   information to its RR [14].  If the RR recomputes the IGP tables of
   its clients, they need to be updated after each IGP change.  Several
   algorithms [15]  have been proposed to incrementally update the
   routing table of a router after a topology change. There are also
   incremental versions of the  all-pairs shortest paths algorithms
   [16].  Based on those algorithms, it should be possible to build
   incremental algorithms to determine the  BGP updates to be sent to
   the clients of a RR after a BGP or an IGP change.
     Another issue with RR is the convergence time in case of failure.
   Consider again the network topology shown in Figure 1. Assume that
   the bottom AS is a provider advertising prefix P at both RX and RY.
   Assume that the forwarding loop problem mentioned above has been
   solved by forcing each RR to compute the best route for each client.
   In this case, R1 sends its packet to P via RR2. If the link RR2-RY
   fails, RR2 would withdraw its route to P on its iBGP session with
   RR1. RR1 would then send a new route to R1. If instead of one prefix




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 4]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   we consider that 100,000 routes used by R1 pass via RR2. Then, when
   the RR2-RY eBGP session fails, RR2 needs to withdraw 100,000 routes
   on the RR2-RR1 iBGP session. RR1 would then need to update the
   100,000 routes on the RR1-R1 iBGP session. This could take several
   seconds or more depending on the performance of the RR. If instead a
   full-mesh of iBGP sessions was used in this network, R1 would have
   received all the eBGP routes learned by RR2 and RR1. When the failure
   of link RR2-RY is reported by the IGP, R1 could consider all the
   routes via RR2 as unreachable and could switch to the routes learned
   from RR1. In large ISPs with a hierarchy of RRs,  the impact of the
   RRs on the BGP convergence time may be even larger.
     With today's stringent SLAs, there is a clear need to reduce the
   convergence time in case of failures. A versatile RR could help to
   reduce it by advertising several routes to its clients. Knowing the
   IGP table of each of its clients, the RR can easily determine the
   best BGP route, but also the second route  that it would select if
   the first become unreachable. By using the BGP extensions proposed in
   [10], the RR could advertise the best and the second route to each
   client. This would ensure that the client can quickly switch to a new
   route when the primary one becomes unreachable.  This solution could
   probably be even more useful in networks providing RFC2547 BGP/MPLS
   VPN services given their tight SLA constraints.


3  RR-assisted traffic engineering


     Another important problem in the global Internet is the need to
   perform traffic engineering. Several solutions to engineer the flow
   of the IP packets in the network are used. Some tune the intradomain
   traffic by setting of the IGP weights [13] or establishing MPLS LSPs
   [17]. Another problem is to engineer the flow of the inter-domain
   traffic. As mentioned in  [17], ``inter-domain  Internet traffic
   engineering is crucial to the performance  enhancement of the global
   Internet infrastructure.'' However, inter-domain traffic engineering
   today often relies on tweaking the configurations of the routers
   [18, 19] and is often more an art than science.


 3.1  Reference environment



     To perform traffic engineering, a RR needs two types of
   information.  Traffic statistics constitute the first type of
   information.  For intradomain traffic engineering, those statistics
   are collected as POP-POP or router-router traffic matrices. For
   interdomain traffic engineering purposes, more precise statistics are
   required at the granularity of the BGP routes. However, in practice,
   accurate statistics for each route are not required [20]. Studies of
   the traffic characteristics in different networks [18, 19] have shown
   that a small number of prefixes are responsible for most of the




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 5]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   traffic. We assume in this paper that per-BGP route volume statistics
   are maintained by the border routers and sent to the RR for those
   heavy prefixes.
     The second type of information required to engineer the flow of the
   interdomain traffic are the routing tables of the border routers. A
   RR is ideally placed to obtain this information since it already
   collects the BGP routes and participates in the IGP.
     Figure 2 provides the typical network environment for RR-based
   traffic engineering. At regular time intervals or when some routing
   change occur, the RR computes  the best route that each ingress BGP
   router should use to reach a particular destination prefix outside
   the AS.


                 <See PostScript version of this document>
        Figure 2: Typical configuration of traffic engineering RR.


     When considering interdomain traffic engineering, we need to
   distinguish between the control of the outbound traffic and the
   control of the inbound traffic.


 3.2  Outbound interdomain traffic engineering



     Let us first consider the case of a stub AS that needs to engineer
   its
    outgoing traffic to a few transit providers. In principle, this
   engineering is simple since the network operator can define filters
   on all its border routers to prefer some upstream provider for some
   prefixes. However, the size of the BGP routing tables (more than
   140.000 routes today) make the search of the ideal configuration
   difficult [21].
    Furthermore, the traffic pattern changes regularly [3]  and thus a
   perfect configuration at time t may become inconvenient at time t+1.
   In [22, 23], we have shown that by using intelligent route
   reflectors, it is possible to engineer the flow of the outbound
   interdomain traffic even when the traffic patterns changes with time.
     The principles of the solution described in [22, 23] can be
   summarised as follows. First, the RR collects traffic statistics
   regularly as explained above. Second, the RR receives all the routes
   from the stub's providers. This can be obtained by establishing
   multi-hop eBGP sessions between the RR and the border router of each
   provider. Another solution is the BGP extension proposed in [10] to
   force the stub's border routers to advertise all their routes and not
   only their best routes. To control the flow of the outgoing traffic,
   the RR simply has to control the iBGP advertisements that it sends to
   the stub's border routers.
     Based on this routing and traffic information, the RR regularly
   runs an  evolutionary algorithm. This algorithm can be configured




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 6]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   with different  objective functions such as balancing the traffic
   among providers, reducing the total cost based on the billing used,
   .... To fulfil the objective  function, the evolutionary algorithm
   will select from time to time, a few prefixes to be moved from one
   provider to another. We have shown in [23] that load balancing was
   possible with only a few iBGP messages per minute, an iBGP load much
   lower than the normal load of BGP messages in the global Internet.
     The RR-based traffic engineering method described above is also
   applicable for transit ASes. A more detailed description of this
   approach may be found in [24, 25].


     In a stub AS, changing iBGP advertisements is possible since the
   impact of those advertisements is limited to the stub AS. In a
   transit AS such as GEANT, an iBGP change can lead sometimes to eBGP
   changes that could force peers to change  their best BGP route.  To
   prevent the BGP route changes to generate instabilities in the rest
   of the  Internet, aggregation could be used by the local AS so that
   changes  in the egress point within the AS do not impact customer
   ASes.  Figure 3 illustrates the use of aggregation to  prevent
   frequent BGP route changes that do not impact the actual path
   followed  by IP packets for the ASes upstream from the flow of the
   traffic. Suppose  that the route reflector RR decides to change the
   egress point to reach the  external prefix A.B.C.D/Y, from egress E1
   to egress E2 for ingress  point I1. Under normal conditions, whenever
   ingress I1 changes its best BGP  route to reach prefix A.B.C.D/Y, it
   requires that a new  BGP route be advertised by I1 to the external
   BGP peers. To prevent I1 to  have to advertise a new BGP route every
   time the best egress point to be  used by I1 changes, I1 could
   advertise to its upstream customers an  aggregated AS path. This AS
   path would contain the set of ASes present in the two BGP routes
   that could be used by I1 to reach the destination prefix A.B.C.D/Y,
   as illustrated by Figure 3. In practice, the RR does not need to
   aggregate the AS-Paths of all the possible routes to a destination,
   only the routes that it could select with its modified decision
   process. Often, the best routes for a given destination will be
   learned from the same peer over different peering sessions. In this
   case, the aggregation is trivial since all the routes have the same
   AS-Path.


                 <See PostScript version of this document>
                   Figure 3: AS path aggregation by RR.



     The solution described above could be extended to larger transit
   ASes that contain more than one (pair of) RR. This would require the
   definition of protocols that allow RR to exchange routing information
   and traffic statistics and coordination mechanism between the RRs.
   For instance, one could choose that each RR is responsible for the




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 7]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   ingress routers it has an iBGP session with. Each RR would then
   compute the best route for its ingress routers towards each
   destination prefix and send them to these ingress routers. For this
   solution  to be scalable in terms of the BGP advertisements, each RR
   would advertise to  all other RR's of the domain aggregated AS paths.


 3.3  Inbound Interdomain Traffic Engineering



     Engineering a domain's incoming traffic with BGP is a difficult
   task [19, 26, 18]. Indeed engineering the incoming traffic of one
   domain requires the ability to influence how distant domains will
   select the route that they use to send packets towards the domain.
   Different techniques exist: announcing more specific prefixes, making
   selective announcements, prepending the AS-Path and using
   redistribution communities [19] [27]. However, these methods suffer
   from several drawbacks. The first two methods increase the size of
   the BGP routing tables of all routers. AS-Path prepending, while
   being a widely used method,  is known to be coarse and unpredictable.
   Finally, the redistribution communities are difficult to setup due to
   the combinatorial explosion of possibilities and the inaccurate view
   of the topology and policies one has from a single domain's point of
   view [27].
     In this section, we show that a more deterministic approach to
   engineering the flow of the incoming traffic is possible. Our method
   relies on a cooperation between the source and destination domains
   and results in the establishment of interdomain tunnels.  A
   destination domain willing to control how it is reached by a source
   domain requests the source to establish a tunnel to one of its border
   router. The tunnel is then used by the source to forward the packets
   destined to the destination domain. In this way, the packets sent by
   the given source enter the destination's network through the desired
   access link.
     To explain our approach, let us consider the example  topology
   shown in Figure 4. AS1 is a stub that wants to control how it is
   reached by source AS2. On the figure, we can see that there exists
   multiple interdomain paths between AS2 and AS1. With the normal BGP,
   the packets from AS2 reach AS1 via router RD1.


                 <See PostScript version of this document>
                    Figure 4: Inbound TE using tunnels.



     Assume that to reduce the delay or balance its incoming traffic,
   AS1 wishes to receive the packets sent by AS2 via ProviderB and thus
   router RD2.  For this, AS1 will request AS2 to establish a tunnel
   with destination RD2 to reach all its prefixes.  For this, we propose
   that a route-reflector RD1 inside AS1 establishes  an eBGP session




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 8]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   with a route-reflector, RS3, in the source domain AS2.  This multihop
   eBGP session could be established manually as in the case of  peering
   links or more dynamically. To allow a dynamic establishment of those
   sessions, AS2 must advertise the address of its route-reflector that
   needs to be contacted. This address can be encoded as an extended
   community value attached to the route(s) advertised by AS2.  To avoid
   security issues, the multi-hop eBGP session  should be established
   over an IPSec tunnel that provides authentication,  data integrity
   and anti-replay. Moreover, BGP extensions such as  S-BGP [28] or
   soBGP [29] should be used to check the validity of the prefixes
   advertised by RD1.
     The destination domain will typically advertise its own prefixes
   over the multi-hop eBGP session and the source domain will not
   advertise any prefix. Each BGP advertisement will also contain a
   flexible community value [30] indicating the tunnel endpoint in the
   destination domain (RD2 in our example), the type of tunnel to be
   used (L2TP, GRE, ...) and possible tunnel parameters such as cookies
   or identifiers. Instead of using flexible communities,  another
   possibility would be to use MP_BGP and to carry tunnel related
   information in the MP_REACH_NLRI and a tunnel-SAFI as proposed in
   [31]. By using as tunnel end-point the IP address of RD2 on the link
   with ProviderB in figure 4, the destination domain can control the
   ingress link over which the packets will arrive provided that this
   address is advertised by ProviderB.
     When RS3 has received the route towards the network of AS1 over the
   multi-hop eBGP session, it will select which router(s) will establish
   the  requested tunnel(s) towards the tunnel end-point. It must also
   update the routes that it distributes with iBGP inside AS2 to ensure
   that the packets  towards AS1 will be forwarded to the tunnel head-
   end in AS2.  Prior to establishing one tunnel towards AS1, RS3 needs
   to check that the tunnel end-point is reachable by verifying that it
   has received at least one BGP route to reach it. Depending on the
   connectivity of AS2, RS3 may  choose to establish one or several
   tunnels to reach the endpoint. Since RS3 is a route-reflector, it has
   the most complete knowledge of the available routes towards the
   tunnel endpoint.  RS3 will typically select AS2's best egress router
   to reach the endpoint as the head-end of the tunnel. Note that the
   selection may depend on other criteria such as the availability of
   special hardware to perform the required encapsulation on the
   routers. In order to ask a client to establish a tunnel towards RD2,
   RS3 sends to this client an iBGP update containing the tunnel
   attributes. Upon reception of this update, the client establishes the
   tunnel. Once the tunnel is up and running, it updates its routing
   table and sends  iBGP advertisements to announce the new route in
   AS2.
     In the case of a stub source domain, the above procedure will only
   cause iBGP changes. On the contrary, if the source domain is a
   transit AS, the new routes using the tunnel could be advertised




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                       [Page 9]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   outside the domain.  In this case, the BGP updates that are
   advertised outside the source domain AS2 should have an AS-Path that
   is composed first of AS2 itself, followed by the AS-Path of the route
   followed by the tunnel and finally, the destination domain AS1. Using
   such a path is necessary to allow BGP to continue to detect loops by
   using the AS-Path attribute.  Indeed, without this AS-Path, a transit
   domain ASX could select AS2 has its next-hop to reach AS1 while the
   tunnel used by AS2 passes through ASX. The traffic would then pass
   twice through the same domain which would be a waste of ressources.
     IP tunnels such as GRE or L2TP have been often been criticised
   because of the cost of encapsulating/decapsulating packets and the
   risk of fragmentation. The first problem is not anymore an issue
   since several vendors offer interfaces supporting
   encapsulation/decapsulation at line rate. With Packet over SONET/SDH
   links, the MTU is less a problem given the available frame size.
   Furthermore PathMTU discovery is used by almost all endsystems
   today/widely deployed and used. Compared to other proposals such as
   [26], the solution described above can be used without deploying new
   protocols in the transit domains. For example, universities or
   research networks could use it to control high-bandwidth flows.



4  Route Reflectors and MPLS



     Many large ISPs are currently using MPLS to provide BGP/MPLS VPN
   services to their corporate customers [4]. Today, those services are
   often provided within a single AS. Three types of routers are usually
   distinguished in a network providing BGP/MPLS VPN services. A CE
   router is a router owned and maintained by a customer. A PE router is
   a router maintained by the network provider and directly attached to
   a CE router.  A PE router will usually learn the routes reachable via
   each of its attached CE routers through a special IGP or BGP session
   [4]. To isolate all the different VPNs, a  PE router will maintain
   one VPN Routing and Forwarding table (VRF) for each supported VPN.
   BGP is used by the PE routers to distribute the content of their VRF
   to other PE that are attached to the same VPN customers. The
   forwarding of VPN packets from one PE to another relies on the
   utilisation of MPLS, GRE or IPSec tunnels. Thanks to the utilisation
   of those tunnels, the core routers, also called P routers, do not
   need to maintain per-VPN VRFs. Since BGP is used to distribute the
   VPN routes inside the network, RR are often used to scale the iBGP
   full-mesh between the PE routers.
     Thanks to the routeviews and RIPE RIS projects, the behaviour of
   BGP in the global Internet has received a lot of attention and BGP is
   better known than a few years ago. Despite of that, few studies have
   analysed BGP/MPLS VPNs. A recent study [32] revealed that  the
   behaviour of BGP is very different when considering VPN services than




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 10]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   when considering the global Internet.
     A first difference is the size of the routing tables. In the global
   Internet, few routes are more specific than /24 and the BGP routes
   are very stable. In the BGP/MPLS network analysed in [32], the
   situation is completely different. First, the BGP/MPLS routing table
   is already larger than the Internet BGP routing table and is growing
   quickly.  Second, the BGP/MPLS VPN routing table contains much more
   specific prefixes than the BGP Internet routing table. Figure 5,
   based on  [32] compares the percentage of routes for the most common
   prefix lengths.  This figure shows that 55% of the Internet routes
   are for /24 prefixes and other common prefix sizes are /16 to  /23.
   In the BGP/MPLS VPN routing tables,  38% of the routes have a /32
   IPv4 prefix as destination and 9% correspond to a /30 prefix.  A
   first consequence of those specific routes  is that in the network
   studied in [32],  the BGP/MPLS VPN routing table in the RR is already
   larger than the BGP  Internet routing table and the BGP/MPLS routing
   table. Another consequence is that the BGP/MPLS VPN routes are less
   stable and the BGP messages are much more frequent in the BGP/MPLS
   network [32].


                 <See PostScript version of this document>
   Figure 5: Prefix distribution in the BGP Internet and BGP/MPLS VPN
                              routing tables



     The size of the BGP/MPLS routing tables will force operators to
   utilise route aggregation mechanisms for the BGP/MPLS VPNs. The
   default BGP aggregation [1] is able to aggregate routes for
   contiguous prefixes coming from different ASes in a single
   advertisement.  This technique could be applied by the customers on
   the CE routers. However, a CE router could only aggregate its local
   routes. A versatile RR, receiving VPN routes from several PE routers
   could  perform a better aggregation by considering all the routes
   inside each VPN.  Given the volatility of some BGP/MPLS routes, the
   RR would need to be able to change an aggregate dynamically after an
   event in a customer network.
     The next step for the BGP/MPLS VPNs is to provide those services
   across  different ASes. Several solutions are proposed in [4].  One
   of the possible solutions is to directly interconnect the RR of
   different ASes with a  multi-hop eBGP session to distribute the
   inter-provider VPN routes. In this case, the RR should clearly
   aggregate the VPN routes that it sends over the multi-hop eBGP
   session.
     Another problem with BGP/MPLS VPNs is that important VPN sites are
   often  attached to two different PE routers. This dual attachment is
   often required for redundancy, but once the two links are
   established, customers often require to be able to use them for both
   inbound and outbound traffic. For the packets sent by the CE router




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 11]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



   to the network provider, this depends only on the customer network.
   For the packets sent by the VPN provider towards the CE router, the
   ability to load-balance the traffic between the two PE routers
   depends on the configuration of PE routers of the VPN provider. A
   possible solution is to use per-site route distinguishers [4] to
   ensure that each  PE receives all the advertisements from all the PE
   routers attached to the same VPN. However, this increases the size of
   the BGP/MPLS routing tables. A versatile route reflector could be
   configured to advertise a single route when scalability is important
   and several routes, for example by using the BGP extensions proposed
   in [10], for the VPNs sites where load-balancing must be achieved.
     Another situation where RR could play a role in MPLS networks is
   when interdomain LSPs [33] need to be established with RSVP-TE. To
   establish a LSP with RSVP-TE, the head-end Label Switching Router
   (LSR) computes an explicit route. In a single IGP area, this
   computation relies on the topology distributed by the IGP. Across
   interdomain boundaries, this computation becomes more difficult since
   BGP distributes reachability and not topological information. For a
   primary LSP, the head-end LSR could use the route distributed by BGP.
   For a disjoint secondary LSP, this becomes more difficult as the
   head-end usually only receive the best BGP route to each destination.
   A RR that collects all the candidate routes learned via BGP could
   select among those routes to find a disjoint route for the secondary
   LSP.


5  Conclusion



     BGP Route Reflectors were designed to solve the scaling problem of
   the iBGP full-mesh. For this, the RR collects the best routes from
   all its clients. Instead of only serving as a distributor of iBGP
   advertisements,  we have shown that by exploiting the routing
   knowledge of the RR it is possible to improve the routing in ASes.
     We have then shown several situations where versatile RR could be
   used to support very useful services in Autonomous Systems. One of
   those situations is the need to engineer the flow of the outgoing
   interdomain traffic of a stub or transit AS.  Another situation
   occurs when an AS wishes to control the flow of its incoming traffic.
   Besides those traffic engineering usages, versatile RR could also be
   used to reduce the convergence time in case of failure or the size of
   the BGP/MPLS routing tables.


Acknowledgements


     This work was supported by the DGTRE in the framework of the TOTEM
   project ( http://totem.info.ucl.ac.be). We would like to thank
   Nicolas Dubois for the data used in figure 5.





Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 12]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



References



    [1]  Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, ``A Border Gateway Protocol 4
      (BGP-4),''  April 2003, internet draft, draft-ietf-idr-
   bgp4-20.txt,
      work in progress.


    [2]  J. Rexford, J. Wang, Z. Xiao, and Y. Zhang, ``Bgp routing
      stability of popular  destinations,'' in Proc. Internet
   Measurement
      Workshop, November 2002.


    [3]  S. Uhlig, V. Magnin, O. Bonaventure, C. Rapier, and L. Deri,
      ``Implications of  the topological properties of internet traffic
   on
      traffic engineering,'' in  ACM Symposium on Applied Computing,
   March
      2004.


    [4]  E. Rosen and Y. Rekhter, ``BGP/MPLS IP VPNs,'' September 2003,
      internet  draft, draft-ietf-l3vpn-rfc2547bis-01.txt, work in
      progress.


    [5]  P. Marques, N. Sheth, R. Raszuk, J. Mauch, and D. McPherson,
      ``Dissemination  of flow specification rules,'' June 2003,
   internet
      draft,  draft-marques-idr-flow-spec-00.txt, work in progress.


    [6]  T. Bates, R. Chandra, and E. Chen, ``BGP route reflection - an
      alternative to  full mesh iBGP,'' April 2000, internet RFC 2796.


    [7]  B. Halabi, Internet Routing Architectures.1em plus 0.5em minus
      0.4emCisco Press, 1997.


    [8]  T. Griffin and G. Wilfong, ``Analysis of the MED oscillation
      problem in  BGP,'' in ICNP2002, 2002.


    [9]  D. McPherson, V. Gill, D. Walton, and A. Retana, ``BGP
   persistent
      route  oscillation condition,'' 2002, internet draft,
      draft-ietf-idr-route-oscillation-01.txt, work in progress.


    [10]  D. Walton, D. Cook, A. Retana, and J. Scudder, ``Advertisement
   of
      Multiple  Paths in BGP,'' November 2002, internet draft,
      draft-walton-bgp-add-paths-01.txt, work in progress.





Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 13]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



    [11]  T. Griffin and G. Wilfong, ``On the correctnes of iBGP
      configuration,'' in  SIGCOMM'02, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, August 2002,
      pp. 17--29.


    [12]  L. Xiao, J. Wang, and K. Nahrstedt, ``Reliability-aware IBGP
      Route Reflection  Topology Design,'' in 11th IEEE International
      Conference on Network  Protocols (ICNP 2003), Atlanta, Georgia,
   USA,
      November 2003.


    [13]  B. Fortz, J. Rexford, and M. Thorup, ``Traffic engineering
   with
      traditional  IP routing protocols,'' IEEE Communications Magazine,
      October 2002.


    [14]  R. Musunuri and J. Cobb, ``A complete solution to stable
   iBGP,''
      in  IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2004.


    [15]  C. Alaettinoglu, V. Jacobson, and H. Yu, ``Towards millisecond
      IGP  congergence,'' November 2000, internet draft,
      draft-alaettinoglu-ISIS-convergence-00.ps, wor k in progress.


    [16]  C. Demetrescu and G. F. Italiano, ``A New Approach to Dynamic
   All
       Pairs Shortest Paths,'' in Proceedings of the 35th ACM symposium
   on
      Theory of computing (STOC'03), June 2003, pp. 159--166.


    [17]  D. Awduche, A. Chiu, A. Elwalid, I. Widjaja, and X. Xiao,
      ``Overview and  principles of internet traffic engineering,'' May
      2002, rFC 3272.


    [18]  N. Feamster, J. Borkenhagen, and J. Rexford, ``Guidelines for
      interdomain  traffic engineering,'' SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
      vol. 33, no. 5,  pp. 19--30, 2003.


    [19]  B. Quoitin, S. Uhlig, C. Pelsser, L. Swinnen, and O.
   Bonaventure,
      ``Interdomain  traffic engineering with BGP,'' IEEE Communications
      Magazine, May  2003.


    [20]  S. Leinen, ``Evaluation of candidate protocols for IP flow
      information ex  port (IPFIX),'' January 2004, internet draft,
      draft-leinen-ipfix-eval-contrib-02, work in pr ogress.


    [21]  T. Ye and S. Kalyanaraman, ``A recursive random search
   algorithm




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 14]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



      for  large-scale network parameter configuration,'' in Proc. of
   ACM
      SIGMETRICS, 2003.


    [22]  S. Uhlig, O. Bonaventure, and B. Quoitin, ``Interdomain
   Traffic
      Engineering  with minimal BGP Configurations,'' in Proc. of the
   18^th
       International Teletraffic Congress, Berlin, September 2003.


    [23]  S. Uhlig, ``Implications of the traffic characteristics on
      interdomain tra ffic  engineering,'' Ph.D. dissertation, Computer
      Science and Engineering  Department, Unive rsit‰ catholique de
      Louvain, March 2004.


    [24]  ------, ``A multiple-objectives evolutionary perspective to
      interdomain traffic  engineering in the internet,'' in Workshop on
      Nature Inspired  Approaches to Networks and Telecommunications
      (NIANT) in PPSN04, Birmingham,  UK, September 2004.


    [25]  S. Uhlig and B. Quoitin, ``BGP-based interdomain traffic
      engineering for  transit ASes.''


    [26]  S. Agarwal, C. Chuah, and R. Katz, ``OPCA: Robust Interdomain
      Policy  Rrouting and Traffic Control,'' in Proceedings of the 6th
      International Conference on Open Architecture and Network
      Programming, IEEE  OpenArch, April 2003.


    [27]  B. Quoitin, S. Tandel, S. Uhlig, and O. Bonaventure,
      ``Interdomain Traffic  Engineering with Redistribution
   Communities,''
      Computer  Communications, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 355--363, March
   2004.


    [28]  S. Kent, C. Lynn, and K. Seo, ``Secure Border Gateway Protocol
      (S-BGP),'' IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,  vol.
      18, no. 4, pp. 582--592, April 2000.


    [29]  R. White, ``Securing BGP Through Secure Origin BGP,'' The
      Internet Protocol Journal, vol. 6, pp. 15--22, June 2003.


    [30]  A. Lange, ``Flexible BGP Communities,'' March 2004, internet
      draft,  draft-lange-flexible-communities-02, work in progress.


    [31]  G. Nalawade, R. Kapoor, and D. Tappan, ``Tunnel SAFI,''
   October
      2003,  internet Draft, draft-nalawade-kapoor-tunnel-safi-01, work
   in




Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 15]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



      progress.


    [32]  M. Nicolas, ``BGP/MPLS VPN monitoring for troubleshooting,
      scalability  verification and network migration safety,'' February
      2004, presentation at  MPLS2004 , Paris (France).


    [33]  R. Zhang and J. Vasseur, ``MPLS Inter-AS traffic engineering
      requirements,''  November 2003, internet draft,
      draft-ietf-tewg-interas-mpls-te-req-02.txt,  work in progress.



Authors' addresses



     Olivier Bonaventure, Steve Uhlig, Bruno Quoitin
     Dept. Computing Science and Engineering
     Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL)
     Place Sainte-Barbe 2
     B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve
     Belgium
     http://www.info.ucl.ac.be/people/OBO































Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 16]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



Intellectual Property Statement



     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has  made
   any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information  on the
   procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be  found in BCP
   78 and BCP 79.
     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this  specification
   can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary  rights
   that may cover technology that may be required to implement  this
   standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity




     This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement




     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2004.


Acknowledgment






Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 17]
draft-bonaventure-bgp-route-reflectors-00.txt    July 2004



     Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

















































Bonaventure/Uhlig/Quoitin                                      [Page 18] 