

IPO WG                                                    O. Aboul-Magd 
Internet Draft                                                 M. Mayer 
Document: draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt                   D. Benjamin 
Category: Informational                                     B. Jamoussi 
                                                            L. Prattico 
                                                                S. Shew 
                                                        Nortel Networks 
                                                                        
                                                         February, 2001 
 
 
 Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON) Architecture and Its Related 
                               Protocols  
 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This draft describes an architecture for intelligent optical 
   networks. This architecture is called the automatic switched optical 
   networks (ASON). ASON is a client-server architecture with well-
   defined interfaces that allows clients to request services from the 
   optical network (server). ASON architecture and its generic 
   automatic switched transport networks (ASTN) has been an active 
   study area both at T1X1 and ITU [2]. 
    
   The protocols that run over ASON interfaces are not specified in 
   [2]. The emerging of IP-based protocols, e.g. generalized MPLS [3], 
   for the control of the optical layer makes it possible for the ASON 
   architecture to benefit from the protocols design work that has been 
   progressing at the IETF. 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         1 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 
    
    
3. Introduction 
    
   The existing transport networks provide SONET/SDH and WDM services 
   whose connections are provisioned via network management protocols. 
   This process is both slow (weeks to months) relative to the 
   switching speed and costly to the network providers. 
    
   An automatic switched optical network (ASON) is an optical/transport 
   network that has dynamic connection capability. It encompasses 
   SONET/SDH, wavelength, and potentially fiber connection services in 
   both OEO and all-opical networks. There are a number of added values 
   related to such a capability: 
    
   - Traffic engineering of optical channels: Where bandwidth 
     assignment is based on actual demand patterns. 
    
   - Mesh network topologies and restoration: Mesh network topologies 
     can in general be engineered for better utilization for a given 
     demand matrix. Ring topologies might not be as efficient due to 
     the asymmetry of traffic patterns. 
    
   - Managed bandwidth to core IP network connectivity: A switched 
     optical network can provide bandwidth and connectivity to an IP 
     network in a dynamic manner compared to the relatively static 
     service available today. 
    
   - Introduction of new optical services: The availability of switched 
     optical networks will facilitate the introduction of new services 
     at the optical layer. Those services include bandwidth on demand 
     and optical virtual private networks (OVPN). 
    
   This draft describes the ASON architecture. ASON and its generic 
   ASTN has been a topic of active discussion both at the T1X1 and ITU. 
   The draft focuses on ASON control plane, its requirements, and 
   related protocols. 
    
    
4. ASON Architecture: An Overview 
    
   The ASON network architecture is shown in Figure 1. In this Figure 
   all the components that can form part of ASON are shown. The 
   architecture shown is intended to allow switching of optical network 
   connections within the optical transport network under control of 
   ASON signaling network.  
    
   There are three separate planes involved in the network: 
    
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         2 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
   - A transport plane (TP) 
   - A control plane (CP) 
   - A management plane (MP) 
    
       +--------------------------+    +--------------+       
       |   ASON Control Plane     |    |              | 
       |                          |    |              | 
   UNI |  +------+ I-NNI +------+ E-NNI|    +------+  |    +------+ 
   ------>| OCC  |-------| OCC  |-|----|----| OCC  |  | NMI|      | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +------+  |<-->|      | 
       |     ^              ^     |    |      ^       |    |      | 
       +-----|--------------|-----+    +------|-------+    |      | 
             | CCI          |                 |            |      | 
       +-----|--------------|-----+    +------|-------+    |      | 
       |     v              v     |    |      v       |    |      | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +-----+   |<-->|      | 
       |  | OXC  |       | OXC  | | PI |    | OXC |   | NMI+------+ 
       |  |      |-------|      |-----------|     |   | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +-----+   |    Management 
       | Transport Plane          |    |              |       Plane 
       +--------------------------+    +--------------+ 
    
   OCC = Optical Network Controller        UNI = User Network Interface 
   CCI = Connection Control Interface      OXC = Optical Cross Connect 
   I-NNI = Internal Node to Node Interface 
   E-NNI = External Node to Node Interface 
   NMI = Network Management Interface 
   PI = Physical Interface 
    
     Figure 1: Automatic Switching Optical Network (ASON) Architecture 
                                      
   The transport plane contains the transport network elements 
   (switches and links) that carry the entity that is switched, i.e. 
   optical connections. End-to-end connections are setup within the 
   transport plane under the control of the ASON control plane (CP). 
   This draft is concerned with the CP part of the ASON architecture. 
   Both the TP and MP are out of the scope of this draft. 
    
   ASON architecture belongs to client-server models or the overlay 
   network models as defined in [5]. The salient feature of this model 
   is the existence of well-recognized boundaries between client 
   networks and provider domains. Client/provider separation is a 
   direct recognition of today's networking realities where ownership 
   of layer 3 and layer 1 equipment belongs to different organizations. 
   This client/provider domain separation entails the running of 
   different routing instants at each domain. Thus there is no need to 
   share topology information between carriers and their clients. 
    
5. ASON Control Plane: General Requirements 
    
   A well-designed control plane architecture should give service 
   providers better control of their network, while providing faster 
   and improved accuracy of circuit set-up. The control plane itself 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         3 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
   should be reliable, scalable, and efficient.  It should also be 
   sufficiently generic to support different technologies and differing 
   business needs and different partitions of functions by vendors 
   (i.e., different packaging of the control plane components).  In 
   summary, the control plane architecture should:  
    
   - Be applicable to a variety of transport network technologies 
     (e.g., SONET/SDH, OTN, PXC).  In order to achieve this goal, it is 
     essential that the architecture isolate technology dependent 
     aspects from technology independent aspects, and address them 
     separately. 
    
   - Be sufficiently flexible to accommodate a range of different 
     network scenarios. This goal may be achieved by partitioning the 
     control plane into distinct components. This, allows vendors and 
     service providers to decide the location of these components, and 
     also allows the service provider to decide the security and policy 
     control of these components.  
    
   The ASON control plane can be divided into several components, 
   namely, resource discovery, state information dissemination, path 
   selection and path management components. These orthogonal 
   functional components work together to complement each other and 
   form an overall architecture. This approach is intended to avoid 
   inappropriate focus upon certain functional components of the 
   architecture, to the inadvertent exclusion of others, that could 
   result in unnecessary dependencies and non-optimal solutions. The 
   basic modules are described below. 
    
5.1 Resource Discovery 
    
   Resource discovery is defined as the transaction that establishes 
   the adjacencies of the port-pairs. Its basic function is address 
   discovery, service discovery, data path connectivity discovery, 
   verification, and management.   The role of the resource discovery 
   module is to establish a complete map of physical connectivity 
   including attributes, remote identifiers, and real-time status. The 
   control procedure of this component could be generic, yet, its 
   contents could be technology specific. 
    
5.2 State Information Dissemination 
    
   State information dissemination is defined as the manner in which 
   local physical resource information is disseminated throughout the 
   network.  First, the local physical resource map is summarized into 
   logical link information according to link attributes.  This 
   information can then be distributed through the network piggybacked 
   onto the control plane transport network IGP (Interior Gateway 
   Protocol). 
    
5.3 Path Selection 
    

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         4 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
   Transport network routing procedures typically utilize explicit 
   routing, where path selection can be done either by operator, 
   software scheduling tools in management systems.  In a switched 
   optical network, end-to-end optical channel connections are 
   requested with certain constraints. Path selection for a connection 
   request should employ constrained routing based algorithms that 
   balance multiple objectives. 
    
5.4 Path Management 
    
   Path management mainly deals with path operations such as connection 
   setup, modification, deletion, query, auto-rerouting, and protection 
   switching/restoration.  Control messages could be conveyed through 
   suitable signaling protocols.  
    
   Network topology information is typically only provided on a link 
   (and typically not at a link-connection) basis. Link connections are 
   not advertised in the topology dissemination component due to 
   drawbacks with respect to lack of scalability.  Therefore, the 
   result of a path selection algorithm is also only at the link level. 
   This implies that the local intelligence in the NE must decide upon 
   the actual link connection that is used for that path.  
    
6. ASON Control Plane: Interfaces and Protocols 
    
   The ASON CP as shown in Figure 1 defines a set of interfaces: 
    
   - User-Network Interface (UNI): UNI runs between the optical client 
     and the network.  
    
   - Internal Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI): I-NNI defines the 
     interface between the signaling network elements, i.e. OCC within 
     the switched optical network. 
    
   - External Node-to-Node Interface (E-NNI): E-NNI defines the 
     interface between ASON control planes in different administration 
     domains. 
    
   - Connection Control Interface (CCI): The CCI defines the interface 
     between ASON signaling element, i.e. OCC and the transport network 
     element, i.e. the cross connect. 
    
   The different ASON interfaces are described in the next few 
   sections. Candidate protocols for use at the different interfaces 
   are also discussed. 
    
6.1 ASON User-Network Interface 
    
   ASON UNI allows ASON client to perform a number of functions 
   including: 
    
   - Connection Create: Allows the clients to signal to the network to 
     create a new connection with specified attributes. Those 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         5 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
     attributes might include bandwidth, protection, restoration, and 
     diversity. 
    
   - Connection Delete: Allows ASON clients to signal to the network 
     the need to delete an already existing connection. 
    
   - Connection Modify: Allows ASON clients to signal to the network 
     the need to modify one or more attribute for an already existing 
     connection. 
    
   - Status Enquiry: Allows ASON clients to enquire the status of an 
     already existing connection. 
    
   Other functions that might be performed at the ASON UNI are, client 
   registration, address resolution, neighbor and service discovery. 
   Those functions could be automated or manually configured between 
   the network and its clients. 
    
   Client registration and address resolution are tightly coupled to 
   the optical network address scheme. Requirements for optical network 
   addresses and client names are outlined in [6]. In general the 
   client name (or identification) domain and optical address domain 
   are decoupled. The client id should be globally unique to allow for 
   the establishment of end-to-end connections that encompass multiple 
   administration domains. For security, it is required that the nodal 
   addresses used for routing within an optical domain do not cross 
   network boundaries. The notion of closed user groups should also be 
   included in ASON addressing to allow for the offering of OVPN 
   services. 
    
   Address registration and resolution usually involves some kind of a 
   directory service. The client uses the registration process to 
   register his identification with the provider network for a 
   particular user group or groups. Address resolution involves the 
   process of translating client names to network addresses. Address 
   resolution can be performed at clients, edge network element, or at 
   every administrative boundary entry. It could involves 
   authentication and policy look up to make sure that a client has the 
   necessary credentials to join a user group. 
    
   ASON UNI realization requires the implementation of a signaling 
   protocol with sufficient capabilities to satisfy UNI functions. Both 
   LDP [7] and RSVP-TE [8] have been extended to be used the signaling 
   protocol across the ASON UNI. The extensions involve the definition 
   of the necessary TLVs or objects to be used for signaling connection 
   attributes specific to the optical layer. New messages are also 
   defined to allow for connection status enquiry. The Optical 
   Internetworking Forum (OIF) has adopted both protocols in its UNI 
   1.0 specifications [9]. 
    
6.2 ASON Internal Node-to-Node Interface 
    

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         6 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
   The I-NNI defines the interface between adjacent optical connection 
   controls (OCC) in the same network. There are two main aspects of I-
   NNI. Those are signaling and routing. 
    
    
   (Reword) 
   Path selection and setup through the optical network requires a 
   signaling protocol. Transport networks typically utilize explicit 
   routing, where path selection can be done either by operator or 
   software scheduling tools in management systems. IN ASON, end-to-end 
   optical channels (connections) are requested with certain 
   constraints. Path selection for a connection request should employ 
   constrained routing algorithms that balance multiple objectives: 
    
   - Conform to constraints such as physical diversity, etc. 
    
   - Load balancing of network traffic to achieve the best utilization 
     of network resources. 
    
   - Follow policy decisions on routing such as preferred routes. 
    
   To facilitate the automation of the optical connection setup, nodes 
   in the optical network must have an updated view of its adjacencies 
   and of the utilization levels at the various links of the network. 
   This updated view is sometime referred to as state information. 
    
   State information dissemination is defined as the manner in which 
   local physical resource information is disseminated throughout the 
   network. First the local physical resource map is summarized into 
   logical link information according to link attributes. This 
   information can then be distributed to the different nodes in the 
   network using the control plane transport network IGP.  
    
   ASON I-NNI could be based on two key protocols, IP and MPLS. Since 
   MPLS employs the principle of separation between the control and the 
   forward planes, its extension to support I-NNI signaling is 
   feasible. Generalized MPLS [3] defines MPLS extensions to suit types 
   of label switching other than the in-packet label. Those other types 
   include, time slot switching, wavelength and waveband switching, and 
   position switching between fibers. Both CR-LDP [10] and RSVP-TE [11] 
   have been extended to allow for the request and the binding of 
   generalized labels. With generalized MPLS, a label switched path 
   (LSP) is established with the appropriate encoding type (e.g. SONET, 
   wavelength, etc.). LSP establishment takes into account specific 
   characteristics that belong to a particular technology.  
    
   MPLS traffic engineering requires the availability of routing 
   protocols that are capable of summarizing link state information in 
   their databases. Extensions to IP routing protocols, OSPF and IS-IS, 
   in support of link state information for generalized MPLS are 
   described in [12, 13]. 
    
6.3 ASON External Node-to-Node Interface 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         7 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
    
   E-NNI is an inter-domain interface for use between ASON networks 
   that are under different network administrations. It is similar to 
   the UNI interface with some routing functions to allow for the 
   exchange of reachability information between different domains. BGP 
   is an IP based protocol that could be used to summarize reachability 
   information between different ASON domains in the same manner as it 
   has been in use today for IP networks. 
 
6.4 ASON Connection Control Interface 
 
   CCI defines the interface between the ASON signaling element (OCC) 
   and the transport network elements. Connection control information 
   is passed over this interface to establish connections between the 
   ports of the optical transport switch. The CCI is included as part 
   of ASON control plane because it enables switches of various 
   capacities and internal complexities to be part of an ASON node. 
    
   The protocol running across the CCI must support two essential 
   functions: 
    
   - Adding and deletion of connections. 
    
   - Query of port status of the switch. 
    
   General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP) [14] fits CCI 
   requirements. GSMP is a general-purpose protocol that allows a 
   controller to establish and release connections across a switch. 
   GSMP is well suited for network architectures that employs label 
   swapping in the forwarding plane, e.g. ATM, FR, and MPLS. This 
   property makes GSMP a good fit for generalized label as defined by 
   generalized MPLS. GSMP extensions for generalized MPLS are yet to be 
   worked out. 
    
7. ASON CP Transport Network 
    
   In this section, we detail some architectural considerations for the 
   makeup of the transport network that is used to transport the 
   control plane information.  For circuit based networks, the ability 
   to have an independent transport network for message transportation 
   is an important requirement. 
    
   The control network represents the transport infrastructure for 
   control traffic, and can be either in-band or out-of-band. An 
   implication of this is that the control plane may be supported by a 
   different physical topology from that of the underlying ASON. There 
   are fundamental requirements that control networks must satisfy in 
   order to assure that control plane data can be transported in a 
   reliable and efficient manner. In the event of control plane failure 
   (for example, communications channel or control entity failure), 
   while new connection operations will not be accepted, existing 
   connections will not be dropped. Control network failure would still 
   allow dissemination of the failure event to a management system for 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         8 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
   maintenance purposes. This implies a need for separate notifications 
   and status codes for the control plane and ASON. Additional 
   procedures may also be required for control plane failure recovery. 
    
   It is recognized that the inter-working of the control networks is 
   the first step towards control plane inter-working. To maintain a 
   certain level of ease, it's desirable to have a common control 
   network for different domains/sub-networks or types of network. 
    
   Typically, control plane and transport functions may co-exist in a 
   network element. However, this may not be true in the case of a 
   third party control. This situation needs further study.   
   Furthermore, addressing issues in the control plane vis-€-vis the 
   transport network is also for further study. 
    
   ASON CP transport network requirements includes: 
    
   - Control plane message transport should be secure. This requirement 
     stems from the fact that the information exchanged over the 
     control plane is service-provider specific and security is of 
     utmost importance.  
    
   - Control message transport reliability has to be guaranteed in 
     almost all situations, even during what might be considered 
     catastrophic failure scenarios of the controlled network. 
    
   - The control traffic transport performance affects connection 
     management performance.  Connection service performance largely 
     depends on its message transport. Time sensitive operations, such 
     as protection switching, may need certain QoS guarantees. 
     Furthermore, a certain level of survivability of the message 
     transport should be provided in case of control network failure. 
    
   - The control network needs to be both upward and downward scalable 
     in order for the control plane to be scalable. Downward 
     scalability may be envisioned where the ASON network offers 
     significant static connections, reducing the need for an extended 
     control network.  
    
   Given the above requirements, it is critical that the maintenance of 
   the control network itself not pose a problem to service providers. 
   As a corollary this means that configuration-intensive operations 
   should be avoided for the control network. 
      
    
    
8. Security Considerations 
 
   This draft does not introduce any unknown security issues. 
    
    
9. References 
    
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                         9 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Mayer, M. Editor, "Architecture for the Automatic Switched 
      Transport Networks", ITU G.astn, Draft V.0.3, Nov. 2000 
    
   3  Ashwood-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS- Signaling 
      Functional Description", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
      00.txt, work in progress, Oct. 2000 
    
   4  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   5  Rajagopalan, B. et. al., "IP over Optical Networks: A Framework", 
      draft-many-ipo-optical-framework-02.txt, work in progress, Nov. 
      2000 
    
   6  Lazar, M. et. al., "Alternate Addressing Proposal", OIF 
      Contribution, OIF2001.21, January 2001. 
       
   7  Aboul-Magd, O. et. al., "LDP Extensions for Optical User Network 
      Interface (O-UNI) Signaling", draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-uni-optical-
      00.txt, work in progress, Dec. 2000 
     
   8  Yu, J., et. al., "RSVP Extensions in Support of OIF Optical UNI 
      Signaling", draft-yu-mpls-rsvp-oif-uni-00.txt, work in progress, 
      Dec. 2000. 
    
   9  Rajagopalan, B. Editor, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0 
      Signaling Specifications", OIF Contribution, OIF2000.125.3, Dec. 
      2000 
    
   10 Ashoowd-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS Signaling: CR-LDP 
      Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-00.txt, work in 
      progress, Nov. 2000 
    
   11 Ashwood-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS Signaling: RSVP-TE 
      Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-00.txt, work in 
      progress, Nov 2000. 
    
   12 Kompella, K. et. al., "IS-IS Extensions in Support of Generalized 
      MPLS", draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-01.txt, work in progress, 
      Nov. 2000. 
    
   13 Kompella, K. et. al., "OSPF Extensions in Support of Generalized 
      MPLS", draft-kompella-ospf-gmpls-extensions-00.txt, work in 
      progress, Nov. 2000. 
    
   14 Doria, A. et. al., "Generalized Switch Management Protocol V3", 
      draft-ietf-gsmp-08.txt, work in progress, Nov. 2000. 
    
 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                        10 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
    
11. Author's Addresses 
    
    
   Osama Aboul-Magd 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 623-763-5827 
   E.mail: Osama@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Michael Mayer 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 613-765-4153 
   Email: mgm@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   David Benjamin 
   Nortel Networks 
   2351 BOULEVARD ALFRED-NOBEL 
   ST LAURENT, QUEBEC, CANADA 
   H4S-2A9 
   Phone: 514-818-7812 
    
    
   Bilel Jamoussi 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica, MA 01821, USA 
   Phone: 978-288-4506 
   Email: jamoussi@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Ludo Prattico 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 613-763-1254 
    
   Stephen Shew 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 613-763-2462 
   Email: sdshew@nortelnetworks.com 
    
    


  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                        11 

         Draft-aboulmagd-ipo-ason-00.txt        February 2001 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
 





































  
Aboul-Magd                Expires July 2001                        12 
