

   Network Working Group                            M. Brunner (Editor) 
   Internet Draft                                                   NEC 
   Category: Informational                                  August 2002 
                                                                        
 
 
                   Requirements for Signaling Protocols 
                       <draft-ietf-nsis-req-04.txt> 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments, where different network environments across 
   administrative and technology domains. Signaling is mainly though 
   for QoS such as [1], however in recent year several other 
   applications of signaling have been defined such as signaling for 
   MPLS label distribution [2]. To achieve wide applicability of the 
   requirements, the starting point is a diverse set of scenarios/use 
   cases concerning various types of networks and application 
   interactions.  We also provide an outline structure for the problem, 
   including related terminology. Taken with the scenarios, this allows 
   us to focus more precisely on which parts of the overall problem 
   need to be solved. We present the assumptions and the aspects not 
   considered within scope before listing the requirements grouped 
   according to areas such as architecture and design goals, signaling 
   flows, layering, performance, flexibility, security, and mobility.  
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
    
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 1] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   Table of Contents..................................................2 
   1  Introduction...................................................3 
   2  Terminology....................................................4 
   3  Problem Statement and Scope....................................6 
   4  Assumptions and Exclusions.....................................8 
   4.1  Assumptions and Non-Assumptions..............................8 
   4.2  Exclusions...................................................9 
   5  Requirements..................................................11 
   5.1  Architecture and Design Goals...............................11 
   5.1.1 MUST be applicable for different technologies...............11 
   5.1.2 Resource availability information on request................12 
   5.1.3 NSIS MUST be designed modular...............................12 
   5.1.4 NSIS MUST decouple protocol and information.................12 
   5.1.5 NSIS MUST reuse existing QoS provisioning...................12 
   5.1.6 Independence of signaling and provisioning paradigm.........12 
   5.1.7 Application independence....................................13 
   5.2  Signaling Flows.............................................13 
   5.2.1 Free placement of NSIS Initiator, Forwarder, Responder......13 
   5.2.2 No constraint of the signaling and NSIS Forwarders to be in 
   the data path.....................................................13 
   5.2.3 Concealment of topology and technology information..........14 
   5.2.4 Transparency of signaling to network........................14 
   5.3  Additional information beyond signaling for a service.......14 
   5.3.1 Explicit release of resources...............................14 
   5.3.2 Possibility for automatic release of resources after failure15 
   5.3.3 Notifications sent upstream.................................15 
   5.3.4 Feedback about success of service request...................16 
   5.3.5 Local information exchange..................................16 
   5.4  Control Information.........................................16 
   5.4.1 Mutability information on parameters........................16 
   5.4.2 Possibility to add and remove local domain information......17 
   5.4.3 Independence of reservation identifier......................17 
   5.4.4 Seamless modification of already reserved resources.........17 
   5.4.5 Grouping of signaling for several microflows................17 
   5.5  Performance.................................................17 
   5.5.1 Scalability.................................................18 
   5.5.2 Low latency in setup........................................18 
   5.5.3 Allow for low bandwidth consumption for signaling protocol..18 
   5.5.4 Ability to constrain load on devices........................18 
   5.5.5 Highest possible network utilization........................19 
   5.6  Flexibility.................................................19 
   5.6.1 Flow aggregation............................................19 
   5.6.2 Flexibility in the placement of the NSIS Initiator..........19 
   5.6.3 Flexibility in the initiation of re-negotiation.............19 
   5.6.4 Uni / bi-directional reservation............................19 
   5.7  Security....................................................20 
   5.7.1 Authentication of signaling requests........................20 
   5.7.2 Resource Authorization......................................20 
   5.7.3 Integrity protection........................................20 
   5.7.4 Replay protection...........................................20 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 2] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   5.7.5 Hop-by-hop security.........................................20 
   5.7.6 Identity confidentiality and location privacy...............21 
   5.7.7 Denial-of-service attacks...................................21 
   5.7.8 Confidentiality of signaling messages.......................21 
   5.7.9 Ownership of a reservation..................................21 
   5.7.10 Hooks with Authentication and Key Agreement protocols......22 
   5.8  Mobility....................................................22 
   5.8.1 Allow efficient QoS re-establishment after handover.........22 
   5.9  Interworking with other protocols and techniques............23 
   5.9.1 MUST interwork with IP tunneling............................23 
   5.9.2 The solution MUST NOT constrain either to IPv4 or IPv6......23 
   5.9.3 MUST be independent from charging model.....................23 
   5.9.4 SHOULD provide hooks for AAA protocols......................23 
   5.9.5 SHOULD interwork with seamless handoff protocols............23 
   5.9.6 MAY interwork with non-traditional routing..................23 
   5.10  Operational................................................23 
   5.10.1 Ability to assign transport quality to signaling messages..23 
   5.10.2 Graceful fail over.........................................24 
   5.10.3 Graceful handling of NSIS entity problems..................24 
   6  Security Considerations.......................................24 
   7  Reference.....................................................24 
   8  Acknowledgments...............................................24 
   9  Author's Addresses............................................25 
   10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases.................................25 
   10.1  Terminal Mobility..........................................25 
   10.2  Cellular Networks..........................................27 
   10.3  UMTS access................................................28 
   10.4  Wired part of wireless network.............................30 
   10.5  Session Mobility...........................................31 
   10.6  QoS reservations/negotiation from access to core network...32 
   10.7  QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries.32 
   10.8  QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers...33 
   10.9  PSTN trunking gateway......................................34 
   10.10 Application request end-to-end QoS path from the network...36 
    
1  Introduction 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments. It does not list any problems of existing 
   signaling protocols such as RSVP [1].  
    
   In order to derive requirements for signaling it is necessary to 
   first have a clear idea of the scope within which they are 
   applicable.  
    
   We describe a set of QoS signaling scenarios and use cases in the 
   Appendix of that document. These scenarios derive from a variety of 
   backgrounds, and help obtain a clearer picture of what is in or out 
   of scope of the NSIS work. They illustrate the problem of QoS 
   signaling from various perspectives (end-system, access network, 
   core network) and for various areas (fixed line, mobile, wireless 
   environments).  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 3] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   Based on these scenarios, we are able to define the signaling 
   problem on a more abstract level. In Section 3, we thus present a 
   simple conceptual model of the signaling problem. Additionally, we 
   describe the entities involved in signaling and typical signaling 
   paths. In Section 4 we list assumptions and exclusions.  
    
   The model of Section 3 allows deriving requirements from the 
   scenarios presented in the appendix in a coherent and consistent 
   manner. Requirements are grouped according to areas such as 
   Architecture and design goals, Signaling Flows, Layering, 
   Performance, Flexibility, Security and Mobility. 
    
   QoS is a pretty large field with a lot of interaction with other 
   protocols, mechanisms, applications etc.  However, it is not the 
   only field where signaling is used in the Internet. Even if this 
   requirement documents mainly used QoS as the sample application 
   other application should be possible. 
 
   It is clear that the subject of QoS is uniquely complex and any 
   investigation could potentially have a very broad scope - so broad 
   that it is a challenge to focus work on an area, which could lead to 
   a concrete and useful result. This is our motivation for considering 
   a set of use cases, which map out the domain of application that we 
   want to address. It is also the motivation for defining a problem 
   structure, which allows us to state the boundaries of what types of 
   functionality to consider, and to list background assumptions.  
    
   There are several areas of the requirements related to networking 
   aspects which are incomplete, for example, interaction with host and 
   site multi-homing, use of anycast services, and so on. These issues 
   should be considered in any future analysis work. 
    
2  Terminology 
    
   In the area of Quality of Service (QoS) it is quite difficult and an 
   exercise for its own to define terminology. Nevertheless, we tried 
   to list the most often used terms in the draft and tried to explain 
   them. However, don't be to religious about it, they are not meant to 
   prescribe any thing in the draft. 
 
   NSIS Domain (ND) - Administrative domain where an NSIS protocol 
   signals for a resource or set of resources.  
        
   NSIS Entity (NE) - the function within a node, which implements an 
   NSIS protocol.  
        
   NSIS Forwarder (NF) - NSIS Entity on the path between a NI and NR, 
   which may interact with local resource management function (RMF) for 
   this purpose. NSIS Forwarder also propagates NSIS signaling further 
   through the network. It is responsible for interpreting the 
   signaling carrying the user parameters, optionally inserting or 
   modifying the parameters according to domain network management 
   policy. 
        
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 4] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   NSIS Initiator (NI) - NSIS Entity that initiates NSIS signaling for 
   a network resource based on user or application requirements. This 
   can be located in the end system, but may reside elsewhere in 
   network. 
        
   NSIS Responder (NR) - NSIS Entity that terminates NSIS signaling and 
   can optionally interact with applications as well.  
     
   Resource Management Function (RMF) - an abstract concept, 
   representing the management of resources in a domain or a node.   
 
   Egress point: the router via which a path exits a domain/subdomain. 
    
   End Host: the end system or host, for whose flows QoS is being 
   requested and provisioned. 
    
   End-to-End QoS: the QoS delivered by the network between two 
   communicating end hosts.  End-to-end QoS co-ordinates and enforces 
   predefined traffic management policies across multiple network 
   entities and administrative domains. 
    
   Edge-to-edge QoS: QoS within an administrative domain that connects 
   to other networks rather than hosts or end systems.  
    
   Flow: a traffic stream (sequence of IP packets between two end 
   systems) for which a specific level of QoS is to be provided. The 
   flow can be unicast (uni- or bi-directional) or multicast. 
    
   Higher Layers: the higher layer (transport protocol and application) 
   functions that request QoS from the network layer. The request might 
   be a trigger generated within the end system, or the trigger might 
   be provided by some entity within the network (e.g. application 
   proxy or policy server). 
    
   Indication: feedback from QoS provisioning to indicate the current 
   QoS being provided to a flow or aggregate, and whether any 
   violations have been detected by the QoS technology is being used 
   within the local domain/subdomain. 
    
   Ingress point: the router via which a path enters a 
   domain/subdomain. 
    
   Path: the route across the networks taken by a flow or aggregate, 
   i.e. which domains/subdomains it passes through and the 
   egress/ingress points for each. 
    
   Path segment: the segment of a path within a single 
   domain/subdomain. 
    
   Control Information: the information the governs for instance the 
   QoS treatment to be applied to a flow or aggregate, including the 
   service class, flow administration, and any associated security or 
   accounting information. 
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 5] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   QoS Provisioning: the act of actually allocating resources to a flow 
   or aggregate of flows, may include mechanisms such as LSP initiation 
   for MPLS, packet scheduler configuration within a router, and so on. 
   The mechanisms depend on the overall QoS technology being used 
   within the domain. 
 
   Subdomain: a network within an administrative domain using a uniform 
   technology, e.g., a single QoS provisioning function to provision 
   resources. 
    
   QoS Technology: a generic term for a set of protocols, standards and 
   mechanisms that can be used within a QoS domain/subdomain to manage 
   the QoS provided to flows or aggregates that traverse the domain. 
   Examples might include MPLS, DiffServ, and so on. A QoS technology 
   is associated with certain QoS provisioning techniques. 
 
   Resource: something of value in a network infrastructure to which 
   rules or policy criteria are first applied before access is granted. 
   Examples of resources include the buffers in a router and bandwidth 
   on an interface. 
    
   Resource Allocation: part of a resource that has been dedicated for 
   the use of a particular traffic type for a period of time through 
   the application of policies. 
 
   Sender-initiated signaling protocol: A sender-initiated signaling 
   protocol is a protocol where the NI initiates the signaling on 
   behalf of the sender of the data. What this means is that admission 
   control and resource allocation functions are processed from the 
   data sender towards the data receiver. However, the triggering 
   instance is not specified.  
    
   Receiver-initiated signaling protocol: A receiver-initiated 
   protocol, (see e.g., RSVP [1]) is a protocol where the NSIS 
   Responder on behalf of the receiver of the user data initiates the 
   reservations. What this means is that admission control and resource 
   allocation functions are processed from the data receiver back 
   towards the data sender. However, the triggering instance is not 
   specified. 
 
3  Problem Statement and Scope 
    
   We provide in the following a preliminary architectural picture as a 
   basis for discussion. We will refer to it in the following 
   requirement section. 
    
   A set of issues and problems to be solved has been given at a top 
   level by the use cases/scenarios of the appendix. However, the 
   problem of QoS has an extremely wide scope and there is a great deal 
   of work already done to provide different components of the 
   solution, such as QoS technologies for example. A basic goal should 
   be to re-use these wherever possible, and to focus requirements work 
   at an early stage on those areas where a new solution is needed 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 6] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   (e.g. an especially simple one). We also try to avoid defining 
   requirements related to internal implementation aspects. 
    
   In this section, we present a simple conceptual model of the overall 
   problem in order to identify the applicability to NSIS of 
   requirements derived from the use cases, and to clarify the scope of 
   the work, including any open issues. This model also identifies 
   further sources of requirements from external interactions with 
   other parts of an overall solution, clarifies the terminology used, 
   and allows the statement of design goals about the nature of the 
   solution (see section 5). 
    
   Note that this model is intended not to constrain the technical 
   approach taken subsequently, simply to allow concrete phrasing of 
   requirements (e.g. requirements about placement of the NSIS 
   Initiator, or ability to 'drive' particular QoS technologies.) 
    
   Roughly, the scope of NSIS is assumed to be the interaction between 
   the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder(s), and NSIS Responder 
   including a protocol to carry the information, and the 
   syntax/semantics of the information that is exchanged. Further 
   statements on assumptions/exclusions are given in the next Section. 
    
   The main elements are: 
    
   1. Something that starts the request for resources, the NSIS 
   Initiator.  
    
   This might be in the end system or within some other part of the 
   network. The distinguishing feature of the NSIS Initiator is that it 
   acts on triggers coming (directly or indirectly) from the higher 
   layers in the end systems. It needs to map the resources requested 
   by them, and also provides feedback information to the higher 
   layers, which might be used by transport layer rate management or 
   adaptive applications. 
    
   2. Something that assists in managing resources further along the 
   path, the NSIS Forwarder.  
    
   The NSIS Forwarder does not interact with higher layers, but 
   interacts with the NSIS Initiator and possibly more NSIS Forwarders 
   on the path, edge-to-edge or possibly end-to-end. 
    
   3. The NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder(s) interact with each 
   other, path segment by path segment. This interaction involves the 
   exchange of data (resources control information) over some signaling 
   protocol. 
    
   4. The path segment traverses an underlying network covering one or 
   more IP hops. The underlying network uses some local QoS technology. 
   This QoS technology has to be provisioned appropriately for the 
   service requested. An NSIS Forwarder maps service-specific 
   information to technology-related QoS parameters and receiving 
   indications about success or failure in response. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 7] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   Now concentrating more on the overall end to end (multiple domain) 
   aspects, in particular: 
    
   1. The NSIS Initiator need not be located at an end system, and the 
   NSIS Forwarders are not assumed to be located on the flow's data 
   path. However, they must be able to identify the ingress and egress 
   points for the flow path as it traverses the domain/subdomain. Any 
   signaling protocol must be able to find the appropriate NSIS 
   Forwarder and carry this ingress/egress point information. 
    
   2. We see the network at the level of domains/subdomains rather than 
   individual routers (except in the special case that the domain 
   contains one link). Domains are assumed to be administrative 
   entities, so security requirements apply to the signaling between 
   them.  
    
   3. Any domain may contain Resource Management Function (e.g. to do 
   with traffic engineering, admission control, policy and so on). 
   These are assumed to interact with the NSIS Initiator and 
   Controllers (and end systems) using standard mechanisms. 
    
   4. The placement of the NSIS Initiators and NSIS Forwarders is not 
   fixed.  
 
4  Assumptions and Exclusions 
    
4.1 Assumptions and Non-Assumptions 
    
   1. The NSIS signaling could run end to end, end to edge, or edge to 
   edge, or network-to-network ((between providers), depending on what 
   point in the network acts as the initiator, and how far towards the 
   other end of the network the signaling propagates. Although the 
   figures show NSIS Forwarders at a very limited number of locations 
   in the network (e.g. at domain or subdomain borders, or even 
   controlling a complete domain), this is only one possible case. In 
   general, we could expect NSIS Forwarders to become more 'dense' 
   towards the edges of the network, but this is not a requirement. An 
   over-provisioned domain might contain no NSIS Forwarders at all (and 
   be NSIS transparent); at the other extreme, NSIS Forwarders might be 
   placed at every router. In the latter case, QoS provisioning can be 
   carried out in a local implementation-dependent way without further 
   signaling, whereas in the case of remote NSIS Forwarders, a 
   provisioning protocol might be needed to control the routers along 
   the path. This provisioning protocol is then independent of the end-
   to-end NSIS signaling.  
    
   2. We do not consider 'pure' end-to-end signaling that is not 
   interpreted anywhere within the network. Such signaling is an 
   application-layer issue and IETF protocols such as SIP etc. can be 
   used. 
    
   3. Where the signaling does cover several NSIS domains or 
   subdomains, we do not exclude that different signaling protocols are 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 8] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   used in each path segment. We only place requirements on the 
   universality of the control information that is being transported. 
   (The goals here would be to allow the use of signaling protocols, 
   which are matched to the characteristics of the portion of the 
   network being traversed.) Note that the outcome of NSIS work might 
   result in various protocols or various flavors of the same protocol. 
   This implies the need for the translation of information into domain 
   specific format as well. 
    
   4. We assume that the service definitions a NSIS Initiator can ask 
   for are known in advance of the signaling protocol running. Service 
   definition includes QoS parameters, lifetime of QoS guarantee etc., 
   or any other service-specific parameters. 
    
   There are many ways service requesters get to know about it. There 
   might be standardized services, the definition can be negotiated 
   together with a contract, the service definition is published at a 
   Web page, etc.  
    
   5. We assume that there are means for the discovery of NSIS entities 
   in order to know the signaling peers (solutions include static 
   configuration, automatically discovered, or implicitly runs over the 
   right nodes, etc.) The discovery of the NSIS entities has security 
   implications that need to be addressed properly. These implications 
   largely depend on the chosen protocol. For some security mechanisms 
   (i.e. Kerberos, pre-shared secret) it is required to know the 
   identity of the other entity. Hence the discovery mechanism may 
   provide means to learn this identity, which is then later used to 
   retrieve the required keys and parameters.  
    
   6. NSIS assumes to operate with networks using standard ("normal") 
   L3 routing. Where "normal" is not specified more exactly on purpose. 
    
4.2 Exclusions 
    
   1. Development of specific mechanisms and algorithms for application 
   and transport layer adaptation are not considered, nor are the 
   protocols that would support it. 
    
   2. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between 
   transport/applications and the network layer are not considered, 
   except to clarify the requirements on the negotiation capabilities 
   and information semantics that would be needed of the signaling 
   protocol. The same applies to application adaptation mechanisms. 
    
   3. Specific mechanisms for QoS provisioning within a 
   domain/subdomain are not considered. However, NSIS can be used for 
   signaling within a domain/subdomain performing QoS provisioning. It 
   should be possible to exploit these mechanisms optimally within the 
   end-to-end context. Consideration of how to do this might generate 
   new requirements for NSIS however. For example, the information 
   needed by a NSIS Forwarder to manage a radio subnetwork needs to be 
   provided by the NSIS solution. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 9] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   4. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between the 
   network layer and underlying QoS provisioning mechanisms are not 
   considered.  
    
   5. Interaction with resource management capabilities is not 
   considered. Standard protocols should be used for this (e.g. COPS). 
   This may imply requirements for the sort of information that should 
   be exchanged between the NSIS entities. 
 
   6. Security implications related to multicasting are outside the 
   scope of the signaling protocol.  
 
   7. Protection of non-signaling messages is outside the scope of the 
   protocol  
    
   The protection of non-signaling messages (including data traffic 
   following a reservation) is not directly considered by a signaling 
   protocol. The protection of data messages transmitted along the 
   provisioned path is outside the scope of a signaling protocol. 
   Regarding data traffic there is an interaction with accounting 
   (metering) and edge routers might require packets to be integrity 
   protected to be able to securely assign incoming data traffic to a 
   particular user.  
 
   Additionally there might be an interaction with IPSec protected 
   traffic experiencing QoS treatment and the established state created 
   due to signaling. One example of such an interaction is the different 
   flow identification with and without IPSec protection.  
    
   Many security properties are likely to be application specific and 
   may be provided by the corresponding application layer protocol.  
    
   8. Service definitions and in particular QoS classes are out of 
   scope. Together with the service definition any definition of 
   service specific parameters are not considered in this draft. Only 
   the base NSIS signaling protocol for transporting the service 
   information are handled. 
    
   9. Similarly, specific methods, protocols, and ways to express 
   QoS/service information in the Application/Session level are not 
   considered (e.g., SDP, SIP, RTSP, etc.).  
    
   10. The specification of any extensions needed to signal information 
   via application level protocols (e.g. SDP), and the mapping on NSIS 
   information are considered outside of the scope of NSIS working 
   group, as this work is in the direct scope of other IETF working 
   groups (e.g. MMUSIC). 
    
   11. Handoff decision and trigger sources: An NSIS protocol is not 
   used to trigger handoffs in mobile IP, nor is it used to decide 
   whether to handoff or not. As soon as or in some situation even 
   before a handoff happened, an NSIS protocol might be used for 
   signaling for QoS again. However, NSIS MUST interwork with several 
   protocols for mobility management. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 10] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   12. QoS monitoring is out of scope. It is heavily dependent on the 
   type of the application and or transport service, and in what 
   scenario it is used. 
 
5  Requirements 
    
   This section defines more detailed requirements for a signaling 
   solution, derived from consideration of the use cases/scenarios 
   described in the appendix, and respecting the framework, scoping 
   assumptions, and terminology considered earlier. The requirements 
   are in subsections, grouped roughly according to general technical 
   aspects: architecture and design goals, topology issues, parameters, 
   performance, security, information, and flexibility. 
    
   Two general (and potentially contradictory) goals for the solution 
   are that it should be applicable in a very wide range of scenarios, 
   and at the same time lightweight in implementation complexity and 
   resource requirements in nodes. One approach to this is that the 
   solution could deal with certain requirements via modular components 
   or capabilities, which are optional to implement in individual 
   nodes.  
    
   Some of the requirements are technically contradictory. Depending on 
   the scenarios a solution applies to, one or the other requirement is 
   applicable.  
    
   In order to prioritize the various requirements we define different 
   'parts of the network'. In the different parts of the network a 
   particular requirement might have a different priority.  
    
   The parts of the networks we differentiate are the host-to-first 
   router, the access network, and the core network. The host to first 
   router part includes all the layer 2 technologies to access to the 
   Internet. In many cases, there is an application and/or user running 
   on the host initiating signaling. The access network can be 
   characterized by low capacity links, medium speed IP processing 
   capabilities, and it might consist of a complete layer 2 network as 
   well. The core network characteristics include high-speed forwarding 
   capacities and inter-domain issues. All of them are not strictly 
   defined and should not be regarded as that, but should give a 
   feeling about where in the network we have different requirements 
   concerning signaling. 
    
5.1 Architecture and Design Goals 
    
   This section contains requirements related to desirable overall 
   characteristics of a solution, e.g. enabling flexibility, or 
   independence of parts of the framework. 
    
5.1.1 MUST be applicable for different technologies. 
     
   The signaling protocol MUST work with various QoS technologies as 
   well as other technologies needing signaling. The information 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 11] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   exchanged over the signaling protocol must be in such detail and 
   quantity that it is useful for various technologies.  
    
5.1.2 Resource availability information on request  
 
   In some scenarios, e.g., the mobile terminal scenario, it is 
   required to query, whether resources are available, without 
   performing a reservation on the resource. One solution might be a 
   feedback mechanism based on which a QoS inferred handover can take 
   place. So NSIS SHOULD provide a mechanism to check whether resources 
   are available without performing a reservation 
    
5.1.3 NSIS MUST be designed modular  
 
   A modular design allows for more lightweight implementations, if 
   fewer features are needed. Mutually exclusive solutions are 
   supported. Examples for modularity: 
    
   - Work over any kind of network (narrowband versus broadband, error-
   prone versus reliable, ...). This implies low bandwidth signaling 
   and redundant information MUST be supported if necessary.  
    
   - Uni- and bi-directional reservations are possible 
    
   - Extensible in the future with different add-ons for certain 
   environments or scenarios  
    
   - Protocol layering, where appropriate. This means NSIS MUST provide 
   a base protocol, which can be adapted to different environments. 
    
5.1.4 NSIS MUST decouple protocol and information 
 
   The signaling protocol MUST be clearly separated from the control 
   information being transported. This provides for the independent 
   development of these two aspects of the solution, and allows for 
   this control information to be carried within other protocols, 
   including application layer ones, existing ones or those being 
   developed in the future. The gained flexibility in the information 
   transported allows for the applicability of the same protocol in 
   various scenarios.  
    
   However, note that the information carried needs to be the 
   standardized; otherwise interoperability is difficult to achieve. 
 
5.1.5 NSIS MUST reuse existing QoS provisioning 
 
   Reuse existing functions and protocols for QoS provisioning within a 
   domain/subdomain unchanged. (Motivation: 'Don't re-invent the 
   wheel'.) 
    
5.1.6 Independence of signaling and provisioning paradigm 
 
   The signaling MUST be independent of the paradigm and mechanism of 
   provisioning. E.g., in the case of signaling for QoS, the 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 12] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   independence of the signaling protocol from the QoS provisioning 
   allows for using the NSIS protocol together with various QoS 
   technologies in various scenarios. 
 
5.1.7 Application independence 
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be independent of the application. The 
   control information SHOULD be application independent, because we 
   look into network level signaling.  
    
   The requirement relates to the way the signaling interacts with 
   upper layer functions (users, applications, and QoS administration), 
   and lower layer QoS technologies. 
    
   Opaque application information MAY get transported in the signaling 
   message, without being handled in the network. Development and 
   deployment of new applications SHOULD be possible without impacting 
   the network infrastructure.  
    
5.2 Signaling Flows 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the possible signaling 
   flows that should be supported, e.g. over what parts of the flow 
   path, between what entities (end-systems, routers, middle boxes, 
   management systems), in which direction.  
 
5.2.1 Free placement of NSIS Initiator, Forwarder, Responder 
    
   The protocol MUST work in various scenarios such as host-to-network-
   to-host, edge-to-edge, (e.g., just within one providers domain), 
   user-to-network (from end system into the network, ending, e.g., at 
   the entry to the network and vice versa), and network-to-network 
   (e.g., between providers).  
    
   Placing the NSIS Forwarder and NSIS Initiator functions at different 
   locations allows for various scenarios to work with the same 
   protocol. 
    
5.2.2 No constraint of the signaling and NSIS Forwarders to be in the 
     data path. 
    
   There is a set of scenarios, where signaling is not on the data 
   path. The NSIS Forwarder being in the data path is one extreme case 
   and useful in many cases. Therefore the case of having NSIS entities 
   on the data path only MUST be allowed. 
    
   There are going to be cases where a centralized entity will take a 
   decision about service requests. In this case, there is no need to 
   have the data follow the signaling path.  
    
   There are going to be cases without a centralized entity managing 
   resources and the signaling will be used as a tool for resource 
   management. For various reasons (such as efficient use of expensive 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 13] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   bandwidth), one will want to have fine-grained, fast, and very 
   dynamic control of the resources in the network. 
    
   There are going to be cases where there will be neither signaling 
   nor a centralized entity (over-provisioning). Nothing has to be done 
   anyway. 
    
   One can capture the requirement with the following, different 
   wording: If one views the domain with a QoS technology as a virtual 
   router then NSIS signaling used between those virtual routers MUST 
   follow the same path as the data.  
    
   Routing the signaling protocol along an independent path is desired 
   by network operators/designers. Ideally, the capability to route the 
   protocol along an independent path would give the network 
   designer/operator the option to manage bandwidth utilization through 
   the topology. 
    
   There are other possibilities as well. An NSIS protocol MUST accept 
   all of these possibilities with a strong focus on the on-path 
   signaling.  
 
5.2.3 Concealment of topology and technology information 
    
   The NSIS protocol SHOULD allow for hiding the internal structure of 
   a NSIS domain from end-nodes and from other networks. Hence an 
   adversary should not be able to learn the internal structure of a 
   network with the help of the signaling protocol. 
    
   In various scenarios, topology information SHOULD be hidden for 
   various reasons. From a business point of view, some administrations 
   don't want to reveal the topology and technology used.  
    
5.2.4 Transparency of signaling to network 
    
   It SHOULD be possible that the signaling for some flows traverse 
   path segments transparently, i.e., without interpretation at NSIS 
   Forwarders within the network. An example would be a subdomain 
   within a core network, which only interpreted signaling for 
   aggregates established at the domain edge, with the flow-related 
   signaling passing transparently through it. 
    
   In other words, NSIS SHOULD work in hierarchical scenarios, where 
   big pipes/trunks are setup using NSIS signaling, but also flows 
   which run within that big pipe/trunk are setup using NSIS. 
 
5.3 Additional information beyond signaling for a service 
 
5.3.1 Explicit release of resources  
    
   When a resource reservation is no longer necessary, e.g. because the 
   application terminates, or because a mobile host experienced a hand-


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 14] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   off, it MUST be possible to explicitly release resources. In general 
   explicit release enhances the overall network utilization. 
    
5.3.2 Possibility for automatic release of resources after failure 
    
   When the NSIS Initiator goes down, the resources it requested in the 
   network SHOULD be released, since they will no longer be necessary. 
    
   After detection of a failure in the network, any NSIS 
   Forwarder/Initiator MUST be able to release a reservation it is 
   involved in. For example, this may require signaling of the "Release 
   after Failure" message upstream as well as downstream, or soft state 
   timing out of reservations. 
    
   The goal is to prevent stale state within the network and adds 
   robustness to the operation of NSIS. So in other words, an NSIS 
   signaling protocol or mechanisms MUST provide means for an NSIS 
   entity to discover and remove local stale state.  
    
   Note that this might need to work together with a notification 
   mechanism. 
    
5.3.3 Notifications sent upstream 
 
   NSIS Forwarders SHOULD be able to notify the NSIS Initiator or any 
   other NSIS Forwarder upstream, if there is a state change inside the 
   network. There are various types of network changes for instance 
   among them: 
    
   Recoverable errors: the network nodes can locally repair this type 
   error. The network nodes do not have to notify the users of the 
   error immediately. This is a condition when the danger of 
   degradation (or actual short term degradation) of the provided QoS 
   was overcome by the network (NSIS Forwarder) itself. 
    
   Unrecoverable errors: the network nodes cannot handle this type of 
   error, and have to notify the users as soon as possible. 
    
   QoS degradation/severe congestion: In case the service cannot be 
   provided completely but partially only. 
    
   Repair indication: If an error occurred and it has been fixed, this 
   triggers the sending of a notification. 
    
   Service upgrade available: If a previously requested better service 
   becomes available. 
 
   The content of the notification is very service specific, but it is 
   must at least carry type information. Additionally, it may carry the 
   location of the state change. 
    
   The notifications may or may not be in response to a NSIS message. 
   This means an NSIS entity has to be able to handle notifications at 
   any time. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 15] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   Note however, that there are a number of security consideration 
   needs to be solved with notification, even more important if the 
   notification is sent without prior request (asynchronously). The 
   problem basically is, that everybody could send notifications to any 
   NSIS entity and the NSIS entity most likely reacts on the 
   notification. E.g., if it gets an error notification it might 
   teardown the reservation, even if everything is ok. So the 
   notification might depend on security associations between the 
   sender of the notification and its receiver. If a hop-by-hop 
   security mechanism is chosen, this implies also that notifications 
   need to be sent on the reverse path. 
 
5.3.4 Feedback about success of service request 
    
   A request for service MUST be answered at least with yes or no. 
   However, it MAY be useful in case of a negative answer to also get a 
   description of what amount of resources a request is possible. So an 
   opaque element MAY be included into the answer. The element heavily 
   depends on the service requested. 
 
5.3.5 Local information exchange  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be able to exchange local information 
   between NSIS Forwarders located within one single administrative 
   domain. Local information might, for example, be IP addresses, 
   severe congestion notification, notification of successful or 
   erroneous processing of signaling messages. 
    
   In some cases, the NSIS signaling protocol MAY carry identification 
   of the NSIS Forwarders located at the boundaries of a domain. 
   However, the identification of edge should not be visible to the end 
   host (NSIS Initiator) and only applies within one administrative 
   domain. 
    
5.4 Control Information 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the control 
   information that needs to be exchanged. 
 
5.4.1 Mutability information on parameters 
    
   It SHOULD be possible for the NSIS initiator to control the 
   mutability of the signaled information. This prevents from being 
   changed in a non-recoverable way. The NSIS initiator SHOULD be able 
   to control what is requested end to end, without the request being 
   gradually mutated as it passes through a sequence of domains. This 
   implies that in case of changes made on the parameters, the original 
   requested ones must still be available.  
    
   Note that we do not require anything about particular parameters 
   being changed.  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 16] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   Additionally, note that a provider or that particular services 
   requested, can still influence the QoS provisioning but in the 
   signaling message the request should stay the same. 
    
5.4.2 Possibility to add and remove local domain information  
    
   It SHOULD be possible for the Resource Management Function to add 
   and remove local scope elements. E.g., at the entrance to a domain 
   domain-specific information is added, which is used in this domain 
   only, and the information is removed again when a signaling message 
   leaves the domain. The motivation is in the economy of re-use the 
   protocol for domain internal signaling of various information 
   pieces. Where additional information is needed within a particular 
   domain, it should be possible to carry this at the same time as the 
   end-to-end information. 
    
5.4.3 Independence of reservation identifier 
    
   A reservation identifier, which is independent of the flow 
   identifier (flow end-points), MUST be used. Various scenarios in the 
   mobility area require this independence because flows resulting from 
   handoff might have changed end-points etc. but still have the same 
   service requirement. Also several proxy-based signaling methods 
   might profit from such as independence. 
    
5.4.4 Seamless modification of already reserved resources 
    
   In many case, the reservation needs to be updated (up or downgrade). 
   This SHOULD happen seamlessly without service interruption. At least 
   the signaling protocol should allow for it, even if some data path 
   elements might not be capable of doing so.  
    
5.4.5 Grouping of signaling for several micro-flows 
    
   NSIS MAY group signaling information for several micro-flow into one 
   signaling message. The goal of this is the optimization in terms of 
   setup delay, which can happen in parallel. This helps applications 
   requesting several flows at once. Also potential refreshes (in case 
   of a soft state solution) might profit of grouping.  
    
   However, the network MUST NOT know that a relationship between the 
   grouped flows exists. There MUST NOT be any transactional semantic 
   associated with the grouping. It is only meant for optimization 
   purposes and each reservation MUST be handled separately from each 
   other. 
    
5.5 Performance 
    
   This section discusses performance requirements and evaluation 
   criteria and the way in which these could and should be traded off 
   against each other in various parts of the solution. 
    
   Scalability is a must anyway. However, depending on the scenario the 
   question to which extends the protocol must be scalable.  
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 17] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   Note that many of the performance issues are heavily dependent on 
   the scenario assumed and are normally a trade-off between speed, 
   reliability, complexity, and scalability. The trade-off varies in 
   different parts of the network. For example, in radio access 
   networks low bandwidth consumption will overweight the low latency 
   requirement, while in core networks it may be reverse. 
    
5.5.1 Scalability  
    
   NSIS MUST be scalable in the number of messages received by a 
   signaling communication partner (NSIS Initiator, NSIS Forwarder, and 
   NSIS Responder). The major concern lies in the core of the network, 
   where large numbers of messages arrive. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in number of hand-offs in mobile environments. 
   This mainly applies in access networks, because the core is 
   transparent to mobility in most cases. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in the number of interactions for setting up a 
   reservation. This applies for end-systems setting up several 
   reservations. Some servers might be expected to setup a large number 
   of reservations. 
    
   Scalability in the number of state per entity MUST be achieved for 
   NSIS Forwarders in the core of the network. 
    
   And Scalability in CPU use MUST be achieved on end terminals in case 
   of many reservations at the same time and intermediate nodes mainly 
   in the core. 
    
5.5.2 Low latency in setup 
    
   NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency setup of reservations. This is 
   only needed in scenarios, where reservations are in a short time 
   scale (e.g. handover in mobile environments), or where human 
   interaction is immediately concerned (e.g., voice communication 
   setup delay).  
    
5.5.3 Allow for low bandwidth consumption for signaling protocol 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption in certain access 
   networks. Again only small sets of scenarios call for low bandwidth, 
   mainly those where wireless links are involved.  
 
5.5.4 Ability to constrain load on devices 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD give the ability to constrain the load 
   (CPU load, memory space, signaling bandwidth consumption and 
   signaling intensity) on devices where it is needed. One of the 
   reasons is that the protocol handling should have a minimal impact 
   on interior (core) nodes. 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 18] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   This can be achieved by many different methods. Examples, and this 
   are only examples, include message aggregation, by ignoring 
   signaling message, header compression, or minimizing functionality. 
   The framework may choose any method as long as the requirement is 
   met. 
    
5.5.5 Highest possible network utilization 
 
   There are networking environments that require high network 
   utilization for various reasons, and the signaling protocol SHOULD 
   to its best ability support high resource utilization while 
   maintaining appropriate QoS. 
    
   In networks where resources are very expensive (as is the case for 
   many wireless networks), efficient network utilization is of 
   critical financial importance.  On the other hand there are other 
   parts of the network where high utilization is not required.  
 
5.6 Flexibility 
 
   This section lists the various ways the protocol can flexibly be 
   employed. 
    
5.6.1 Flow aggregation 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for flow aggregation, including the capability to 
   select and change the level of aggregation. 
    
5.6.2 Flexibility in the placement of the NSIS Initiator 
    
   NSIS MUST be flexible in placing an NSIS Initiator. The NSIS 
   Initiator might be the sender or the receiver of content. But also 
   network-initiated reservations MUST be available in various 
   scenarios such as PSTN gateways, some VPNs, and mobility. 
    
5.6.3 Flexibility in the initiation of re-negotiation 
    
   The sender or the receiver of content SHOULD be able to initiate a 
   re-negotiation or change the reservation due to various reasons, 
   such as local resource shortage (CPU, memory on end-system) or a 
   user changed application preference/profiles. But also network-
   initiated re-negotiation SHOULD be supported in cases, where the 
   network is not able to further guarantee resources etc. 
    
5.6.4 Uni / bi-directional reservation 
    
   Both unidirectional as well as bi-direction reservations SHOULD be 
   possible. With bi-directional reservations we mean here reservations 
   having the same end-points. But the path in the two directions does 
   not need to be the same. 
    



     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 19] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   The goal of a bi-directional reservation is mainly an optimization 
   in terms of setup delay. There is no requirements on constrains such 
   as use the same data path etc. 
    
5.7 Security 
    
   This section discusses security-related requirements. For a 
   discussion of security threats see [3]. The NSIS protocol MUST 
   provide means for security, but it MUST be allowed that nodes 
   implementing NSIS signaling do not need use the security means. 
    
5.7.1 Authentication of signaling requests  
 
   A signaling protocol MUST make provision for enabling various 
   entities to be authenticated against each other using strong 
   authentication mechanisms. The term strong authentication points to 
   the fact that weak plain-text password mechanisms must not be used 
   for authentication. 
 
5.7.2 Resource Authorization  
 
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to authorize resource 
   requests. This requirement demands a hook to interact with a policy 
   entity to request authorization data. This allows an authenticated 
   entity to be associated with authorization data and to verify the 
   resource request. Authorization prevents reservations by unauthorized 
   entities, reservations violating policies, and theft of service. 
   Additionally it limits denial of service attacks against parts of the 
   network or the entire network caused by unrestricted reservations. 
   Additionally it might be helpful to provide some means to inform 
   other protocols of participating nodes within the same administrative 
   domain about a previous successful authorization event. 
 
5.7.3 Integrity protection  
 
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to protect the message 
   payloads against modifications. Integrity protection prevents an 
   adversary from modifying parts of the signaling message and from 
   mounting denial of service or theft of service type of attacks 
   against network elements participating in the protocol execution. 
 
5.7.4 Replay protection 
 
   To prevent replay of previous signaling messages the signaling 
   protocol MUST provide means to detect old i.e. already transmitted 
   signaling messages. A solution must cover issues of synchronization 
   problems in the case of a restart or a crash of a participating 
   network element. The use of replay mechanism apart from sequence 
   numbers should be investigated. 
 
5.7.5 Hop-by-hop security 
 
   Hop-by-Hop security SHOULD be supported. It is a well known and 
   proven concept in Quality-of-Service and other signaling protocols 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 20] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   that allows intermediate nodes that actively participate in the 
   protocol to modify the messages as it is required by processing rule. 
   Note that this requirement does not exclude end-to-end or network-to-
   network security of a signaling message. End-to-end security between 
   the initiator and the responder may be used to provide protection of 
   non-mutable data fields. Network-to-network security refers to the 
   protection of messages over various hops but not in an end-to-end 
   manner i.e. protected over a particular network. 
 
5.7.6 Identity confidentiality and location privacy 
 
   Identity confidentiality SHOULD be supported. It enables privacy and 
   avoids profiling of entities by adversary eavesdropping the signaling 
   traffic along the path. The identity used in the process of 
   authentication may also be hidden to a limited extent from a network 
   to which the initiator is attached. However the identity MUST provide 
   enough information for the nodes in the access network to collect 
   accounting data. 
   Location privacy MAY be supported. It is an issue for the initiator 
   who triggers the signaling protocol. In some scenarios the initiator 
   may not be willing to reveal location information to the responder as 
   part the signaling procedure.  
    
5.7.7 Denial-of-service attacks 
 
   A signaling protocol SHOULD provide prevention of DoS attacks.  
   To effectively prevent denial-of-service attacks it is necessary that 
   the used security and protocol mechanisms MUST have low computation 
   complexity to verify a resource request prior authenticating the 
   requesting entity. Additionally the signaling protocol and the used 
   security mechanisms SHOULD NOT require large resource consumption 
   (for example main memory or other additional message exchanges) 
   before a successful authentication was done.  
 
5.7.8 Confidentiality of signaling messages 
 
   Based on the signaling information exchanged between nodes 
   participating in the signaling protocol an adversary may learn both 
   the identities and the content of the signaling messages. To prevent 
   this from happening, confidentiality of the signaling message in a 
   hop-by-hop manner MAY be provided. Note that the protection can be 
   provided on a hop-by-hop basis for most message payloads since it is 
   required that entities which actively participating in the signaling 
   protocol must be able to read and eventually modify the content of 
   the signaling messages. 
 
5.7.9 Ownership of a reservation 
 
   When existing reservations have to be modified then there is a need 
   to use a reservation identifier to uniquely identify the established 
   state. A signaling protocol MUST provide the appropriate security 
   protection to prevent other entities to modify state without having 
   the proper ownership.  
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 21] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
5.7.10 Hooks with Authentication and Key Agreement protocols 
 
   This requirement covers two subsequent steps before a signaling 
   protocol is executed and the required hooks. First there is a need to 
   agree on a specific authentication protocol. Later this protocol is 
   executed and provides authentication and establishes the desired 
   security associations. Using these security associations it is then 
   possible to exchange secured signaling messages.  
    
   The signaling protocol implementation SHOULD provide hooks to 
   interact with protocols that allow the negotiation of authentication 
   and key agreement protocols. Although the negotiation of an 
   authentication and key management protocol within the signaling 
   protocol may be outside the scope it is still required to trigger 
   this exchange in case that no such security association is available.  
   This requirement originates from the fact that more than one key 
   management protocol may be used to provide a security association for 
   the signaling protocol. Hence the communicating entities must be 
   capable to agree on a specific authentication. The selected 
   authentication and key agreement protocol must however be able to 
   create a security association that can be used within the signaling 
   protocol.  
    
   Key management protocols typically require a larger number of 
   messages to be transmitted to allow a session key and the 
   corresponding security association to be derived. To avoid the 
   complex issue of embedding individual authentication and key 
   agreement protocols into a specific signaling protocol it is required 
   that most of these protocols are executed independently (prior to the 
   signaling protocol) and although the key management protocol may be 
   independent there must be a way for the signaling protocol to access 
   and use available (i.e. already established) security associations to 
   avoid executing a separate key management protocol (or instance of 
   the same protocol) for protocols that closely operate together. If no 
   such security association exists then there SHOULD be means for the 
   signaling protocol to dynamically trigger such a protocol.  
    
5.8 Mobility 
 
5.8.1 Allow efficient QoS re-establishment after handover 
    
   Handover is an essential function in wireless networks. After 
   handover, the reservation may need to be completely or partially re-
   established due to route changes. The re-establishment may be 
   requested by the mobile node itself or triggered by the access point 
   that the mobile node is attached to.  In the first case, the 
   signaling MUST allow efficient re-establishment after handover.  Re-
   establishment after handover MUST be as quick as possible so that 
   the mobile node does not experience service interruption or service 
   degradation. The re-establishment SHOULD be localized, and not 
   require end-to-end signaling. 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 22] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
5.9 Interworking with other protocols and techniques 
 
   Hooks SHOULD be provided to enable efficient interworking between 
   various protocols and techniques including: 
    
5.9.1 MUST interwork with IP tunneling 
    
   IP tunneling for various applications MUST be supported. More 
   specifically tunneling for IPSec tunnels are of importance as 
   discussed in Section 4.2. This mainly impacts the identification of 
   flows. Using IPSec parts of information used for flow identification 
   (e.g. transport protocol information and ports) may not be accessible 
   due to encryption.   
 
5.9.2 The solution MUST NOT constrain either to IPv4 or IPv6 
    
5.9.3 MUST be independent from charging model 
    
   Signaling MUST NOT be constrained by charging models or the charging 
   infrastructure used.  
    
5.9.4 SHOULD provide hooks for AAA protocols 
    
   The security mechanism SHOULD be developed with respect to be able 
   to collect usage records from one or more network elements. 
    
5.9.5 SHOULD interwork with seamless handoff protocols 
    
   An NSIS protocol SHOULD interwork with seamless handoff protocols 
   such as context transfer and candidate access router (CAR) 
   discovery. The goal to achieve is that signaling works fast enough 
   in case of a handoff, where that protocols might help in one way or 
   the other.  
    
5.9.6 MAY interwork with non-traditional routing 
    
   NSIS assumes traditional routing, but networks, which do non-
   traditional L3 routing, should not break it. 
    
5.10 Operational 
    
5.10.1 Ability to assign transport quality to signaling messages. 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD allow the network operator to assign 
   the NSIS protocol messages a certain transport quality. As signaling 
   opens up for possible denial-of-service attacks, this requirement 
   gives the network operator a mean, but also the obligation, to 
   trade-off between signaling latency and the impact (from the 
   signaling messages) on devices within his/her network. From protocol 
   design this requirement states that the protocol messages SHOULD be 
   detectable, at least where the control and assignment of the 
   messages priority is done. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 23] 


                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   Furthermore, the protocol design must take into account reliability 
   concerns. Communication reliability is seen as part of the quality 
   assigned to signaling messages. So procedures MUST be defined how an 
   NSIS signaling system behaves if some kind of request it sent stays 
   without answer. The basic transport protocol to be used between 
   adjacent NSIS units MAY ensure message integrity and reliable 
   transport. 
    
5.10.2 Graceful fail over 
    
   Any unit participating in NSIS signaling MUST NOT cause further 
   damage to other systems involved in NSIS signaling when it has to go 
   out of service. 
    
5.10.3 Graceful handling of NSIS entity problems 
    
   NSIS peers SHOULD be able to detect the malfunctioning peer. It may 
   notify the NSIS Initiator or another NSIS entity involved in the 
   signaling process. The NSIS peer may handle the problem itself e.g. 
   switching to a backup NSIS entity. In the latter case note that 
   synchronization of state between the primary and the backup entity 
   is needed. 
    
6  Security Considerations 
    
   Section 5.8 of this draft provides security related requirements of 
   a signaling protocol. Another document describes security threads 
   for NSIS [3]. 
     
7  Reference 
    
   [1] Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, A., Jamin, S., 
   "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
   Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    
   [2] D. Awduche, L. Berger, D. Gan, T. Li, V. Srinivasan, G. Swallow, 
   "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 
   2001. 
 
   [3] Tschofenig, H., "NSIS Threats", <draft-tschofenig-nsis-threats-
   00.txt>, May 2002.  
    
8  Acknowledgments 
    
   Quite a number of people have been involved in the discussion of the 
   draft, adding some ideas, requirements, etc. We list them without a 
   guarantee on completeness: Changpeng Fan (Siemens), Krishna Paul 
   (NEC), Maurizio Molina (NEC), Mirko Schramm (Siemens), Andreas 
   Schrader (NEC), Hannes Hartenstein (NEC), Ralf Schmitz (NEC), 
   Juergen Quittek (NEC), Morihisa Momona (NEC), Holger Karl (Technical 
   University Berlin), Xiaoming Fu (Technical University Berlin), Hans-
   Peter Schwefel (Siemens), Mathias Rautenberg (Siemens), Christoph 
   Niedermeier (Siemens), Andreas Kassler (University of Ulm), Ilya 
   Freytsis. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 24] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   Some text and/or ideas for text, requirements, scenarios have been 
   taken from a draft written by the following authors: David Partain 
   (Ericsson), Anders Bergsten (Telia Research), Marc Greis (Nokia), 
   Georgios Karagiannis (Ericsson), Jukka Manner (University of 
   Helsinki), Ping Pan (Juniper), Vlora Rexhepi (Ericsson), Lars 
   Westberg (Ericsson), Haihong Zheng (Nokia). Some of those have 
   actively contributed new text to the draft as well. 
    
   Another draft impacting this draft has been written by Sven Van den 
   Bosch, Maarten Buchli, and Danny Goderis. These people contributed 
   also with new text. 
     
9  Author's Addresses 
    
   Marcus Brunner (Editor) 
   NEC Europe Ltd. 
   Network Laboratories 
   Adenauerplatz 6 
   D-69115 Heidelberg 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: brunner@ccrle.nec.de (contact) 
    
   Robert Hancock, Eleanor Hepworth 
   Roke Manor Research Ltd 
   Romsey, Hants, SO51 0ZN 
   United Kingdom 
   E-Mail: [robert.hancock|eleanor.hepworth]@roke.co.uk 
    
   Cornelia Kappler 
   Siemens AG 
   Berlin  13623 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: cornelia.kappler@icn.siemens.de 
 
   Hannes Tschofenig  
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munchen 
   Germany 
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@mchp.siemens.de 
 
10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases 
    
   In the following we describe scenarios, which are important to 
   cover, and which allow us to discuss various requirements. Some 
   regard this as use cases to be covered defining the use of a QoS 
   signaling protocol.  
    
10.1 Terminal Mobility 
    
   The scenario we are looking at is the case where a mobile terminal 
   (MT) changes from one access point to another access point. The 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 25] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   access points are located in separate QoS domains. We assume Mobile 
   IP to handle mobility on the network layer in this scenario and 
   consider the various extensions (i.e., IETF proposals) to Mobile IP, 
   in order to provide 'fast handover' for roaming Mobile Terminals. 
   The goal to be achieved lies in providing, keeping, and adapting the 
   requested QoS for the ongoing IP sessions in case of handover. 
   Furthermore, the negotiation of QoS parameters with the new domain 
   via the old connection might be needed, in order to support the 
   different 'fast handover' proposals within the IETF.  
 
   The entities involved in this scenario include a mobile terminal, 
   access points, an access network manager, communication partners of 
   the MT (the other end(s) of the communication association). 
   From a technical point of view, terminal mobility means changing the 
   access point of a mobile terminal (MT). However, technologies might 
   change in various directions (access technology, QoS technology, 
   administrative domain). If the access points are within one specific 
   QoS technology (independent of access technology) we call this 
   intra-QoS technology handoff. In the case of an inter-QoS technology 
   handoff, one changes from e.g. a DiffServ to an IntServ domain, 
   however still using the same access technology. Finally, if the 
   access points are using different access technologies we call it 
   inter-technology hand-off. 
    
   The following issues are of special importance in this scenario: 
    
   1) Handoff decision 
    
   - The QoS management requests handoff. The QoS management can decide 
   to change the access point, since the traffic conditions of the new 
   access point are better supporting the QoS requirements. The metric 
   may be different (optimized towards a single or a group/class of 
   users). Note that the MT or the network (see below) might trigger 
   the handoff. 
    
   - The mobility management forces handoff. This can have several 
   reasons. The operator optimizes his network, admission is no longer 
   granted (e.g. emptied prepaid condition). Or another example is when 
   the MT is reaching the focus of another base station. However, this 
   might be detected via measurements of QoS on the physical layer and 
   is therefore out of scope of QoS signaling in IP. Note again that 
   the MT or the network (see below) might trigger the handoff. 
    
   - This scenario shows that local decisions might not be enough. The 
   rest of the path to the other end of the communication needs to be 
   considered as well. Hand-off decisions in a QoS domain, does not 
   only depend on the local resource availability, e.g., the wireless 
   part, but involves the rest of the path as well. Additionally, 
   decomposition of an end-to-end reservation might be needed, in order 
   to change only parts of it. 
    
   2) Trigger sources  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 26] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   - Mobile terminal: If the end-system QoS management identifies 
   another (better-suited) access point, it will request the handoff 
   from the terminal itself. This will be especially likely in the case 
   that two different provider networks are involved. Another important 
   example is when the current access point bearer disappears (e.g. 
   removing the Ethernet cable). In this case, the NSIS Initiator is 
   basically located on the mobile terminal. 
    
   - Network (access network manager): Sometimes, the handoff trigger 
   will be issued from the network management to optimize the overall 
   load situation. Most likely this will result in changing the base-
   station of a single providers network. Most likely the NSIS 
   Initiator is located on a system within the network. 
    
   3) Integration with other protocols 
    
   - Interworking with other protocol must be considered in one or the 
   other form. E.g., it might be worth combining QoS signaling between 
   different QoS domains with mobility signaling at hand-over. 
    
   4) Handover rates 
    
   In mobile networks, the admission control process has to cope with 
   far more admission requests than call setups alone would generate. 
   For example, in the GSM (Global System for Mobile communications) 
   case, mobility usually generates an average of one to two handovers 
   per call. For third generation networks (such as UMTS), where it is 
   necessary to keep radio links to several cells simultaneously 
   (macro-diversity), the handover rate is significantly higher. 
    
   5) Fast reservations 
    
   Handover can also cause packet losses. This happens when the 
   processing of an admission request causes a delayed handover to the 
   new base station. In this situation, some packets might be 
   discarded, and the overall speech quality might be degraded 
   significantly. Moreover, a delay in handover may cause degradation 
   for other users. In the worst-case scenario, a delay in handover may 
   cause the connection to be dropped if the handover occurred due to 
   bad air link quality. Therefore, it is critical that QoS signaling 
   in connection with handover be carried out very quickly. 
    
   6) Call blocking in case of overload 
    
   Furthermore, when the network is overloaded, it is preferable to 
   keep reservations for previously established flows while blocking 
   new requests. Therefore, the resource reservation requests in 
   connection with handover should be given higher priority than new 
   requests for resource reservation. 
 
10.2 Cellular Networks 
    
   In this scenario, the user is using the packet service of a 3rd 
   generation cellular system, e.g. UMTS. The region between the End 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 27] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   Host and the edge node connecting the cellular network to another 
   QoS domain (e.g. the GGSN in UMTS or the PDSN in 3GPP2) is 
   considered to be a single QoS domain. 
    
   The issues in such an environment regarding QoS include: 
    
   1) Cellular systems provide their own QoS technology with 
   specialized parameters to co-ordinate the QoS provided by both the 
   radio access and wired access network. For example, in a UMTS 
   network, one aspect of GPRS is that it can be considered as a QoS 
   technology; provisioning of QoS within GPRS is described mainly in 
   terms of calling UMTS bearer classes.  This QoS technology needs to 
   be invoked with suitable parameters when higher layers trigger a 
   request for QoS, and this therefore involves mapping the requested 
   IP QoS onto these UMTS bearer classes. This request for resources 
   might be triggered by IP signaling messages that pass across the 
   cellular system, and possibly other QoS domains, to negotiate for 
   network resources. Typically, cellular system specific messages 
   invoke the underlying cellular system QoS technology in parallel 
   with the IP QoS negotiation, to allocate the resources within the 
   cellular system.  
    
   2) The placement of NSIS Initiators and NSIS Forwarders (terminology 
   in the framework given here). The NSIS Initiator could be located at 
   the End Host (triggered by applications), the GGSN/PDSN, or at a 
   node not directly on the data path, such as a bandwidth broker. In 
   the second case, the GGSN/PDSN could either be acting as a proxy on 
   behalf of an End Host with little capabilities, and/or managing 
   aggregate resources within its QoS domain (the UMTS core network). 
   The IP signaling messages are interpreted by the NSIS Forwarders, 
   which may be located at the GGSN/PDSN, and in any QoS sub-domains 
   within the cellular system.  
    
   3) Initiation of IP-level QoS negotiation. IP-level QoS re-
   negotiation may be initiated by either the End Host, or by the 
   network, based on current network loads, which might change 
   depending on the location of the end host. 
    
   4) The networks are designed and mainly used for speech 
   communication (at least so far). 
    
   Note that in comparison to the former scenario, the emphasis is much 
   less on the mobility aspects, because mobility is mainly handled on 
   the lower layer. 
    
10.3 UMTS access 
    
   The UMTS access scenario is shown in figure 3. The Proxy-Call State 
   Control Function/Policy Control Function (P-CSCF/PCF) is the 
   outbound SIP proxy of the visited domain, i.e. the domain where the 
   mobile user wants to set-up a call. The Gateway GPRS Support Node 
   (GGSN) is the egress router of the UMTS domain and connects the UMTS 
   access network to the Edge Router (ER) of the core IP network. The 
   P-CSCF/PCF communicates with the GGSN via the COPS protocol. The 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 28] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   User Equipment (UE) consists of a Mobile Terminal (MT) and Terminal 
   Equipment (TE), e.g. a laptop. 
    
                            
                           +--------+           
                +----------| P-CSCF |-------> SIP signaling 
               /           +--------+  
              / SIP            :            
             :             +--------+   NSIS  +----------------+          
             :             |  PCF   |---------| NSIS Forwarder | 
             :             +--------+         +----------------+ 
             :                 : 
             :                 : COPS   
             :                 : 
           +----+          +--------+      +----+ 
           | UE |----------|  GGSN  |------| ER | 
           +----+          +--------+      +----+ 
    
                      Figure 1: UMTS access scenario 
    
   In this scenario the GGSN has the role of Access Gate. According to 
   3GPP standardization, the PCF is responsible for the policy-based 
   control of the end-user service in the UMTS access network (i.e. 
   from UE to GGSN). In the current UMTS release R.5, the PCF is part 
   of the P-CSCF, but in UMTS R.6 the interface between P-CSCF and PCF 
   may evolve to an open standardized interface. In any case the PCF 
   has all required QoS information for per-flow admission control in 
   the UMTS access network (which it gets from the P-CSCF and/or GGSN). 
   Thus the PCF would be the appropriate entity to host the 
   functionality of NSIS Initiator, initiating the "NSIS" QoS signaling 
   towards the core IP network. The PCF/P-CSCF has to do the mapping 
   from codec type (derived from SIP/SDP signaling) to IP traffic 
   descriptor. SDP extensions to explicitly signal QoS information are 
   useful to avoid the need to store codec information in the PCF and 
   to allow for more flexibility and accurate description of the QoS 
   traffic parameters. The PCF also controls the GGSN to open and close 
   the gates and to configure per-flow policers, i.e. to authorize or 
   forbid user traffic. 
    
   The NSIS Forwarder is (of course) not part of the standard UMTS 
   architecture. However, to achieve end-to-end QoS a NSIS Forwarder is 
   needed such that the PCF can request a QoS connection to the IP 
   network. As in the previous example, the NSIS Forwarder could manage 
   a set of pre-provisioned resources in the IP network, i.e. bandwidth 
   pipes, and the NSIS Forwarder performs per-flow admission control 
   into these pipes. In this way, a connection can be made between two 
   UMTS access networks, and hence, end-to-end QoS can be achieved. In 
   this case the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder are clearly two 
   separate entities. 
   This use case clearly illustrates the need for an "NSIS" QoS 
   signaling protocol between NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder. An 
   important application of such a protocol may be its use in the 
   inter-connection of UMTS networks over an IP backbone. 
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 29] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
10.4 Wired part of wireless network 
 
   A wireless network, seen from a QoS domain perspective, usually 
   consists of three parts: a wireless interface part (the "radio 
   interface"), a wired part of the wireless network (i.e., Radio 
   Access Network) and the backbone of the wireless network, as shown 
   in Figure 2. Note that this figure should not be seen as an 
   architectural overview of wireless networks but rather as showing 
   the conceptual QoS domains in a wireless network. 
    
   In this scenario, a mobile host can roam and perform a handover 
   procedure between base stations/access routers. In this scenario the 
   NSIS QoS protocol can be applied between a base station and the 
   gateway (GW).  In this case a GW can also be considered as a local 
   handover anchor point. Furthermore, in this scenario the NSIS QoS 
   protocol can also be applied either between two GWs, or between two 
   edge routers (ER). 
    
                          |--| 
                          |GW| 
   |--|                   |--| 
   |MH|---                 . 
   |--|  / |-------|       . 
        /--|base   | |--|  . 
           |station|-|ER|... 
           |-------| |--|  . |--| back- |--|  |---|              |----|               
                           ..|ER|.......|ER|..|BGW|.."Internet"..|host| 
        -- |-------| |--|  . |--| bone  |--|  |---|              |----| 
   |--| \  |base   |-|ER|...     . 
   |MH|  \ |station| |--|        . 
   |--|--- |-------|             .          MH  = mobile host 
                              |--|          ER  = edge router 
      <---->                  |GW|          GW  = gateway 
     Wireless link            |--|          BGW = border gateway 
                                            ... = interior nodes 
            <-------------------> 
       Wired part of wireless network 
    
   <----------------------------------------> 
                Wireless Network 
    
      Figure 2. QoS architecture of wired part of wireless network 
    
   Each of these parts of the wireless network impose different issues 
   to be solved on the QoS signaling solution being used: 
    
    
   - Wireless interface: The solution for the air interface link 
     has to ensure flexibility and spectrum efficient transmission 
     of IP packets.  However, this link layer QoS can be solved in 
     the same way as any other last hop problem by allowing a 
     host to request the proper QoS profile. 
    
   - Wired part of the wireless network:  This is the part of 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 30] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
     the network that is closest to the base stations/access 
     routers.  It is an IP network although some parts logically 
     perform tunneling of the end user data. In cellular networks, 
     the wired part of the wireless network is denoted as a 
     radio access network. 
    
     This part of the wireless network has different 
     characteristics when compared to traditional IP networks: 
    
         1. The network supports a high proportion of real-time 
            traffic.  The majority of the traffic transported in the 
            wired part of the wireless network is speech, which is 
            very sensitive to delays and delay variation (jitter). 
    
         2. The network must support mobility.  Many wireless 
            networks are able to provide a combination of soft 
            and hard handover procedures.  When handover occurs, 
            reservations need to be established on new paths. 
            The establishment time has to be as short as possible 
            since long establishment times for reservations degrade 
            the performance of the wireless network.  Moreover, 
            for maximal utilization of the radio spectrum, frequent 
            handover operations are required. 
    
         3. These links are typically rather bandwidth-limited. 
    
         4. The wired transmission in such a network contains a 
            relatively high volume of expensive leased lines. 
            Overprovisioning might therefore be prohibitively 
            expensive. 
    
         5. The radio base stations are spread over a wide 
            geographical area and are in general situated a large 
            distance from the backbone. 
    
   - Backbone of the wireless network: the requirements imposed 
     by this network are similar to the requirements imposed by 
     other types of backbone networks. 
    
   Due to these very different characteristics and requirements, often 
   contradictory, different QoS signaling solutions might be needed in 
   each of the three network parts. 
 
10.5 Session Mobility 
    
   In this scenario, a session is moved from one end-system to another. 
   Ongoing sessions are kept and QoS parameters need to be adapted, 
   since it is very likely that the new device provides different 
   capabilities. Note that it is open which entity initiates the move, 
   which implies that the NSIS Initiator might be triggered by 
   different entities. 
     


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 31] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   User mobility (i.e., a user changing the device and therefore moving 
   the sessions to the new device) is considered to be a special case 
   within the session mobility scenario. 
 
   Note that this scenario is different from terminal mobility. Not the 
   terminal (end-system) has moved to a different access point. Both 
   terminals are still connected to an IP network at their original 
   points.  
    
   The issues include: 
    
   1) Keeping the QoS guarantees negotiated implies that the end-
   point(s) of communication are changed without changing the 
   reservations.  
    
   2) The trigger of the session move might be the user or any other 
   party involved in the session.  
    
10.6 QoS reservations/negotiation from access to core network 
    
   The scenario includes the signaling between access networks and core 
   networks in order to setup and change reservations together with 
   potential negotiation. 
 
   The issues to be solved in this scenario are different from previous 
   ones. 
     
   1) The entity of reservation is most likely an aggregate. 
    
   2) The time scales of reservations might be different (long living 
   reservations of aggregates, rarer re-negotiation).  
    
   3) The specification of the traffic (amount of traffic), a 
   particular QoS is guaranteed for, needs to be changed. E.g., in case 
   additional flows are added to the aggregate, the traffic 
   specification of the flow needs to be added if it is not already 
   included in the aggregates specification.  
    
   4) The flow specification is more complex including network 
   addresses and sets of different address for the source as well as 
   for the destination of the flow.  
 
10.7 QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries 
    
   Signaling between two or more core networks to provide QoS is 
   handled in this scenario. This might also include access to core 
   signaling over administrative boundaries. Compared to the previous 
   one it adds the case, where the two networks are not in the same 
   administrative domain. Basically, it is the inter-domain/inter 
   provider signaling which is handled in here. 
    
   The domain boundary is the critical issue to be resolved. Which as 
   various flavors of issues a QoS signaling protocol has to be 
   concerned with.  
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 32] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
    
   1) Competing administrations: Normally, only basic information 
   should be exchanged, if the signaling is between competing 
   administrations. Specifically information about core network 
   internals (e.g., topology, technology, etc.) should not be 
   exchanged. Some information exchange about the "access points" of 
   the core networks (which is topology information as well) may need 
   to be exchanged, because it is needed for proper signaling. 
    
   2) Additionally, as in scenario 4, signaling most likely is based on 
   aggregates, with all the issues raise there. 
    
   3) Authorization: It is critical that the NSIS Initiator is 
   authorized to perform a QoS path setup. 
    
   4) Accountability: It is important to notice that signaling might be 
   used as an entity to charge money for, therefore the interoperation 
   with accounting needs to be available. 
 
10.8 QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers 
 
   A PSTN gateway (i.e., host) requires information from the network 
   regarding its ability to transport voice traffic across the network. 
   The voice quality will suffer due to packet loss, latency and 
   jitter. Signaling is used to identify and admit a flow for which 
   these impairments are minimized.  In addition, the disposition of 
   the signaling request is used to allow the PSTN GW to make a call 
   routing decision before the call is actually accepted and delivered 
   to the final destination. 
    
   PSTN gateways may handle thousands of calls simultaneously and there 
   may be hundreds of PSTN gateways in a single provider network. These 
   numbers are likely to increase as the size of the network increases. 
   The point being that scalability is a major issue. 
    
   There are several ways that a PSTN gateway can acquire assurances 
   that a network can carry its traffic across the network. These 
   include: 
 
     1. Over-provisioning a high availability network. 
     2. Handling admission control through some policy server 
        that has a global view of the network and its resources. 
     3. Per PSTN GW pair admission control. 
     4. Per call admission control (where a call is defined as 
        the 5 tuple used to carry a single RTP flow). 
 
   Item 1 requires no signaling at all and is therefore outside the 
   scope of this working group. 
    
   Item 2 is really a better informed version of 1, but it is also 
   outside the scope of this working group as it relies on a particular 
   telephony signaling protocol rather than a packet admission control 
   protocol. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 33] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   Item 3 is initially attractive, as it appears to have reasonable 
   scaling properties, however, its scaling properties only are 
   effective in cases where there are relatively few PSTN GWs. In the 
   more general case were a PSTN GW reduces to a single IP phone 
   sitting behind some access network, the opportunities for 
   aggregation are reduced and the problem reduces to item 4. 
    
   Item 4 is the most general case. However, it has the most difficult 
   scaling problems. The objective here is to place the requirements on 
   Item 4 such that a scalable per-flow admission control protocol or 
   protocol suite may be developed. 
    
   The case where per-flow signaling extends to individual IP end-
   points allows the inclusion of IP phones on cable, DSL, wireless or 
   other access networks in this scenario. 
    
   Call Scenario 
    
   A PSTN GW signals end-to-end for some 5 tuple defined flow a 
   bandwidth and QoS requirement. Note that the 5 tuple might include 
   masking/wildcarding. The access network admits this flow according 
   to its local policy and the specific details of the access 
   technology.   
    
   At the edge router (i.e., border node), the flow is admitted, again 
   with an optional authentication process, possibly involving an 
   external policy server.  Note that the relationship between the PSTN 
   GW and the policy server and the routers and the policy server is 
   outside the scope of NSIS. The edge router then admits the flow into 
   the core of the network, possibly using some aggregation technique. 
    
   At the interior nodes, the NSIS host-to-host signaling should either 
   be ignored or invisible as the Edge router performed the admission 
   control decision to some aggregate. 
    
   At the inter-provider router (i.e., border node), again the NSIS 
   host-to-host signaling should either be ignored or invisible as the 
   Edge router has performed an admission control decision about an 
   aggregate across a carrier network.  
    
10.9 PSTN trunking gateway 
    
   One of the use cases for the NSIS signaling protocol is the scenario 
   of interconnecting PSTN gateways with an IP network that supports 
   QoS. 
   Four different scenarios are considered here. 
     1. In-band QoS signaling is used. In this case the Media Gateway 
        (MG) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator and the Edge Router 
        (ER) will be the NSIS Forwarder. Hence, the ER should do 
        admission control (into pre-provisioned traffic trunks) for the 
        individual traffic flows. This scenario is not further 
        considered here. 


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 34] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
     2. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS Forwarder is 
        integrated in the MGC. In this case no NSIS protocol is 
        required. 
     3. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS Forwarder is 
        a separate box. In this case NSIS signaling is used between the 
        MGC and the NSIS Forwarder. 
     4. Out-of-band signaling between multiple domains, the NSIS 
        Forwarder (which may be integrated in the MGC) triggers the 
        NSIS Forwarder of the next domain. 
    
   When the out-of-band QoS signaling is used the Media Gateway 
   Controller (MGC) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator.   
    
   In the second scenario the voice provider manages a set of traffic 
   trunks that are leased from a network provider. The MGC does the 
   admission control in this case. Since the NSIS Forwarder acts both 
   as a NSIS Initiator and a NSIS Forwarder, no NSIS signaling is 
   required. This scenario is shown in figure 1. 
    
      +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
      | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
      +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
            :                    /           :             \ 
            :                   /            :              \ 
            :                  /    +--------:----------+    \            
            :          MEGACO /    /         :           \    \                   
            :                /    /       +-----+         \    \               
            :               /    /        | NMS |          \    \               
            :              /     |        +-----+          |     \       
            :              :     |                         |     :       
     +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+           
     | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
     +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                   \     QoS network     / 
                                    +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 1: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
   In the third scenario, the voice provider does not lease traffic 
   trunks in the network. Another entity may lease traffic trunks and 
   may use a NSIS Forwarder to do per-flow admission control. In this 
   case the NSIS signaling is used between the MGC and the NSIS 
   Forwarder, which is a separate box here. Hence, the MGC acts only as 
   a NSIS Initiator. This scenario is depicted in figure 2. 
    
    
      +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
      | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
      +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
            :                    /           :             \ 
            :                   /         +-----+           \ 
            :                  /          | NSIS Forwarder  |            
   \ 
            :                 /           +-----+             \ 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 35] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
            :                /               :                 \ 
            :               /       +--------:----------+       \            
            :       MEGACO :       /         :           \       :                   
            :              :      /       +-----+         \      :               
            :              :     /        | NMS |          \     :               
            :              :     |        +-----+          |     :       
            :              :     |                         |     :       
     +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+           
     | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
     +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                   \     QoS network     / 
                                    +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 2: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
   In the fourth scenario multiple transport domains are involved. In 
   the originating network either the MGC may have an overview on the 
   resources of the overlay network or a separate NSIS Forwarder will 
   have the overview. Hence, depending on this either the MGC or the 
   NSIS Forwarder of the originating domain will contact the NSIS 
   Forwarder of the next domain. The MGC always acts as a NSIS 
   Initiator and may also be acting as a NSIS Forwarder in the first 
   domain. 
    
10.10  Application request end-to-end QoS path from the network 
    
   This is actually the easiest case, nevertheless might be most often 
   used in terms of number of users. So multimedia application requests 
   a guaranteed service from an IP network. We assume here that the 
   application is somehow able to specify the network service. The 
   characteristics here are that many hosts might do it, but that the 
   requested service is low capacity (bounded by the access line). 
   Additionally, we assume no mobility and standard devices. 
    
    QOS for Virtual Private Networks 
 
   In a Virtual Private Network (VPN) a variety of tunnels might be 
   used between its edges. These tunnels could be for example, IP-Sec, 
   GRE, and IP-IP. One of the most significant issues in VPNs is 
   related to how a flow is identified and what quality a flow gets. A 
   flow identification might consist among others of the transport 
   protocol port numbers. In an IP-Sec tunnel this will be problematic 
   since the transport protocol information is encrypted. 
    
   There are two types of L3 VPNs, distinguished by where the endpoints 
   of the tunnels exist. The endpoints of the tunnels may either be on 
   the customer (CPE) or the provider equipment or provider edge (PE). 
    
   Virtual Private networks are also likely to request bandwidth or 
   other type of service in addition to the premium services the PSTN 
   GW are likely to use. 
 
   Tunnel end points at the Customer premises 
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 36] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
   When the endpoints are the CPE, the CPE may want to signal across 
   the public IP network for a particular amount of bandwidth and QoS 
   for the tunnel aggregate. Such signaling may be useful when a 
   customer wants to vary their network cost with demand, rather than 
   paying a flat rate. Such signaling exists between the two CPE 
   routers. Intermediate access and edge routers perform the same exact 
   call admission control, authentication and aggregation functions 
   performed by the corresponding routers in the PSTN GW scenario with 
   the exception that the endpoints are the CPE tunnel endpoints rather 
   than PSTN GWs and the 5-tuple used to describe the RTP flow is 
   replaced with the corresponding flow spec to uniquely identify the 
   tunnels. Tunnels may be of any variety (e.g. IP-Sec, GRE, IP-IP). 
    
   In such a scenario, NSIS would actually allow partly for customer 
   managed VPNs, which means a customer can setup VPNs by subsequent 
   NSIS signaling to various end-point. Plus the tunnel end-points are 
   not necessarily bound to an application. The customer administrator 
   might be the one triggering NSIS signaling. 
 
   Tunnel end points at the provider premises 
 
   In the case were the tunnel end-points exist on the provider edge, 
   requests for bandwidth may be signaled either per flow, where a flow 
   is defined from a customers address space, or between customer 
   sites. 
    
   In the case of per flow signaling, the PE router must map the 
   bandwidth request to the tunnel carrying traffic to the destination 
   specified in the flow spec. Such a tunnel is a member of an 
   aggregate to which the flow must be admitted. In this case, the 
   operation of admission control is very similar to the case of the 
   PSTN GW with the additional level of indirection imposed by the VPN 
   tunnel. Therefore, authentication, accounting and policing may be 
   required on the PE router. 
    
   In the case of per site signaling, a site would need to be 
   identified. This may be accomplished by specifying the network 
   serviced at that site through an IP prefix. In this case, the 
   admission control function is performed on the aggregate to the PE 
   router connected to the site in question. 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
   
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 37] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols      August 2002 
    
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 
   
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDIN 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 







































     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 38] 

