     Internet Draft                                       Greg Vaudreuil
     Expires in six months                           Lucent Technologies
                                                        December 1, 1999


                       Voice Messaging Directory Service:
                            Principles of Operation

                  <draft-vaudreuil-vpimdir-principles-00.txt>



  Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
     provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
     and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
     working documents as Internet Drafts.

     Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
     updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is
     inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite
     them other than as a "work in progress".

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
     Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
     munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
     ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).



  Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

     This Internet-Draft is in conformance with Section 10 of RFC2026.

  Overview

     This document outlines the principles for the operation of an
     experimental telephone number directory service.  This service
     provides for the resolution of telephone number address to domain name
     address, address confirmation and capabilities discovery, and intra-
     domain messaging routing.  This directory service uses a combination
     of DNS and LDAP queries.

     The experiment is conducted using voice messaging in the North
     American dialing plan as the prototype application.

     Please send comments on this document to the author, Greg Vaudreuil
     <gregv@lucent.com>.



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  Working Group Summary

     This document is not the product of an IETF working group.  It
     documents a inter-company voice message interchange experiment
     conducted over the Internet as a project of the Telemessaging Industry
     Association (TMIA) http://www.tmia.org.  The TMIA is a consortium of
     large North American wireline and wireless telephone companies.
















































     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 2]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  Table of Contents

  1. ABSTRACT ............................................................4
  2. SCOPE ...............................................................5
    2.1Design Goals ......................................................5
  3. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION ..................................................6
    3.1Time Constraints ..................................................6
  4. ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE ..........................................7
    4.1E164.int Domain ...................................................8
  5. INTER-DOMAIN MESSAGE ROUTING ........................................8
  6. ADDRESS CONFIRMATION SERVICE ........................................8
    6.1Address Validation Server Discovery ...............................9
    6.2Address Validation LDAP Query .....................................9
  7. INTRA-DOMAIN MESSAGE ROUTING SERVICE ................................9
  8. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS ............................................10
  9. REFERENCES .........................................................10
  10.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ....................................................11
  11.COPYRIGHT NOTICE ...................................................11
  12.AUTHORS' ADDRESSES .................................................12




































     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 3]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  1. Abstract

     General electronic mail (email) provides a facility for exchanging
     messages of seemingly arbitrary content.  In common email usage, text
     is the primary media with one or more attachments.

     A class of special-purpose computers has evolved to provide voice-
     messaging services.  These machines generally interface to a telephone
     switch and provide call answering and voice messaging services.
     Message exchange between these voice-mail only systems can best be
     achieved using VPIM Version 2.

     Voice messaging uses the ubiquitous telephone as the primary terminal
     for access and for the sending of messages.  As such, the limitations
     of the numeric keypad must be adequately addressed.  The following
     limitations are addressed by the directory service described in this
     document:

     1) Telephone numbers are the natural identifiers for messages sent
     from a telephone and to a telephone-based recipient.  Internet mail on
     which VPIM V2 messages are transported use the Domain Name System
     identifiers.  The directory service must translate between these
     addressing systems.

     2) Entry of a telephone number is error-prone.  While a mis-typed
     email address will generally fail to be delivered, a mis-dialed number
     may more frequently be delivered to the wrong recipient.  Confirmation
     that the dialed number corresponds to the intended recipient is
     considered an essential part of voice messaging service.

     3) Voice terminals are relatively inflexible in the handling of media
     and encodings.  Spawning a helper application is not feasible.
     Coupled with the strong pressure to adopt ever cheaper and more
     compact audio encodings, voice messaging requires the ability for the
     sender to tailor the composition to the capabilities of the recipient.

     4) While telephone numbers uniquely identify a recipient in inter-
     domain space, service providers have needs to name or number the
     recipient's mailboxes according to more local requirements.  A
     standard for the mapping between the telephone-number-based inter-
     domain form of the email address to an inter-domain form is required
     for interoperability between multiple directory and messaging platform
     vendors.

           5) Telephone-based users have a strong expectation for rapid a
     response to addressing actions.  While various "delaying" tone or
     phrase may extend this (audio hourglass?) time, the accepted normal
     maximum interval is two seconds with perceived system failure at five
     seconds.  The directory system must provide responses within these
     tight latency requirements.

           



     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 4]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  2.  Scope

     This document is the first of a set that define the experimental voice
     messaging directory service.  This document discussed design goals and
     the principles of operation.  Subsequent documents detail the schema
     for the DNS and LDAP portions of the service.

  2.1 Design Goals

     Rapid Deployment through use of existing protocols, products and
     infrastructure.

     Leverage existing administrative address assignment and authority
     delegation hierarchies to accelerate time-to-market.

     Provide maximum flexibility for a provider to control sensitive
     directory information made available, while ensuring that message can
     reliably be exchanged.





































     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 5]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999




  3. System Description

  3.1 Performance Constraints

     This directory service is latency critical.  For the full set of
     features, a number of queries must occur within a short time interval,
     optimally less than two seconds.  The following














































     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 6]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  4. Address Resolution Service

     The high level directory provides Address Resolution Service (ARS) to
     map between telephone numbers and routeable Internet email addresses.
     The phone number is the international E.164 form, and the Email
     address is the inter-domain form such as 19727332722@voice.SP.net.

     The Internet Domain Name System provides an ideal technology for this
     directory due to it's fast, hierarchical structure and distributed
     administrative model.  Earlier experimentation with the TPC.INT remote
     printing experiment has shown how the hierarchical assignment of
     telephone numbers can be mapped directly to the hierarchy of domains
     within the DNS.  The ARS directory uses that approach to map any
     arbitrary telephone number into a single domain name.

     The telephone number data to populate the highest level entries in the
     ARS is publicly available.  The ITU maintains a list of country codes
     and the authorities that manage the sub-structure under countries.
     Within North America, the delegation of phone numbers to the NPA/NXX
     level is managed by the "Traffic Routing Administration" a cooperative
     agreement with Telecordia (http://www.trainfo.com).  The delegations
     are made available in a quarterly publication called the Local
     Exchange Routing Guide (LERG).  The LERG is available publicly for a
     nominal fee.

     Toll free numbers (800 and 888), ported telephone numbers, and sub-
     delegation of numbers to enterprises are beyond the scope of this
     initial directory experiment.

     Local number portability (LNP) does not change the delegation of phone
     numbers, but does change their routing.  The LNP routing of phone
     numbers to carriers is a third-level directory in the hierarchy
     managed by the Number Portability Administrative Center (NPAC) managed
     under contract by Martian Marrietta (http://www.nanpa.com).  While
     this data is also publicly available, it does require an agreement to
     receive real-time replication from the master database.  Due to cost
     and time constraints, ported telephone numbers are beyond the scope of
     this initial experiment, however, they are very important and any
     viable solution must address the need to receive a correct mapping to
     a domain name for these number.

     Within a given service provider, authority for telephone numbers may
     be further sub-assigned to individual customers, either on a number-
     by-number, or by telephone number blocks.  This delegation is
     typically private information maintained by each telco.  Successful
     exchange of messages using telephone numbers between enterprises
     requires that service providers make this information via the
     directory service.  Similar to the infrastructure for LNP, this effort
     is beyond the scope of the initial voice messaging directory
     experiment, however, it is a goal to provide the protocol
     infrastructure necessary to address this need.




     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 7]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  4.1 E164.int Domain

     This document claims the e164.int domain as the root for the telephone
     numbering hierarchy.  The operating entity for the primary server for
     the duration of the experiment is the NANP DNS authority.  That
     authority has not yet determined, however Lucent Technologies may
     assume that responsibility for the duration of the experiment or until
     a more suitable entity can be suckered into it.

     The North American Numbering Plan (NAMP) subdomain, country code "1"
     of the E164 will also be operated on an interim basis by the NANP DNS
     authority.

     The North American Numbering Plan (NANP) local routing information in
     the LERG database maps a telephone number prefix to an Operating
     Company Number (OCN).  The OCN is the unique identifier of the local
     exchange operator that has received the telephone number delegation.
     This delegation does not change with LNP.

     The primary name server for the NANP will provide domain name service
     for the NANP based on a mapping between OCN and the domain name chosen
     by the operating company.  The NANP DNS authority will maintain the
     registration of the domain name to OCN mapping.

     Information to Sub-delegate telephone number assignments below a
     NPA/NXX level within the NANP will be maintained by the NANP DNS
     authority and made generally available as a DNS referral.

  5. Inter-domain Message Routing

     The high-level directory query provides all the information necessary
     to route a message from one service provider to another using the
     existing mail routing infrastructure.  Mail routers, firewalls, and
     redundancy for voice messaging is identical to that deployed for email
     routing.  This inter-domain mail routing is not discussed in detail in
     this proposal, but uses the mail exchange "MX" routing records in DNS
     to route a message to one or more appropriate gateways or firewalls.

     There is no restriction on the nature of the messages routed to these
     gateways.  They may be the same as the general-purpose email gateways.
     It is up to the receiving system to determine the appropriate
     destination with their network for a given message.

  6. Address Confirmation Service

     Address validation is the directory step whereby one service provider
     can inquire of another about the validity of a telephone number for
     messaging and to receive spoken name confirmation and a set of
     capabilities of the recipient.   This is an optional service.  A
     message sender may send a message to the recipient using the inter-
     domain form of the email address determined from the address
     resolution service described above.  Address confirmation and
     capabilities discovery is an additional, higher level of service.


     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 8]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999




  6.1 Address Validation Server Discovery

     The first step of this directory step is to identify the appropriate
     directory server of the recipient domain.  For this, the DNS provides
     an extension record called the service record or SRV.  This record
     acts like the MX record in providing a list of servers offering a
     given service to provide redundancy.

     For the voice messaging address validation service, the AVS service
     record is defined.  (The details are contained within a companion
     document).  The address validation server is found by querying DNS
     with the domain name found in the address resolution step for the SRV
     records corresponding with the AVS service.   There may be one or more
     SRV records for one or more AVS servers for redundancy and load
     sharing.  It is the responsibility of the querying client to determine
     when to query an alternate AVS in the event that the preferred server
     is out-of-service given the stringent user interface latency
     requirements.  It is expected that multiple algorithms will be
     explored as part of this experiment.

  6.2 Address Validation LDAP Query

     The query to the address validation server of the recipient is made to
     find the spoken name of the recipient, the status of the mailbox, the
     capabilities of the mailbox, and the possible existence of sub-
     mailboxes.

     The message sender initiates the query and requests information based
     on the inter-domain email address of the recipient as found in the
     address resolution step. While this query is inherently simple and
     LDAP may be seen as overkill, it is useful to leverage the deployment
     experience and security work done with LDAP.

     The RESCAP work within the IETF may provide an alternative approach,
     and if successful may replace this protocol.  At this time, the use of
     the voice messaging LDAP schema as defined in [VPIMLDAP] is specified
     for use in this experiment.

  7. Intra-domain Message Routing Service

     A common intra-domain message routing challenge is addressed with a
     common schema for voice message routing.  The ARS directory step
     yields an inter-domain email address sufficient to deliver a message
     to a given service provider.  The service provider must then route the
     message within their network to the appropriate platform.  To
     facilitate maximum interoperability for the duration of this
     experiment, a common schema is defined in [VPIMROUTE].

     This schema is based in part on the work of the LASER group.  As that
     work is completed and standardized, it is expected to replace the
     limited schema defined in [VPIMROUTE].


     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                    [Page 9]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  8. Security Considerations

     The following are known security issues taken into consideration in
     the definition of this directory service.

     1) Service provider customer information is very sensitive, especially
     in this time of local phone competition.  Service providers require
     the maximum flexibility to protect this data.  Because of the dense
     nature of telephone number assignments, this data is subject to "go
     fish" queries via repeated LDAP queries to determine a complete list
     of current or active messaging subscribers.  To reduce the value of
     this retrieved data, service providers may limit disclose of data
     useful for telemarketing such as the textual name and disclose only
     information useful to the sender such as the recipients spoken name, a
     data element much harder to auto-process.

     2) Registration of an OCN for another carrier may result in messages
     being mis-directed to the wrong carrier.  As sub-delegations are
     implemented, the risk that one the phone numbers delegated to one
     enterprise may be mis-pointed at another will increase.

     3) Service providers operate in a regulated environment where certian
     information about a subscriber must not be disclosed.  Voice Messaging
     is subject to caller-ID blocking restrictions, restrictions enforced
     in the telephony network.  No such protection is available on the
     Internet.  The protection of this data is essential, but is up to the
     individual service providers to not disclose this information outside
     of their control.

  9. References

  [MIMEDIR] F. Dawson, T. Howes, & M. Smith, "A MIME Content-Type for
      Directory Information", Work In Progress, <draft-ietf-asid-mime-
      direct-06.txt>, March 1998

  [DNS1] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
      specification", RFC1035, Nov 1987.

  [DNS2] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities", RFC
      1034, Nov 1987.

  [E164] CCITT Recommendation E.164 (1991), Telephone Network and ISDN
      Operation, Numbering, Routing and  Mobile Service - Numbering Plan
      for the ISDN Era.

  [TPC1] Malamud, Carl, Rose, Marshall, "Principles of Operation for the
      TPC.INT Subdomain: Remote Printing -- Technical Procedures", RFC
      1530, October 1993.

  [VPIM2] Vaudreuil, Greg, Parsons, Glen, "Voice Profile for Internet
      Mail, Version 2", RFC 2421, September 1998.

  [VPIMe164] Vaudreuil, Greg, "Voice Messaging Directory Service:
      Principles of Operation", work-in-progress.

     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                   [Page 10]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999


  [VPIMARS] Vaudreuil, Greg, "Voice Messaging Directory Service:
      DNS-based", work-in-progress.

  [VPIMLDAP] Vaudreuil, Greg, " Voice Messaging Directory Service: Address
      Validation Schema", work-in-progress.

  [SRV] Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., "A DNS RR for specifying the location
      of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2052, October 1996.



  10. Acknowledgments

     This experimental directory builds upon the earlier work of Carl
     Malamud and Marshall Rose in thier TPC.INT remote printing experiment
     and the work lead by Anne Brown as part of the EMA voice messaging
     committee's directory effort.

     Bernhard Elliot working with the TMIA has provided most of the
     organizational impetus to get this project moving, a substantial task
     given the sometimes slow and bureaucratic nature of the voice mail
     business and regulatory environment.

     Dave Dudley and the Messaging Aliance (TMA) for thier early work in
     pioneering a shared directory service for voice messaging and their
     continuing efforts to apply those learnings to this effort.

  11. Copyright Notice

     "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998). All Rights Reserved.

     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
     others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
     or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
     distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
     provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
     included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
     the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
     Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
     developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
     copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
     or as required to translate it into languages other than English.

     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
     revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

     This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
     "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
     NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
     WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                   [Page 11]



     Internet Draft           VPIM Directory            December 1, 1999




  12. Authors' Addresses

     Gregory M. Vaudreuil
     Lucent Technologies,
      Communications Application Group
     17080 Dallas Parkway
     Dallas, TX  75248-1905
     United States

     Phone/Fax: +1-972-733-2722
     Email: GregV@Lucent.Com










































     Vaudreuil, Parsons       Expires 5/1/00                   [Page 12]
