
                                                              T. Taylor 
   Internet Draft                                       Nortel Networks 
   Document: draft-taylor-mmusic-sdp-tdm-01.txt                         
   Expires: October 2002                                     April 2002 
 
 
     Conventions for the use of the Session Description Protocol (SDP) 
                      for Digital Circuit Connections 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.         
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes conventions for using the Session 
   Description Protocol (SDP) for controlling digital circuits.  These 
   conventions describe 
    - circuit addressing conventions for use on the SDP "c=" line 
    - content of the "m=" line(s) for digital circuits 
    - attributes to convey the parameters contained within the Bearer 
      Capability, Low Layer Compatibility, and High Layer Compatibility 
      Information Elements of ITU-T Recommendation Q.931. 
    
   These conventions have been defined for use in media gateway 
   control, particularly in support of NAS operation, but may also be 
   used by IP-based call signalling schemes (SIP, BICC) to control 
   media exchange over digital circuits.  
 
 
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               1 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
1. Introduction 
    
   The scope of SDP control is being extended to a variety of bearer 
   types, particularly to serve the needs of media gateway control 
   protocols such as Megaco/H.248 [2] and MGCP [3], but also those of 
   the bearer-related portions of call signalling over the internet as 
   represented by SIP [4] and BICC [5].  Control of ATM bearers was 
   documented in [6].  This document uses [6] as a model for a rather 
   simpler case, the control of 64 kbit/s digital circuits.  These 
   circuits may carry voice, video or multiplexed multimedia, voiceband 
   data (fax relay, modem relay), or baseband data (PPP, frame relay 
   etc.). 
    
   The conventions in this document may be applied in three possible 
   situations: 
    
   (1)  For media gateway control at the boundary between an ISDN 
        access network and another bearer network.  In this case, SDP 
        must capture bearer characteristics conveyed in the Q.931 call 
        signalling protocol [7]. 
    
   (2)  For media gateway control at the boundary between an ISDN core 
        network and another bearer network.  In this case, SDP must 
        capture bearer characteristics conveyed in the SS7 ISUP call 
        signalling protocol [8].  Since a mapping has been defined 
        between ISUP and Q.931 [9], the SDP conventions required will 
        be in large part the same as in the first case. 
    
   (3)  For control of TDM circuits across a network using SIP or BICC 
        [5].  This is a potential future application, included here for 
        logical completeness, since neither SIP nor BICC is currently 
        being designed with TDM circuit networks in mind.     
    
1.1 Terminology 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [10]. 
    
   "TDM" stands for "Time Division Multiplex" digital transmission. 
    
   In this document, the term "TDM circuit" is used to mean a 64 kbit/s 
   TDM channel. 
    
1.2 Scope 
    
   This document provides the means to describe media flows in TDM 
   circuits.  Although it will be of use in the general categories of 
   applications described in the introduction, it is specifically aimed 
   at satisfying the requirements of the Megaco/H.248 media gateway 
   control protocol including the voice, voice-band data (and NAS 
   operation in particular), and multimedia conferencing (H.320 and 
   H.324i) applications. 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               2 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   This document provides conventions for:  
    - use of the SDP "b=" line to convey the TDM circuit information 
      transfer rate 
    - addressing of TDM circuits on the SDP "c=" line 
    - the transport types TDM, PKT/TDM, and FRM/TDM 
    - a description of the content carried by the TDM circuit on the 
      SDP "m=" line 
    - attributes to convey the content of the Q.931 Low Layer and High 
      Layer Compatibility Information Elements. 
    
   The present issue of this document excludes the following: 
    
    1. Mapping of Layer 2 and Layer 3 protocol parameters (e.g. for 
      X.25, frame relay) into SDP attributes.  It is assumed that such 
      mappings will be defined in separate protocol-specific documents 
      if they are required. 
       
    2. Bearer capability negotiation.  Q.931 and ISUP support the 
      inclusion of multiple Bearer Capability Information Elements for 
      negotiation.  This document supports transfer of only one set of 
      bearer capability information per session description.   
       
    3. Support of multi-rate (N x 64 kbit/s) service. 
    
   This document conforms to the syntactic conventions of SDP as 
   defined in [1]. 
    
1.3 Why Are TDM-Circuit-Specific Conventions Needed? 
 
   SDP was originally designed for the description of media sessions 
   carried over IP packets, typically using RTP [11] encapsulation and 
   UDP transport.  In contrast, description of media transport over TDM 
   circuits must begin at a much lower level, with the basic 
   organization of the bits across the 64 kbit/s channel.  Moreover, 
   the higher-layer organization of the content is typically negotiated 
   "in-band", through protocols such as V.8bis or V.140.  This forces a 
   re-interpretation of the contents of the SDP "m=" line in 
   particular, and the creation of a number of additional attributes to 
   describe the lower layers of transport. 
    
   Addressing of TDM circuits is also different, and for media gateway 
   control is actually irrelevant, since the information is conveyed by 
   other means (terminationIDs in Megaco/H.248, and endpoint 
   identifiers in MGCP).  This affects the SDP "c=" line and makes 
   redundant the port identification on the "m=" line. 
    
   The other lines of the SDP session description can generally be used 
   without modification from their use as described in [1], with the 
   following notes: 
    
    1. If the "b=" line is present, it MUST indicate a bandwidth of 64 
      (kbit/s).  The modifier used is "AS".  The effective user rate, 
      if less than this, is indicated by an attribute within the media 
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               3 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
      description. 
       
    2. The "k=" line MAY be present.  There are probably consistency 
      conditions on the media format value in this case.  
    
1.4 Changes From The Previous Version 
    
   The main change from the previous version has been to limit the 
   scope of the present document by placing greater reliance on the 
   Megaco/H.248 multiplex concept.  This has meant the removal of 
   wideband or aggregated N x 64 kbit/s service from the scope of the 
   document, and the reduction of H.320 and H.324 sessions to 
   application/octet-stream media flows from the point of view of TDM 
   transport.  (Separate documents define SDP conventions for the H221, 
   H223, and H226 transport types.) 
    
   The syntax in this version conforms to [1] rather than RFC 2327. 
    
   MIME subtype registrations for audio/PCMU, audio/PCMA, audio/G721, 
   and application/octet-stream over TDM have been added in the 
   appendices. 
    
2. "c=" Line For TDM circuits 
    
   The connection field ("c=" line) is structured as follows [1]: 
    
      connection-field =    "c=" nettype space addrtype space 
                            connection-address CRLF 
    
   This document reserves a nettype value of "TDM" for TDM circuits.  
    
   The present issue of this document proposes two naming schemes for 
   TDM circuits: the NUL scheme (addrtype is "NUL") and the group-and-
   member scheme (addrtype is "GRP").  Future issues of this document 
   may specify other schemes.  
    
   The NUL scheme is suitable for use with media gateway control, since 
   other means are available (as mentioned above) for designating the 
   TDM circuit.  The NUL connection-address MUST be present, but may be 
   any string satisfying the syntactical requirements of [1], for 
   example, "x".  The receiver MUST ignore the connection-address when 
   addrtype is NUL.  
    
   The GRP scheme designates a logical or physical grouping of circuits 
   within which individual 64 kbit/s channels may be identified by 
   integer values.  The GRP connection-address consists of two parts.  
   The first part identifies the logical or physical group, while the 
   second identifies the individual circuit within the group.   
    
        grp-connection-address = group-part "/" member-part 
         
        group-part  = non-ws-string  ; as defined in [1] 
        member-part = non-ws-string  ; as defined in [1] 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               4 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   Over all, the syntax conforms to the extension-addr form of unicast-
   address as defined in [1].  There is one additional restriction: 
   member-part MUST NOT contain the "/" character. 
         
    
    
3. "m=" Line For TDM Circuits 
    
   [1] defines the syntax of the media field ("m=" line) as follows: 
    
      media-field =         "m=" media space port ["/" integer] 
                            space proto 1*(space fmt) CRLF 
    
3.1 Specification of Medium and Format 
    
   In accordance with [1], the media token must be a MIME type and the 
   fmt token must reference a MIME subtype.  Since existing MIME type 
   registration is for packet transport, it will be necessary to add or 
   extend registrations to include TDM transport.  Where possible, the 
   extension route is preferable.   
    
   Based on RFC 2046 [13] and a review of the various fields of the 
   Bearer Capability Information Element, the two possible settings for 
   the media token appear to be "audio" and "application".  The 
   available range of subtypes is more problematic. 
    
   We begin the discussion with "audio".  RFC 2046 defines one audio 
   subtype: "basic".  This denotes G.711 mu-law PCM.  This would be 
   been quite acceptable to match the Q.931 User Information Layer 1 
   protocol codepoint "Recommendation G.711 mu-law", but leaves 
   "Recommendation G.711 A-law" out in the cold.  Very fortunately, the 
   AVT Working Group has created a new document [14] to register RTP 
   payload types as MIME subtypes.  Two of these subtypes are 
   audio/PCMA and audio/PCMU, corresponding to A-law and Mu-law 
   companding respectively.  The Q.931 codepoint "Recommendation G.721 
   [11] 32 kbit/s ADPCM and Recommendation I.460" is actually for 
   G.726, which is covered in [14] by the audio/G726-16, audio/G726-24, 
   audio/G726-32, and audio/G726-40 MIME subtypes. 
    
   The Q.931 codepoints "Recommendations H.221 and H.242" and 
   "Recommendations H.223 and H.245" refer to the use of H.320 and 
   H.324I multimedia conferencing, respectively.  In the Megaco/H.248 
   model, the TDM circuits carrying these sessions feed into 
   terminations representing the respective multiplexes.  It is the 
   responsibility of the multiplexes to manage the audio, video, data, 
   and control flows.  The SDP for this purpose is documented 
   separately, on the premise that each multiplex represents another 
   transport type.  From the TDM point of view, the flows are 
   undifferentiated, so the MIME subtype application/octet-stream is 
   appropriate. 
    
   "application/octet-stream" is probably adequate to cover the other 
   possibilities provided for in Q.931. 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               5 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   In summary, the possible medium/format combinations for TDM 
   transport are: 
    - audio/pcma 
    - audio/pcmu 
    - audio/g726-16, 24, 32, 40 
    - application/octet-stream   
   The MIME registrations for all of these must be updated to note the 
   possibility of transport over TDM.  This is done in the appendices 
   to the present document. 
    
   If the nature of the medium (typically "audio") is known, it should 
   be specified accordingly.  Otherwise, medium and format are derived 
   from the Transmission Mode, Information Transfer Capability, and 
   User Information Layer 1 Protocol of the bearer, as follows: 
    
      1. Set media = "application" if Transmission Mode is not 
         "circuit", or if Information Transfer Capability is 
         "unrestricted digital information" or "restricted digital 
         information". 
           
      2. If Transmission Mode is "circuit" and Information Transfer 
         Capability is "Speech" or "3.1 kHz audio", set media = 
         "audio". 
          
      3. If Transmission Mode is "circuit" and Information Transfer 
         Capability is "Unrestricted digital information with tones and 
         announcements", set media = "audio" while the call is being 
         set up, then set it to "application". 
          
      4. If Transmission Mode is "circuit" and Information Transfer 
         Capability is "Video", set media = "application".  
         "Application" is more appropriate than "video" as a MIME type 
         because the bit stream carries more than just video and an 
         application tool is required to interpret it. 
     
3.2 Specification of Port 
    
   Port number is inapplicable to TDM circuits, but must be specified 
   to satisfy SDP syntax.  Where the present specification is being 
   used in circumstances in which the offer-answer model [15] applies, 
   setting port = 0 indicates rejection of a media stream.  It is 
   therefore RECOMMENDED that the sender set port = 1 except when it is 
   being used in this way.  The receiver must ignore non-zero port 
   values, and must ignore zero values unless the application is one to 
   which the offer-answer model applies.  Megaco/H.248 in particular 
   does not conform to the offer-answer model, and port is therefore 
   irrelevant. 
    
3.3 Specification of Protocol 
    
   Q.931 and Q.939 distinguish between protocol information which the 
   network sees and may modify (in the Bearer Capability Information 
   Element) and protocol information which is available only between 
   endpoints (in the Low Layer Compatibility Information Element).  
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               6 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   Depending on endpoint intentions, any of the protocol information at 
   layers 1, 2, or 3 may appear in either place.  The only information 
   which is guaranteed to be visible to the network is the transfer 
   mode (circuit, packet, or frame mode).  It is therefore proposed 
   that the transport profile on the "m=" line indicate the transfer 
   mode, but that additional protocol information be indicated on 
   attribute lines within the media description.  This document 
   accordingly defines three transport profiles: 
    
   . "TDM" denotes circuit mode (octet-oriented) transport over a TDM 
     circuit. 
      
   . "PKT/TDM" denotes packet mode transport over a TDM circuit 
      
   . "FRM/TDM" denotes frame mode transport over a TDM circuit. 
    
   The audio MIME type applies only to TDM transport.  The 
   application/octet-string MIME type may be carried by any of the 
   three transports. 
    
    
4. Attributes For TDM circuits 
    
4.1 Audio Transfer Capability  
    
   a= spchonly 
    
   When present, attribute "spchonly" indicates that an audio 
   connection is suitable only for speech (Q.931 Information Transfer 
   Capability = speech) and not for modem or FAX signals. 
    
    
4.2 Bandwidth Restriction 
    
   a=56kmax 
    
   When present, this attribute indicates that the transfer rate for 
   user data is limited to 56 kbit/s per channel.  ITU-T Recommendation 
   I.464 gives further details of operation under these circumstances. 
    
    
4.3 Protocol Profile 
    
   The protocol profile attribute is required to distinguish payloads 
   characterized by the apllication/octet-string MIME type.   
    
   As mentioned above, Q.931 provides two places for user protocols to 
   be specified: in Bearer Capability, where they are subject to 
   inspection and modification by network equipment such as gateways or 
   proxies, and in Low Layer Compatibility, where they are placed for 
   the information of the remote peer.  Rules for the choice of 
   placement are given in Recommendation Q.939. 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               7 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   The present document assumes that if a protocol is exposed to the 
   network, all parameters describing that protocol are also exposed.  
   Thus it is unnecessary to provide segregated versions of the various 
   protocol parameters, only of the protocol stacks themselves. 
    
   a=netprof:<profile> 
   a=e2eprof:<profile> 
    
   Attribute "netprof" lists the protocols which the sender is prepared 
   to expose to network inspection.  Attribute "e2eprof" lists those 
   which are intended for remote peer use only.  Attribute "netprof" 
   SHOULD be present if media = "application" on the "m=" line, even if 
   it is empty. 
    
   <profile> consists of up to three protocol designators, one per 
   layer, separated by "/".  The protocols are ordered from highest to 
   lowest.  Missing layers are omitted, along with their separators.  
   For any given layer: 
    - no protocol is specified in either "netprof" or "e2eprof", or 
    - some protocol is specified in "netprof", or 
    - some protocol is specified in "e2eprof". 
    
   Protocol parameters for protocols listed in "e2eprof" SHOULD be 
   transmitted by network entities without modification. 
    
   Examples: 
    
   a=netprof:Q922A 
        frame relay 
    
   a=e2eprof:X25P/X25L/V110 
        X.25 packet layer over X.25 link layer over V.110 rate adaption 
        (circuit mode operation with user rate less than 64 kbit/s). 
         
   a=e2eprof:PPP 
        layers 1 and 2 are specified in "netprof" or not needed (e.g. 
        because framing is auto-sensed). 
    
 4.4.1 Layer 1 Protocols 
    
   The following table contains the Layer 1 protocols defined in this 
   document.  They correspond to the non-audio codepoints for the User 
   information layer 1 protocol given in Q.931. 
    
   Symbol  Description 
             
   V110    ITU-T standardized rate adaption V.110, I.460 and 
            X.30.  Requires TDM transport. 
             
   V120    ITU-T standardized rate adaption V.120.  Requires 
            TDM transport. 
             
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               8 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
   X31     ITU-T standardized rate adaption X.31 HDLC flag 
            stuffing.  Requires PKT/TDM (packet-mode) 
            transport. 
             
   H221    An H.320 session using the H.221 multiplex.  
            Requires TDM transport. 
             
   H223    An H.324/I session using the H.223 multiplex [Note 
            1].  Requires TDM transport. 
             
      
    
   Note 1: The H223 codepoint is not intended to preclude the use of an 
   H.226 multiplex for multilink operation in accordance with H.324 
   Annex F. 
  
 4.4.2 Layer 2 Protocols 
    
   The Layer 2 codepoints defined in Q.931 and Q.933 are shown in the 
   table below.  The Layer 2 protocol MUST be specified in attribute 
   "netprof" if either PKT/TDM (packet mode) or FRM/TDM (frame mode) 
   transport is being used. 
    
   Symbol    Description 
              
   Q921      Recommendation Q.921/I.441 (typically used for D-
             channel data). 
               
   X25L      Recommendation X.25, link layer. 
              
   ISO8802   LAN logical link control (ISO/IEC 8802-2) 
              Requires TDM transport. 
               
   Q922      Recommendation Q.922 (frame switching). Layer 1 
             must be unspecified.  Requires FRM/TDM (frame 
              mode) transport.   
               
   Q922A     Core aspects of frame mode (Annex A/Q.922) (frame 
              relay).  Layer 1 must be unspecified.  Requires 
              FRM/TDM (frame mode) transport.   
               
   ISO1745   Basic mode (ISO/IEC 1745) 
               
   X25ML     Recommendation X.25 Multilink. 
              
   T71       Extended LAPB; for half duplex operation 
              (Recommendation T.71) 
               
   HDLC-ARM  HDLC ARM (ISO/IEC 4335). 
              
   HDLC-NRM  HDLC NRM (ISO/IEC 4335). 
              
   HDLC-ABM  HDLC ABM (ISO/IEC 4335). 
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002               9 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
              
   X75SLP    Recommendation X.75 single Link Procedure (SLP). 
              
   ISO7776   ISO/IEC 7776 DTE-DCE operation. 
    
    
 4.4.3 Layer 3 Protocols 
    
   The Layer 3 codepoints defined in Q.931 are shown in the table 
   below. 
    
   Symbol  Description 
            
   Q931    Recommendation Q.931 (i.e. call signalling). 
             
   X25P    Recommendation X.25, packet layer. 
             
   IP      Internet Protocol (RFC 791)  Requires TDM 
            transport. 
             
   PPP     Point to Point Protocol (RFC 1598, RFC 1618, or 
            RFC 1973, depending on lower layer).  Requires TDM 
            transport. 
             
   X25PLP  ISO/IEC 8208 [41] (X.25 packet level protocol for 
            data terminal equipment) 
             
   ISO8878 ITU-T Rec. X.223 and ISO/IEC 8878 (use of ISO/IEC 
            8208 and Recommendation X.25 to provide the OSI-
            CONS) 
             
   ISO8473 ISO/IEC 8473 (OSI connectionless mode protocol) 
             
   T70MIN  Recommendation T.70 minimum network layer 
    
    
4.5 User Rate 
    
   a=userbw:<bits> 
    
   <bits> is the user data rate in bits per second per 64 kbit/s 
   channel within the TDM circuit.  This attribute is useful in cases 
   where the user rate information is not passed end-to-end through in-
   band signalling and negotiation.  
    
    
4.6 In-Band Negotiation 
    
   a=ibneg 
    
   This attribute if present indicates that in-band negotiation is 
   supported by the V.110, X.30, I.460 or modem layer 1 protocol. 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002              10 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
4.7 V.110/X.30/I.460 Protocol Parameters 
    
   a=v110parms:<parms> 
    
   <parms> consists of a comma-separated list of parameters.  The only 
   required parameter is the intermediate rate for rate adaptation, 
   which has the form: 
        "intrat="<kbits> 
   <kbits> is the intermediate rate in kbit/s, and has the possible 
   values 8, 16, 32, or "NONE". 
    
   The remaining parameters are keyword values, as follows: 
         
        "sendNIC" indicates by its presence that network-independent 
        clocking will be sent with the outgoing media stream. 
         
        "sendFC" indicates that flow control will be sent with the 
        outgoing media stream. 
         
        "recvNIC" indicates that network-independent clocking may be 
        present in the incoming media stream. 
         
        "recvFC" indicates that flow control may be present in the 
        incoming media stream. 
  
   Note that the directionality convention used here is entity-
   relative, whereas the directionality convention in Q.931 is call-
   relative.  The two conventions coincide at the end of the TDM 
   circuit closer to the calling party, but are opposed at the end 
   closer to the called party.  The convention in this document is the 
   more suitable for media gateway control, since the media gateway is 
   unaware of call direction. 
    
    
 4.8 V.120 Protocol Parameters 
    
   a=v120parms:<parms> 
    
   <parms> consists of a comma-separated list of parameters, as 
   follows.  These parameters are required unless otherwise indicated. 
    
        "mode="<mode> 
        Indicates whether rate adaptation mode is bit-transparent 
        (<mode> = "transp") or protocol-sensitive (<mode> = "protdep"). 
         
        "llineg="<negotiation> 
        Indicates whether and how Logical Link Identifier (LLI) 
        negotiation is done.  <negotiation> has the possible values 
        "NONE" (default) if LLI = 256 is the only value supported, "OB" 
        if negotiation is possible over a temporary signalling channel, 
        or "IB" if negotiation is done on LLI 0. 
         
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002              11 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
        "hdr" 
        Optional keyword parameter.  If present, indicates that the 
        rate adaption header is included. 
         
        "multifrm" 
        Optional keyword parameter.  If present, indicates that 
        multiframe establishment is supported. 
         
        "assgn" 
        Optional keyword parameter.  If present, indicates that the 
        message originator is "Assignor only".  If absent, message 
        originator is "Default assignee". 
    
    
4.9 Asynchronous Parameters 
    
   a=asynch:stop=<sbits>,data=<dbits>,parity=<par>,duplex=<dlx> 
    
   If present, indicates asynchronous data transport. 
    
4.10 Modem 
    
   a=modem:<modem> 
    
   If present, indicates data transport via modem.  <modem> indicates 
   the type of modem used.  It may have values "V34" or "V90".  Other 
   values may be added in subsequent issues of this document if 
   required.  Requires TDM transport and medium specified as audio/PCMU 
   or audio/PCMA. 
    
Security Considerations 
 
   This document deals with the signalling of information to direct the 
   transfer of user information across TDM circuits.  Threats to 
   security may be identified both at the signalling level and at the 
   media transport level.  See [1] for a discussion of security issues 
   at the signalling level. 
    
   Media transport is in general subject to threats to integrity and 
   confidentiality.  (Injection of spurious media into an ongoing 
   session is classed here as a breach of integrity.  Passing of 
   spurious media outside of an established session is considered to be 
   a signalling problem.)  These threats are sharply reduced for TDM as 
   opposed to IP bearer transport.  However, the user is not normally 
   aware of what sort of transport is in use on an end-to-end basis, 
   and the media flow may well pass from one network to another.  Where 
   integrity or confidentiality are a concern, end-to-end encryption of 
   the media stream should be considered. 
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002              12 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
    
References 
     1.  M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Perkins "SDP: Session Description 
          Protocol", IETF draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-new-xx.txt, work in 
          progress. 
           
     2.  B. Rosen, J. Segers et al, "Megaco Protocol Version 1.0", 
          IETF RFC 3015, Standards Track, November 2000. 
           
     3.  C. Huitema et al, "Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) 
          Version 1.0", IETF RFC 2705, Informational, October 1999. 
           
     4.  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg, "SIP: 
          Session Initiation Protocol", IETF RFC 2543, Standards Track, 
          March 1999. 
           
     5.  ITU-T Recommendation Q.1902.1-6, "Bearer Independent Call 
          Control Protocol", July, 2001. 
           
     6.  R. Kumar, M. Mostafa, "Conventions for the use of the Session 
          Description Protocol (SDP) for ATM Bearer Connections", IETF 
          RFC 3108, Standards Track, May 2001. 
           
     7.  ITU-T Recommendation Q.931, "Digital subscriber Signalling 
          System No. 1 û Network layer", May 1998. 
           
     8.  ITU-T Recommendation Q.763, "Signalling system No. 7 - ISDN 
          user part formats and codes", September 1997. 
           
     9.  ITU-T Recommendation Q.699, "Interworking between ISDN access 
          and non-ISDN access over ISDN User Part of signalling system 
          No. 7", September 1997. 
           
     10. S. Bradner, Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
          Levels, IETF RFC 2119, Best Current Practice, March 1997. 
           
     11. H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, V. Jacobson, " RTP: 
          A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", IETF RFC 
          1889, Standards Track, January 1996.  
           
     12. ITU-T Recommendation I.230, "Definition of bearer service 
          categories", November 1988. 
           
     13. N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
          Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", IETF RFC 2046, 
          November 1996. 
           
     14. S. Casner, P.Hoschka, "MIME Type Registration of RTP Payload 
          Type Formats", IETF work in progress. 
           
     15. J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model with 
          SDP", IETF Internet Draft approved as Standards Track RFC in 
          March, 2002. 
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002              13 
                   SDP Conventions For TDM Circuits         April 2002 
                                    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Tom Taylor 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario                  Phone:  +1 613 736 0961 
   Canada K1Y 4H7                   Email:  taylor@nortelnetworks.com 
    
    
    
     
   Taylor       Standards Track - Expires October 2002              14 