mipshop                                                                 
Internet Draft                                                P. McCann 
Document: draft-ietf-mipshop-80211fh-01.txt         Lucent Technologies 
Expires: January 2005                                         July 2004 
    
    
              Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers for 802.11 Networks 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable    
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with    
   RFC 3668. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes how a Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover could be 
   implemented on link layers conforming to the 802.11 suite of 
   specifications. 
    
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 1] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
   3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11.............4 
   4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail.....................................5 
   5. FMIPv6 Message Exchanges.......................................7 
   6. Beacon Scanning and NAR Discovery..............................7 
   7. Scenarios......................................................8 
      7.1 Scenario 1abcdef23456g.....................................9 
      7.2 Scenario ab123456cdefg.....................................9 
      7.3 Scenario 123456abcdefg....................................10 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................10 
   9. Conclusions...................................................11 
   10. References...................................................12 
   11. Acknowledgments..............................................13 
   12. Author's Address.............................................13 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol [2] has been proposed as a way 
   to minimize the interruption in service experienced by a Mobile IPv6 
   node as it changes its point of attachment to the Internet.  Without 
   such a mechanism, a mobile node cannot send or receive packets from 
   the time that it disconnects from one point of attachment in one 
   subnet to the time it registers a new care-of address from the new 
   point of attachment in a new subnet.  Such an interruption would be 
   unacceptable for real-time services such as Voice-over-IP. 
    
   The basic idea behind a Mobile IPv6 fast handover is to leverage 
   information from the link-layer technology to either predict or 
   rapidly respond to a handover event.  This allows IP connectivity to 
   be restored at the new point of attachment sooner than would 
   otherwise be possible.  By tunneling data between the old and new 
   access routers, it is possible to provide IP connectivity in advance 
   of actual Mobile IP registration with the home agent or correspondent 
   node.  This removes such Mobile IP registration, which may require 
   time-consuming Internet round-trips, from the critical path before 
   real-time service is re-established. 
    
   The particular link-layer information available, as well as the 
   timing of its availability (before, during, or after a handover has 
   occurred), differs according to the particular link-layer technology 
   in use.  This document gives a set of deployment examples for Mobile 
   IPv6 Fast Handovers on 802.11 networks.  We begin with a brief 
   overview of relevant aspects of basic 802.11  [3].  We examine how 
   and when handover information might become available to the IP layers 
   that implement Fast Handover, both in the network infrastructure and 
   on the mobile node.  Finally, we give details on how the proposed 
   Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol would work in this environment. 
     
    
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 2] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
2. Terminology 
    
   This document borrows all of the terminology from Mobile IPv6 Fast 
   Handovers [2], with the following additional terms from the 802.11 
   specification [3] (some definitions slightly modified for clarity): 
    
   Access Point (AP): Any entity that has station functionality and 
                  provides access to the distribution services, via the 
                  wireless medium (WM) for associated stations. 
    
   Association:   The service used to establish access point/station 
                  (AP/STA) mapping and enable STA access to the 
                  Distribution System. 
    
   Basic Service Set (BSS): A set of stations controlled by a single 
                  coordination function, where the coordination 
                  function may be centralized (e.g., in a single AP) or 
                  distributed (e.g., for an ad-hoc network).  The BSS 
                  can be thought of as the coverage area of a single 
                  AP. 
    
   Distribution System (DS): A system used to interconnect a set of 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) to create an extended service set 
                  (ESS). 
    
   Extended Service Set (ESS): A set of one or more interconnected 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) that appears as a single BSS to the 
                  logical link control layer at any station associated 
                  with one of those BSSs.  The ESS can be thought of as 
                  the coverage area provided by a collection of APs all 
                  interconnected by the Distribution System.  It may 
                  consist of one or more IP subnets. 
    
   Inter-Access Point Protocol (IAPP): A protocol defined for use 
                  between access points [4] at handover time that 
                  allows for the old association with the old AP to be 
                  deleted, and for context to be transferred to the new 
                  AP. 
    
   Station (STA): Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant 
                  medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) 
                  interface to the wireless medium (WM). 
 
    




 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 3] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11 
    
   In this section we describe the two most likely relationships between 
   Access Points (APs), Access Routers (ARs), and IP subnets that are 
   possible in an 802.11 network deployment.  Here we consider only the 
   infrastructure mode [3] of 802.11.  A given STA may be associated 
   with one and only one AP at any given point in time; when a STA moves 
   out of the coverage area of a given AP it must handover (re-
   associate) with a new AP.  It is important to understand that 802.11 
   offers great flexibility, and that handover from one AP to another 
   does not necessarily mean a change of AR or subnet.   
    
    
                  AR                              AR 
            AR     |    AR                   AR    |     AR 
              \    |   /                       \   |    / 
               Subnet 1                         Subnet 2 
             /  /  |  \  \                    /  /  |  \  \ 
            /  /   |   \  \                  /  /   |   \  \ 
           /   |   |   |   \                /   |   |   |   \ 
        AP1  AP2  AP3  AP4  AP5          AP6  AP7  AP8  AP9  AP10   
    
             Figure 1: An 802.11 deployment with relay APs. 
    
   Figure 1 depicts a typical 802.11 deployment with two IP subnets, 
   each with three Access Routers and five Access Points.  Note that the 
   APs in this figure are acting as link-layer relays, which means that 
   they transport Ethernet-layer frames between the wireless medium and 
   the subnet.  Each subnet is implemented as a single LAN or VLAN.  
   Note that a handover from AP1 to AP2 does not require a change of AR 
   because all three ARs are link-layer reachable from a STA connected 
   to any AP1-5.  Therefore, such handoffs are outside the scope of IP-
   layer handover mechanisms.  However, a handoff from AP5 to AP6 would 
   require a change of AR, because the STA would be attaching to a 
   different subnet.  An IP-layer handover mechanism would need to be 
   invoked in order to provide low-interruption handover between the two 
   ARs. 
    
    
                                Internet 
                               /    |   \ 
                              /     |    \ 
                             /      |     \ 
                           AR      AR      AR 
                           AP1     AP2     AP3 
    
        Figure 2. An 802.11 deployment with integrated APs/ARs. 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 4] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
    
    
   Figure 2 depicts an alternative 802.11 deployment where each AP is 
   integrated with exactly one AR.  In this case, every change of AP 
   would result in a necessary change of AR, which would require some 
   IP-layer handover mechanism to provide for low-interruption handover 
   between the ARs.  Also, the AR shares a MAC-layer identifier with its 
   attached AP. 
    
   In the next section, we examine the steps involved in any 802.11 
   handover. Subsequent sections discuss how these steps could be 
   integrated with an IP-layer handover mechanism in each of the above 
   deployment scenarios. 
    
    
4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail 
    
   An 802.11 handover takes place when a STA changes its association 
   from one AP to another ("re-association").  This process consists of 
   the following steps: 
    
     1. The STA performs a scan to see what APs are available.  The 
        result of the scan is a list of APs together with physical 
        layer information, such as signal strength. 
      
     2. The STA chooses one of the APs and performs a join to 
        synchronize its physical and MAC layer timing parameters with 
        the selected AP. 
         
     3. The STA requests authentication with the new AP.  For an "Open 
        System", such authentication is a single round-trip message 
        exchange with null authentication. 
         
     4. The STA requests association or re-association with the new AP.  
        A re-association request contains the MAC-layer address of the 
        old AP, while a plain association request does not. 
         
     5. If operating in accordance with the IAPP [4], the new AP 
        performs a lookup based on MAC-layer address to obtain the IP 
        address of the old AP by consulting a local table or RADIUS 
        server.  It opens a UDP or TCP connection, protected by IPSec 
        encryption, to the old AP.  Via the secure connection, it 
        informs the old AP of the re-association so that information 
        about the STA is deleted from the old AP.  Note that IAPP can 
        only be invoked based on a re-association message, as the plain 
        association message does not contain the old AP's MAC-layer 
        address. 
         


 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 5] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
     6. The new AP sends a Layer 2 Update frame on the local LAN 
        segment to update the learning tables of any connected Ethernet 
        bridges. 
    
   Note that in some existing 802.11 implementations, steps 1-4 are 
   performed by firmware that is on-board the 802.11 PCMCIA card.  This 
   might make it impossible for the host to take any actions (including 
   sending or receiving IP packets) before the handoff is complete.  In 
   other 802.11 implementations, it is possible to invoke the scan (step 
   1) and join (step 2) operations independently under host control.  
   This would make it possible to, e.g., perform step 1 far in advance 
   of the handover and perhaps in advance of any real-time traffic.  
   This could substantially reduce the handover latency, as one study 
   has concluded that the 802.11 beacon scanning function may take 
   several hundred milliseconds to complete [5] during which time 
   sending and receiving IP packets is not possible.  However, scanning 
   too far in advance may make the information out-of-date by the time 
   of handoff, which would cause the subsequent join operation to fail 
   if radio conditions have changed so much in the interim that the 
   target AP is no longer reachable.  A given implementation of FMIPv6 
   over 802.11 must weigh this tradeoff carefully. 
    
   Even if steps 1 and 2 are performed in rapid succession, there is no 
   guarantee that an AP found during step 1 will be available during 
   step 2 because radio conditions can change dramatically from moment 
   to moment.  The STA may then decide to associate with a completely 
   different AP.  Often, this decision is implemented in firmware and 
   the attached host would have no control over which AP is chosen. 
    
   There is no standardized trigger for step 1.  It may be performed as 
   a result of decaying radio conditions on the current AP or at other 
   times as determined by local implementation decisions. 
    
   During step 5, IAPP is used to communicate with the old AP.  The 
   IPSec tunnel between the two APs is originally established with key 
   distribution via RADIUS, but can be subsequently re-used for 
   different MNs that may need to handover between the same pair of APs. 
   Note that the SA is between the pair of APs and has nothing to do 
   with any security association that might be in place between the MN 
   and either of the APs.  During IAPP operation, link-layer context may 
   be transferred from the old AP to the new AP.  The IAPP defines a 
   container for context information.  However, no such context has 
   currently been defined or standardized by IEEE. 
 
   The coverage area of a single AP is known as a Basic Service Set 
   (BSS).  Note that both APs in the above description are considered to 
   belong to the same Extended Service Set (ESS).  This is to trigger a 
   re-association (rather than plain association) from the STA, which 
   contains information about both the old and new AP.  All APs should 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 6] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
   therefore broadcast the same ESSID.  If two APs belong to different 
   administrative domains, this may require some inter-domain 
   coordination of the ESSID.  Otherwise, there may not be sufficient 
   information to construct the link-layer triggers required by some 
   handover mechanisms. 
    
   A change of BSS within an ESS may or may not require an IP-layer 
   handover, depending on whether the APs provide STAs access to 
   different or the same IP subnets.  If an IP-layer handover is 
   required, then FMIPv6 may be used to decrease the overall latency of 
   the handover.  The main goal of this document is to describe the most 
   reasonable scenarios for how the events of an 802.11 handover may 
   interleave with the message exchanges in FMIPv6. 
    
 
5. FMIPv6 Message Exchanges 
    
   An FMIPv6 handover nominally consists of the following messages: 
    
     a. The MN sends a Router Solicitation for Proxy (RtSolPr) to find 
        out about neighboring ARs. 
      
     b. The MN receives a Proxy Router Advertisement (PrRtAdv) 
        containing one or more [AP-ID, AR-Info] tuples. 
      
     c. The MN sends a Fast Binding Update (FBU) to the Previous Access 
        Router (PAR).   
      
     d. The PAR sends an HI message to the New Access Router (NAR). 
      
     e. The NAR sends a HAck message to the PAR. 
      
     f. The PAR sends a Fast Binding Acknowledgement (FBack) message to 
        the MS the new link.  The FBack is also optionally sent on the 
        previous link if the FBU was sent from there. 
      
     g. The MN sends FNA to the NAR after attaching to it. 
    
   The MN may connect to NAR prior to sending the FBU if the handover is 
   un-anticipated.  In this case, the FNA (step g) would contain the FBU 
   (listed as step c above) and then steps d, e, and f would take place 
   from there. 
    
    
6. Beacon Scanning and NAR Discovery 
    
   The RtSolPr message is used to request information about the 
   router(s) connected to one or more APs.  The APs are specified by 
   link layer address in the RtSolPr and associated IP-layer information 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 7] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
   is returned in the PrRtAdv.  In the case of an 802.11 link, the link 
   layer address is the BSSID of some AP. 
    
   Beacon scanning (step 1 from Section 4) produces a list of available 
   APs along with signal strength information for each.  This list would 
   supply the necessary BSSIDs to fill into the RtSolPr messages.  To 
   obtain this list the host needs to invoke the MLME-SCAN.request 
   primitive (See Section 10.3.2.1 of the 802.11 specification [3]). 
    
   Because beacon scanning takes on the order of a few hundred 
   milliseconds to complete, and because it is generally not possible to 
   send and receive IP packets during this time, the MN needs to 
   schedule these events with care so that they do not disrupt ongoing 
   real-time services.  For example, the scan could be performed at the 
   time the MN attaches to the network prior to any real-time traffic.  
   However, if the interval between scanning and handoff is too long, 
   the neighbor list may be out of date.  For example, the signal 
   strengths of neighboring APs may have dramatically changed, and a 
   handoff directed to the apparently best AP from the old list may 
   fail.  If the handoff is executed in firmware, the STA may even 
   choose a new target AP that is entirely missing from the old list 
   (after performing its own scan).  Both cases would limit the ability 
   of the MN to choose the correct NAR for the FBU in step c during an 
   anticipated handover. 
    
   Note that, aside from physical layer parameters such as signal 
   strength, it may be possible to obtain all necessary information 
   about neighboring APs by using the wildcard form of the RtSolPr 
   message.  This would cause the current access router to return a list 
   of neighboring APs, and would not interrupt ongoing communication 
   with the current AP.  This request could be made at the time the MN 
   first attaches to the access router, and periodically thereafter.  
   This would enable the MN to cache the necessary [AP-ID, AR-Info] 
   tuples and might enable it to react more quickly when a handover 
   becomes necessary due to a changing radio environment.  However, 
   because the information does not include up-to-date signal strength, 
   it would not enable the MN to predict accurately the next AP prior to 
   a handoff.  Also, if the scale of the network is such that a given 
   access router is attached to many APs, then it is possible that there 
   may not be room to list all APs in the PrRtAdv. 
    
    
7. Scenarios 
    
   In this section we look at a few of the possible scenarios for using 
   FMIPv6 in an 802.11 context.  Each scenario is labeled by the 
   sequence of events that take place, where the numbered events are 
   from Section 4 and the lettered events are from Section 5.  For 
   example, "1abcde23456fg" is the sequence where the MN performs a 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 8] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
   scan, then the MN executes the FMIPv6 messaging to obtain NAR 
   information and send a binding update, then the PAR initiates 
   HI/HAck exchange, then the 802.11 handover completes, and finally 
   the HAck is received at the PAR and the MN sends an FNA. 
    
   Each scenario is followed by a brief description and discussion of 
   the benefits and drawbacks. 
    
    
7.1 Scenario 1abcdef23456g 
    
   This scenario is the predictive mode of operation  from the FMIPv6 
   specification.  In this scenario, the host executes the scan sometime 
   prior to the handover, and is able to execute most of the FMIPv6 
   protocol prior to handover.  Only the FNA is sent after the handoff.  
   This mode of operation requires that the scan and join operations 
   (steps 1 and 2) can be performed separately and under host control, 
   so that steps a-f can be inserted between 1 and 2. 
    
   Steps 1ab may be executed far in advance of the handover, which would 
   remove them from the critical path.  This would minimize the service 
   interruption from beacon scanning, and allow at least one 
   RtSolPr/PrRtAdv exchange to complete so that the host has link layer 
   information about some NARs.  Note that if steps ab were delayed 
   until handoff is eminent, there would be no guarantee that the 
   RtSolPr/PrRtAdv exchange would complete especially in a radio 
   environment where the connection to the old AP is deteriorating 
   rapidly.  However, if there were a long interval between the scan and 
   the handover, then the FBU (step c) would be created with out-of-date 
   information.  There is no guarantee that the MN will actually attach 
   to the desired new AP after it has sent the FBU to the oAR, because 
   changing radio conditions may cause nAR to be suddenly unreachable.  
   If this is the case, then the handoff would need to devolve into one 
   of the reactive cases given below. 
    
    
7.2 Scenario ab123456cdefg 
    
   This is the reactive mode of operation from the FMIPv6 specification.  
   This scenario does not require host intervention between steps 1 and 
   2. 
    
   However, it does require that the MN obtain the link-layer address of 
   NAR prior to handover, so that it has a link-layer destination 
   address for outgoing packets (default router information).  This 
   would then be used for sending the FNA (with encapsulated FBU) when 
   it reaches the new subnet.   
    
    
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005                [Page 9] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
7.3 Scenario 123456abcdefg 
    
   In this scenario the MN does not obtain any information about the NAR 
   prior to executing the handover.  It is completely reactive, and 
   consists of soliciting a router advertisement after handover, and 
   then sending an FNA with encapsulated FBU immediately. 
    
   This scenario may be appropriate when it is difficult to learn the 
   link-layer address of the NAR prior to handover.  This may be the 
   case, e.g., if the scan primitive is not available to the host and 
   the wildcard PrRtAdv form returns too many results.  It may be 
   possible to skip the router advertisement/solicitation steps (ab) in 
   some cases, if it is possible to learn the NAR's link-layer address 
   through some other means.  In the deployment illustrated in Figure 2, 
   this would be exactly the new AP's MAC layer address, which can be 
   learned from the link-layer handoff messages.  However, in the case 
   of Figure 1, this information must be learned through router 
   discovery of some form.  Also note that even in the case of Figure 2, 
   the MN must somehow be made aware that it is in fact operating in a 
   Figure 2 network and not a Figure 1 network. 
    
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   The FBU message (the only FMIPv6 message that sets up forwarding 
   state) is protected by well-understood Mobile IPv6 security 
   mechanisms, so the PAR can guarantee it was actually generated by the 
   MS.  However, if the association with the new AP is not protected 
   using mutual authentication, it may be possible for a rogue AP to 
   fool the MN into sending an FBU to the PAR when it is not in its best 
   interest to do so. 
 
   There are several security issues of note with the underlying 802.11 
   handoff mechanisms.  Note that steps 5 and 6 from Section 4 install 
   layer-2 forwarding state that can redirect user traffic and cause 
   disruption of service if they can be triggered by malicious nodes. 
    
   Note that step 3 from Section 4 could potentially provide some 
   security; however, due to the identified weaknesses in WEP shared key 
   security [6], there is currently no authentication algorithm for step 
   3 that is both standardized and secure. 
    
   It may be the case that many deployments are configured as "Open 
   Systems", which will rely instead on higher-layer authentication such 
   as 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control [7].  According to 
   published standards, such authentication techniques would happen only 
   after association or re-association takes place, which leaves the re-
   association messages unprotected.  This would allow malicious nodes 
   to redirect traffic to a different AP on the same subnet.  Work is 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 10] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
   currently underway to better integrate 802.1X with 802.11 [8] but it 
   is not yet complete. 
    
   The 802.1X standard defines a way to encapsulate EAP on 802 networks 
   (EAPOL, for "EAP over LANs").  With this method, the client and AP 
   participate in an EAP exchange which itself can encapsulate any of 
   the various EAP authentication methods.  The EAPOL exchange can 
   output a master key, which can then be used to derive transient keys, 
   which in turn can be used to encipher/authenticate subsequent 
   traffic.  It is possible to use 802.1X pre-authentication [8] between 
   a STA and a target AP while the STA is associated with another AP; 
   this would enable authentication to be done in advance of handover, 
   which would both protect the re-association message and allow fast 
   resumption of service after roaming.  However, because EAPOL frames 
   carry only MAC-layer instead of IP-layer addresses, this is currently 
   only specified to work within a single subnet, where IP layer handoff 
   mechanisms are not needed anyway.  In our case (roaming across subnet 
   boundaries) the 802.1X exchange would need to be performed after 
   roaming to, but prior to re-association with, the new AP.  This would 
   introduce additional handover delay while the 802.1X exchange takes 
   place, which may also involve round-trips to RADIUS or Diameter 
   servers. 
    
   Perhaps faster cross-subnet authentication could be achieved by 
   leveraging the context transfer features of the IAPP to carry 
   security credentials, or with the use of pre-authentication using an 
   IP-layer mechanism that would cross subnet boundaries.  To our 
   knowledge this sort of work is not currently underway in the IEEE.  
   The security considerations of these new approaches would need to be 
   carefully studied. 
    
 
9. Conclusions 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handoff specification presents a protocol for 
   shortening the period of service interruption during a change in 
   link-layer point of attachment.  This document attempts to show how 
   this protocol may be applied in the context of 802.11 access 
   networks. 
    
   There are currently serious security problems in the published 
   specifications that define the 802.11 handover process that must be 
   fixed before even intra-subnet mobility can be considered secure.  
   In-progress specifications may fix these problems but may also 
   introduce additional delay for handover across different subnets.  
   Usually, only the APs themselves are aware that good link-layer 
   security is in place.  This information could be made available to 
   ARs with the use of a new protocol, but such mechanisms are prone to 
   be link-layer specific. 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 11] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
    
   The particular implementation of the 802.11 hardware and firmware may 
   dictate how FMIPv6 is able to operate.  For example, to execute a 
   predictive handover, the scan request primitive must be available to 
   the host and the firmware must execute join operations only under 
   host control, not autonomously in response to its own handoff 
   criteria.  Obtaining the desired PrRtAdv and sending an FBU 
   immediately prior to handover requires that messages be exchanged 
   over the wireless link during a period when connectivity is 
   degrading.  In some cases the scenario given in Section 7.1 may not 
   complete successfully or the FBU may redirect traffic to the wrong 
   NAR.  However, in these cases it seems that the scenario from Section 
   7.2 or at worst the scenario from Section 7.3 present reasonable 
   fall-back strategies. 
    
    
10. References 
    
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   2  Koodli, R. (editor), "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-
      mipshop-fast-mipv6-01.txt, February 2004.  Work In Progress. 
    
   3  "Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
      Specifications", ANSI/IEEE Std 802.11, 1999 Edition. 
    
   4  "Recommended Practice for Multi-Vendor Access Point 
      Interoperability via an Inter-Access Point Protocol Across 
      Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11 Operation", IEEE Std 
      802.11f/D4, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   5  Mitra, A., Shin, M., and Arbaugh, W., "An Empirical Analysis of 
      the IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer Handoff Process", CS-TR-4395, University 
      of Maryland Department of Computer Science, September 2002. 
    
   6  Borisov, N., Goldberg, I., and Wagner, D., "Intercepting Mobile 
      Communications: The Insecurity of 802.11", Proceedings of the 
      Seventh Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
      Networking, July 2001, pp. 180-188. 
    
   7  "Port-Based Network Access Control", IEEE Std 802.1X-2001, 
      October, 2001. 
    
   8 "Draft Supplement to IEEE 802.11: Specification for Enhanced 
      Security", IEEE Std 802.11i/D2.2, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    


 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 12] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
    
11. Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Bob O'Hara for providing explanation and insight on the 
   802.11 standards.  Thanks to James Kempf, Erik Anderlind, and Rajeev 
   Koodli for providing comments on an earlier draft. 
    
    
12. Author's Address 
    
   Pete McCann 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226R 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 713 9359 
   Fax:   +1 630 713 1921 
   Email: mccap@lucent.com 
  
 






























 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 13] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an    
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   At the time of submission the author is not aware of any intellectual 
   property rights that pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document.  However, this does not 
   preclude the possibility that Lucent Technologies, Inc. or other 
   entities may have such rights.  The patent licensing policy of Lucent 
   Technologies, Inc. is on file with the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
    
    
 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 14] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover                July 2004 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
 












































 
 
McCann                  Expires - January 2005               [Page 15] 