
Internet-Draft                                                        Pars Mutaf
Expires: December 19, 2006              Institut National des Telecommunications
                                                                    Evry, France
                                                                       June 2006


          Constructing an IPv6 interface identifier from a human name
                        <draft-mutaf-ipv6humid-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 19, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses
   and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth
   therein, the authors retain all their rights.










Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006


Abstract

This document describes some rules for constructing an IPv6 interface 
identifier from a human name (denoted HUMID). A HUMID-based IPv6 address can 
augment the reachability of a node in some critical scenarios. HUMID-based IPv6 
addresses are configured using standard stateless address autoconfiguration.


1. Introduction

This document describes the construction and utilization of IPv6 interface 
identifiers obtained from human name, or HUMIDs. This document refers to the 
type of IPv6 addresses where the leftmost 64 bits of a 128-bit address form 
the subnet prefix and the rightmost 64 bits of the address form the interface 
identifier [1].  

A HUMID is constructed using a cryptographic hash of the user's real name
(i.e. human name). For example, John Smith's HUMID is:

         HUMID = hash(John Smith) 

A session initiating user can then try to contact his/her friend John Smith 
by sending a packet to the HUMID-based IPv6 address:

         subnet_prefix | hash(John Smith)

if other methods of obtaining his address have failed. This mode of 
operation can be used when, for example, DNS is down or unreachable.


2. Guessing the destination's subnet prefix 

In order to reach a user at his/her HUMID-based IPv6 address, the destination 
node's subnet prefix must be known. In this section, two different cases are 
discussed.


2.1 Initiator and responder are in the same subnet

In some cases, the session initiating user may know or can guess that the target 
user is currently located in the same subnet as the session initiating user 
(same building, campus, village, etc). In this case, the destination's 
HUMID-based address can easily be constructed.








Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006


2.2 Initiator has a list of possible subnets

In some cases, the session initiating user may have obtained a list of 'n' 
potential subnets where the target user is likely to be located. The initiator 
may have a subnetting map of the target region, for example. In this case, the 
initiator may attempt to locate and contact his/her friend John Smith by sending 
a packet to the IPv6 addresses:

         subnet_prefix1 | hash(John Smith)
         subnet_prefix2 | hash(John Smith)
         subnet_prefix3 | hash(John Smith)
                     ...
         subnet_prefixn | hash(John Smith)

if other methods of obtaining his/her address have failed. 

When doing so, it is in the initiator's interest to respect the congestion 
control principles. Otherwise, some packets may be lost and the paging procedure 
may fail. The initiator will have no reliable way to detect lost packets. 
Therefore, packets should be inserted slowly, in order to avoid packet loss.

It should be noted that the above paging procedure does not have guaranteed 
success. It is the "last chance method" for contacting a destination host when
every other method fails because of infrastructure failure. 


3. HUMID construction and guidelines

HUMIDs should be as simple as possible. If too much personal information is 
input to the hash function, other nodes may fail to construct the same HUMID. 
HUMIDs are based on information that is input by a human. Consequently, it 
should be easy to remember and guess.



















Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006


This document recommends the following method for constructing a HUMID:

              HUMID=hash(firstname middlename lastname i)

where 

    hash is a 62-bit output of a cryptographic hash function.

    "firstname" is the firstname of the user, without capital letters.

    "middlename" is the middlename of the user, if any and if used, without 
    capital letters. It is important to note that the "middlename" must be 
    easy to remember as well. If not, it should not be used.

    "lastname" is the lastname of the user, without capital letters.

    "i" is 0, 1, 2, etc. By default i=0 should be set. Each time an address 
    collision is detected (with DAD[3]), "i" should be incremented.

A white space separates the "firstname", the "middlename" the "lastname" 
and "i".

When attempting to contact a host at its HUMID address, the initiator should 
send a packet to 

	subnet_prefix | hash(firstname middlename lastname 0)

and upon failure another packet to 

	subnet_prefix | hash(firstname middlename lastname 1)

and upon failure another packet to 

	subnet_prefix | hash(firstname middlename lastname 2)
etc. 


4. Security considerations

The use of a HUMID contradicts user privacy[4].
Users who configure a HUMID should be beware that a HUMID may reveal the 
presence and/or location of a user to unwanted parties. Suspecting that John 
Smith in this subnet, an adversary may verify it by sending a packet to his
HUMID address. Sending a reply from the HUMID address will reveal the user's
presence and/or location.






Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006




HUMIDs should be used by users for whom, and in cases where, 
augmented reachability outweighs the above threat. 

HUMIDs are by no means a proof of address ownership. For proof of address 
ownership a CGA[2] should be used.

HUMID IPv6 addresses are not different from a standard IPv6 address. 
It is possible to spoof a HUMID-based address. However, HUMID-based address 
ownership of the responder can be verified during a voice session, since the 
initiator recognizes his/her voice.


5. Conclusion

This document described the construction and utilization of IPv6 interface 
identifiers obtained from human name, or HUMIDs.

HUMIDs can be constructed from information that can easily be remembered and/or
guessed. Consequently, they can improve the reachability of an IPv6 node in some
critical scenarios.


6. Future work

Section 3 does not cover all kinds of human names in the world. More work is 
needed.


References


[1]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "Internet Protocol
     Version 6 (IPv6) Addressing Architecture", RFC
     3513, April 2003.

[2]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
        RFC 3972, March 2005.

[3]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
     Address Autoconfiguration", draft-ietf-ipv6-rfc2462bis-08
     (work in progress), May 2005.

[4]  Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for
     Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC
     3041, January 2001. 




Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006


Author's Address

   Pars Mutaf
   Institut National des Telecommunications
   Email: pars.mutaf@int-evry.fr

   This document and the information contained herein
   are provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE
   INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM
   ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
   ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
   INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





































Mutaf                  Expires December 9, 2006                         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       IPv6 interface identifier from human name         June 2006
