
Network Working Group                                       Jutta Degener
Internet Draft					          Philip Guenther
Expires: August 2005                                       Sendmail, Inc.
                                                            February 2005


	     Sieve Mail Filtering Language: Body Extension
		     <draft-ietf-sieve-body-00.txt>


Status of this memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, or
   will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be disclosed,
   in accordance with RFC 3668.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
   provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract

   This document defines a new primitive for the "Sieve" email filtering
   language that tests for the occurrence of one or more strings in the
   body of an email message.


1. Introduction

   The proposed "body" test checks for the occurrence of one
   or more strings in the body of an email message.
   Such a test was initially discussed for the [SIEVE] base
   document, but was subsequently removed because it was
   thought to be too costly to implement.

   Nevertheless, several server vendors have implemented
   some form of the "body" test.

   This document reintroduces the "body" test as an extension,
   and specifies it syntax and semantics.


2. Conventions used.

   Conventions for notations are as in [SIEVE] section 1.1, including
   use of [KEYWORDS] and "Syntax:" label for the definition of action
   and tagged arguments syntax.

   The capability string associated with extension defined in this
   document is "body".


3. Test body

   Syntax:
   	"body" [COMPARATOR] [MATCH-TYPE] [BODY-TRANSFORM]
   		<key-list: string-list>

   The body test matches text in the body of an email message,
   that is, anything following the first empty line after the header.
   (The empty line itself, if present, is not considered to be part
   of the body.)

   The COMPARATOR and MATCH-TYPE keyword parameters are defined
   in [SIEVE].  The BODY-TRANSFORM is a keyword parameter
   discussed in section 4, below.

   If a message consists of a header only, not followed by an empty
   line, all "body" tests fail, including that for an empty string.

   If a message consists of a header followed only by an empty
   line with no body lines following it, the message is considered
   to have an empty string as a body.


4. Body Transform

   Prior to matching text in a message body, "transformations"
   can be applied that filter and decode certain parts of the body.
   These transformations are selected by a "BODY-TRANSFORM"
   keyword parameter.

   Syntax:
   	  ":raw"
	/ ":content" <content-types: string-list>
	/ ":text"

   The default transformation is :text.


4.1 Body Transform ":raw"

   The ":raw" transform is intended to match against the undecoded
   body of a message.

   If the specified body-transform is ":raw", the [MIME] structure of
   the body is irrelevant.  The implementation MUST NOT remove any
   transfer encoding from the message, MUST NOT refuse to filter
   messages with syntactic errors (unless the environment it is part
   of rejects them outright), and MUST NOT interpret or skip MIME
   headers of enclosed body parts.

   Example:

   	require "body";

	# This will match a message containing the words "MAKE MONEY FAST"
	# in body or MIME headers other than the outermost RFC 822 header,
	# but will not match a message containing the words in a
	# content-transfer-encoded body.

	if body :raw :contains "MAKE MONEY FAST" {
		reject;
	}



4.2 Body Transform ":content"

   If the body transform is ":content", only MIME parts that have
   the specified content-types are selected for matching.

   If an individual content type contains a '/' (slash), it
   specifies a full <type>/<subtype> pair, and matches only
   that specific content type.  If it is the empty string, all
   MIME content types are matched.  Otherwise, it specifies a
   <type> only, and any subtype of that type matches it.

   The search for MIME parts matching the :content specification is
   recursive and automatically descends into multipart and
   message/rfc822 MIME parts.  Once a MIME part has been identified
   as suitable for searching, only its direct contents are searched
   for the key strings.

   For example, a document with "multipart" major content type only
   directly contains the text in its epilogue and prologue section;
   all the user-visible data inside it is directly contained in
   documents with MIME types other than multipart.

   (Nevertheless, matches against container types with an empty
   match string can be useful as tests for the existence of such
   document parts.)

   MIME parts encoded in "quoted-printable" or "base64" content
   transfer encodings MUST be decoded to prior to the match.
   MIME parts in other transfer encodings MAY be decoded, omitted
   from the test, or processed as raw data.

   MIME parts identified as using charsets other than UTF-8 as
   defined in [UTF-8] SHOULD be converted to UTF-8 prior to the match.
   A conversion from US-ASCII to UTF-8 MUST be supported.
   If an implementation does not support conversion of a given
   charset to  UTF-8, it MAY compare against the US-ASCII subset
   of the transfer-decoded character data instead.  Characters from
   documents tagged with charsets that the local implementation
   cannot convert to UTF-8 and text from mistagged documents MAY
   be omitted or processed according to local conventions.

   Search expressions MUST NOT match across MIME part boundaries.
   MIME headers of the containing text MUST NOT be included in the
   data.

   Example:
   	require ["body", "fileinto"];

	# Save any message with any text MIME part that contains the
	# worlds "missile" or "coordinates" in the "secrets" folder. 

	if body :content "text" :contains ["missile", "coordinates"] {
		fileinto "secrets";
	}

	# Save any message with an audio/mp3 MIME part in
	# the "jukebox" folder.

	if body :content "audio/mp3" :contains "" {
		fileinto "jukebox";
	}


4.3 Body Transform ":text"

   The ":text" body transform matches against the results of 
   an implementation's best effort at extracting UTF-8 encoded
   text from a message.

   In simple implementations, :text MAY be treated the same
   as :content "text".

   Sophisticated implementations MAY strip mark-up from the text
   prior to matching, and MAY convert media types other than text
   to text prior to matching.
   
   (For example, they may be able to convert proprietary text
   editor formats to text or apply optical character recognition
   algorithms to image data.)



5. Interaction with Other Sieve Extensions

   Any extension that extends the grammar for the COMPARATOR or
   MATCH-TYPE nonterminals will also affect the implementation of
   "body".
  
   The [REGEX] extension can place a considerable load on a system
   when applied to whole bodies of messages, especially when
   implemented naively or used maliciously.

   Regular and wildcard expressions used with "body" are exempt
   from the side effects described in [VARIABLES].  That is, they
   do not set numbered variables ${1}, ${2}... to the input
   values corresponding to wild card sequences in the matched
   pattern.  However, variable references in the pattern string
   are evaluated as described in the draft, if the extension
   is present.


6.  IANA Considerations

    The following template specifies the IANA registration of the Sieve
    extension specified in this document:

    To: iana@iana.org
    Subject: Registration of new Sieve extension

    Capability name: body
    Capability keyword: body
    Capability arguments: N/A
    Standards Track/IESG-approved experimental RFC number: this RFC
    Person and email address to contact for further information:

    Jutta Degener
    jutta@pobox.com

    This information should be added to the list of sieve extensions
    given on http://www.iana.org/assignments/sieve-extensions.


7. Security Considerations

   The system MUST be sized and restricted in such a manner that
   even malicious use of body matching does not deny service to
   other users of the host system.

   Filters relying on string matches in the raw body of an email
   message may be more general than intended.  Text matches are no
   replacement for a virus or spam filtering system.


8. Acknowledgments

   This document has been revised in part based on comments and
   discussions that took place on and off the SIEVE mailing list.
   Thanks to Cyrus Daboo, Ned Freed, Simon Josefsson, Mark E. Mallet,
   Chris Markle, Greg Shapiro, Tim Showalter, Nigel Swinson,
   and Dowson Tong for reviews and suggestions.


9. Authors' Addresses

   Jutta Degener
   5245 College Ave, Suite #127
   Oakland, CA 94618

   Email: jutta@pobox.com

   Philip Guenther
   Sendmail, Inc.
   6425 Christie Ave, 4th Floor
   Emeryville, CA 94608

   Email: guenther@sendmail.com


10. Discussion

   This section will be removed when this document leaves the
   Internet-Draft stage.

   This draft is intended as an extension to the Sieve mail filtering
   language.  Sieve extensions are discussed on the MTA Filters mailing
   list at <ietf-mta-filters@imc.org>.  Subscription  requests can
   be sent to <ietf-mta-filters-request@imc.org> (send an email
   message with the word "subscribe" in the body).

   More information on the mailing list along with a WWW archive of
   back messages is available at <http://www.imc.org/ietf-mta-filters/>.


10.1 Changes from draft-degener-sieve-body-04.txt
   Renamed to draft-ietf-sieve-body-00.txt; tweaked the title and abstract.

   Added Philip Guenther as co-author.

   Split references into normative and informative.  Updated [UTF-8]
   and [VARIABLES] references.

   Updated IPR boilerplate.


10.2 Changes from draft-degener-sieve-body-03.txt

   Made "body" exempt from variable-setting side effects in the presence
   of the "variables" extension and wild cards.  It's too hard to implement.

   Removed :binary.  It's uglier and less useful than it needs to be
   to bother.

   Added IANA section.


Appendices

Appendix A.  Normative References

   [KEYWORDS] 	Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   		Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [MIME] 	Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
   		Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
		Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [SIEVE] 	Showalter, T.,  "Sieve: A Mail Filtering Language", RFC 3028,
		January 2001.

   [UTF-8]      Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646",
		RFC 3629, November 2003.


Appendix B.  Informative References

   [VARIABLES] Homme, K.T., "Sieve Mail Filtering Language: Variables
               Extension", draft-ietf-sieve-variables-01.txt, February 2005


Appendix C. Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to
   rights in IETF Documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by
   the Internet Society.

