Network Working Group                                           BZ. Zinn
Internet-Draft                        Department of Chemistry, Louisiana
Expires: October 3, 2004                                State University
                                                           April 4, 2004



                        When NOT to Bounce Email
                     draft-zinn-smtp-bounces-00.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 3, 2004.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   SMTP RFCs currently require that a notice message MUST be sent when a
   message will not be delivered, even when the 'reverse-path' is
   forged by a virus. Of necessity, some ISPs are now dropping such
   messages silently. Silent dropping of such messages should be allowed
   and encouraged under certain circumstances.











Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



Table of Contents


   1.   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.   Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.   quotation from the 1928 Radio Manual, page 614 . . . . . . .   9
   7.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  10









































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



1.  Requirements notation


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].















































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



2.  Introduction


   It is time to modify the philosophy that one must always 'deliver or
   bounce' because bounces are not always in the best interest of the
   internet.


   History: Long before the first e-mail was sent, it was the rule that
   the party in possession of a message was responsible for moving the
   message toward its destination or returning a notice to the
   originator of the message [RadioManual]. SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer
   Protocol) was developed in this atmosphere and the SMTP RFCs such as
   [RFC2821] seem to imply that the only party that may discard a
   message is the addressee. Anyone else handling the message MUST
   return a bounce (an indication of failure to deliver) to the
   originator.


   Today, the reliability of e-mail message traffic is being threatened
   by strict adherence to this principle.


   Recent viruses take advantage of bounce messages to amplify their
   damage. These recent viruses forge the ‚Çÿreverse path‚ÇÖ of the
   messages they send. If the recipient‚ÇÖs ISP detects a virus in an
   incoming message and blocks delivery to the targeted victim, the
   system operators often believe they are REQUIRED by the RFCs to send
   a bounce message back to the originator as indicated by the
   ‚Çÿreverse path‚ÇÖ. These bounces fill the inboxes of innocent
   victims with spurious messages.


   Important messages are being lost in the noise.


   The spurious messages contain no useful information. Just as the
   original message, spawned by the virus, contained no useful
   information, the bounce contains no useful information. Moreover,
   depending on what an anti virus program does about returning content,
   it is possibe for bounce messages to spread the virus. Even without
   an attached virus, such bounces increase traffic and storage
   requirements unnecessarily. These spurious messages falsely indicate
   that the supposed originator‚ÇÖs machine is infected with a virus.
   This false information can prompt the user to damage their machine by
   trying to remove a nonexistent virus.


   ‚ÇÿSilent message dropping‚ÇÖ implies that a message is accepted for
   delivery or relay and then the message is discarded with no notice
   given to the addressee or sender. Since both the addressee and sender
   are targeted as victims by the virus, there is no reason to send them
   notice.


   Bounces to forged addresses cause many problems. Many ISPs (internet




Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



   service providers) are now silently discarding such messages in order
   to reduce spurious bounces and protect the reliability of e-mail as a
   communications medium. The BCP (best current practices) should
   reflect this fact and the RFCs should be updated to allow and
   encourage this practice. In a recent conversation related to spurious
   bounce messages, a system operator was adamant that he MUST send the
   bounces because the RFCs said so. That is the motivation behind this
   document.












































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



3.  Proposal


   This Internet Draft states that although there may be an obligation
   to deliver or notify when a message has a valid origin, messages
   generated by viruses are ‚Çÿinvalid‚ÇÖ in origin and carry neither an
   obligation to deliver nor an obligation to notify.


   When it can be accurately determined that a message has a forged
   ‚Çÿreverse path‚ÇÖ, has no content desired by or useful to the
   addressee, and has no content useful to the forged originator, then
   the message SHOULD be silently discarded.


   If the actual source of a message spawned by a virus can be
   determined, the responsible ISP MAY be notified.


   New SMTP RFCs should be issued to make it clear that it IS ok to
   discard messages when it is determined that they have no useful
   content and such messages SHOULD be silently discarded when the
   ‚Çÿoriginator‚ÇÖ is forged.

































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



4.  Security Considerations


   This proposal would modify the long standing assumption that any
   message sent will either be delivered or trigger a notification
   bounce.


   The change might seem to ‚Çÿreduce the reliability‚ÇÖ of e-mail as a
   communications channel. However, failure to silently delete messages
   spawned by viruses exacerbates the damage done by viruses. If message
   dropping is done carefully, fewer ‚Çÿreal‚ÇÖ messages will be lost
   than would be lost if the ‚Çÿmust bounce‚ÇÖ rule were followed.


   Blind adherence to the ‚Çÿmust bounce‚ÇÖ principle causes a greater
   overall harm to the communications channel because it decreases the
   reliability of e-mail and speeds the propagation of worms and
   viruses.


   As some ISPs are now dropping such messages silently, continuing to
   insist on ‚Çÿmust bounce‚ÇÖ encourages a disregard of the RFCs.

































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



5.  Acknowledgements


   The author gratefully acknowledges the encouragement, suggestions and
   contributions of: Keith Moore, Dan Wing, John C Klensin, Jack
   Cleaver, Marta Vasquez and the ietf-smtp discussion group.















































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



6.  quotation from the 1928 Radio Manual, page 614


   (52)Whenever it is impossible to deliver a message that has been
   received, a service [message] must be forwarded immediately to the
   office of origin of the message which can not be delivered, stating
   the reason for non-delivery.


   (53)Service message received pertaining to non-delivery due to
   improper address of a message previously transmitted should be
   compared with the original message, and if there is any discrepancy,
   the office reporting non-delivery shall be immediately notified by
   service [message] of the correct address as appearing on the original
   message. In such cases it is not necessary to notify the sender.


   (54)Should, however the address as repeated in the service [message]
   be found to correspond with the address on the original message, a
   copy of the service message shall be delivered to the sender and a
   recipt obtained. In such cases the sender can only rectify or
   complete the address by means of a paid service message.


7  References


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.


   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.


   [RadioManual]
              Sterling, G., "The Radio Manual for Radio Engineers,
              Inspectors, Students, Operators and Radio Fans", December
              1928.



Author's Address


   Robert R. Zinn
   Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University
   232 Choppin Hall
   Baton Rouge, LA  70893
   US


   Phone: +1 225 578 5381
   EMail: Bz+IDprop@chem.lsu.edu
   URI:   http://chemistry.lsu.edu/bz




Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION




Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                [Page 10]
Internet-Draft          When NOT to Bounce Email              April 2004



   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.












































Zinn                    Expires October 3, 2004                [Page 11]