


Internet Engineering Task Force                             Duncan Mills
Internet Draft                                                  Vodafone
draft-mills-sip-access-network-info-02.txt 
 
 
                                                          Date: May 2002
                                                  Expires: November 2002
 
 
 
 
 
    
                    The SIP Access Network Info header 
    
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   The distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   1. Abstract 
   This mechanism is useful in SIP networks that provide layer 2/layer 
   3 connectivity through different access technologies. SIP User 
   Agents 
   This document defines the private SIP extension header P-Access-
   Network-Info. may use this header to relay information about the 
   access technology to serving proxies in their home network. The 
   serving proxy may then use this information to optimize services for 
   the UA. For example, a 3GPP terminal uses this header to pass 
   information about the access network such as radio access technology 
   and cell ID to its home service. 
    
   2. Applicability Statement  
    
   This mechanism is suitable where: a) a UA needs to send to a proxy 
   in its home network, information pertaining to the access network 

Mills                   Expiration 11/28/02                     1 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   through which it reaches that home network; and b) there is 
   transitive trust in intermediate proxies between the UA and the home 
   network proxy via established relationships between the home network 
   and the access network, and generally supported by the use of 
   standard security mechanisms, e.g. IPsec, AKA, and TLS. 
    
   3. Conventions used in this document 
    
   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", 
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", 
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1] 
   and indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations. 
    
   4. Table of Contents 
     
   Status of this Memo                                       1 
   1. Abstract                                               1 
   2. Applicability Statement                                1 
   3. Conventions used in this document                      2 
   4. Table of Contents                                      2 
   5. Introduction                                           2 
   6. Overview                                               2 
   7. The P-Access-Network-Info header                       3 
   8. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header           5 
   8.1 UAC behavior                                          5 
   8.2 Proxy behavior                                        5 
   9. Security considerations                                5 
   10. IANA Considerations                                   6 
   11. References                                            7 
   12. Author's Address                                      7 
   Full Copyright Statement                                  7 
    
    
   5. Introduction 
    
   There are many cases where a user is accessing their home network 
   services via a particular access network. An example is a 3GPP 
   wireless terminal that accesses a SIP server via the UMTS Radio 
   Access Network. Other examples include a laptop connected to a 
   wireless LAN at an airport, or a laptop connected to a local ISP 
   from a hotel room. 
    
   In this document we define an access network as the network 
   providing the layer 2/layer 3 IP connectivity which in turn provides 
   a user with access to the SIP capabilities or services provided by 
   the home network of that user. 
    
   6. Overview 
    
   In some cases, the home network may wish to know information about 
   the type of access network that the UA is currently using.  Some 
   services are more suitable or less suitable depending on the access 
   type, and some services are of more value to subscribers if the 
   access network details are known in the home network.  For instance, 

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        2 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   the type of access being used may influence home network decisions 
   on what level of security to apply to sessions. 
    
   In other cases, the home network may simply wish to know crude 
   location information in order to provide certain services to the 
   user.  For example, many of the location based services available in 
   wireless networks today require the home network to know the 
   identity of the cell the user is being served by.  
    
   Some regulatory requirements exist mandating that for cellular radio 
   systems, the identity of the cell where an emergency call is 
   established is made available to the emergency authorities. 
    
   It may be desired that the home network have the knowledge of some 
   information relating to the network that provided access to the 
   service. This is achieved by defining a new private SIP extension 
   header as defined in [3], P-Access-Network-Info. This header carries 
   information relating to the access network between the UAC and its 
   serving proxy in the home network. 
    
   7. The P-Access-Network-Info header 
    
   The P-Access-Network-Info header is used to transport a set of 
   parameters associated with the access characteristics of a 
   particular network. 
    
   The P-Access-Network-Info header MAY be inserted by a UA. Proxies, 
   MUST NOT add to or modify the contents of the P-Access-Network-Info. 
    
   The information in the P-Access-Network-Info is privacy sensitive. 
   It is intended for use between the UA and proxies in the home 
   network. 
    
   The proxy in the home network may act upon any information in the P-
   Access-Network-Info header if it is present, to provide a different 
   service  depending on the network through which the UA is accessing 
   the server. For example, for cellular radio access networks the home 
   network may use the cell ID to provide basic localised services. 
    
   A proxy in the home network MUST delete the header before forwarding 
   the message outside of its own administrative network domain or 
   outside a trusted administrative network domain. 
    
   Some systems may require that the P-Access-Network-Info header is 
   only sent by the UAC when a secure connection to the proxy in the 
   home network is present.  For example, in 3GPP systems, the UAC MUST 
   NOT send this header in the initial unauthenticated REGISTER 
   request. 
    
   The P-Access-Network-Info header is described using ABNF syntax.  
   The following description of the ABNF syntax is based on the ABNF 
   used for SIP [3]: 
    
    

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        3 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   P-Access-Network-Info                = "Access-Network-Info" HCOLON  
                                        access-network-information 
    
   access-network-information           = access-type [SEMI access-
   info] 
    
   access-type                          ="IEEE-802.11a" / 
                                        "IEEE-802.11b" / "3GPP-GERAN" / 
                                        "3GPP-UTRAN-FDD" / 
                                        "3GPP-UTRAN-TDD" / 
                                        "3GPP-CDMA2000" / token 
    
   access-info                          = 3gpp-cgi / 
                                        3gpp-utran-cell-id / 
                                        extension-access-info 
    
   extension-access-info                = gen-value 
    
   3gpp-cgi                             = "3gpp-cgi" EQUAL (token / 
                                        quoted-string) 
    
   3gpp-utran-cell-id                   = "3gpp-utran-cell-id EQUAL 
                                        (token / quoted string) 
    
    
   A UAC supporting this extension may be capable of accessing the 
   services provided by its home network via one or more access 
   technologies.  Such a UAC must know the values to use for each type 
   of supported access technology. The means of this determination are 
   outside the scope of this document. 
    
   The home network must know the possible values that a particular UA 
   may use to populate the access-type and access-info fields. 
    
   In other words, a home network with business agreements allowing 
   users to access via a particular technology must be able to parse 
   the P-Access-Network-Info header containing an access-type for that 
   technology in order to use this information. 
    
   For example, the access-type could read "IEEE-802.11b".  If a home 
   network knows it has a business agreement with a W-LAN access 
   network, it must be ready to understand the value "IEEE-802.11b". 
   Similarly, a UAC supporting this extension that can access via W-LAN 
   must be able to insert the relevant value. 
    
   Access-info could contain additional information relating to the 
   access network. 
    
   The following table expands on tables 2 and 3 in [3]. 
    
    
    
    
    

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        4 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   Header field          where  proxy  ACK  BYE  CAN  INV  OPT  REG 
   ---------------------------------------------------------------- 
   P-Access-Network-Info         dr     -    o    -    o    o    o 
    
                                       PRA  UPD  SUB  NOT  INF  REF 
                                       ---------------------------- 
                                        o    o    o    o    o    o 
    
    
   Comparisons follow the case-sensitivity rules defined by SIP [3]. 
    
   8. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header 
    
   8.1 UAC behaviour 
    
   A UAC that supports this extension and is willing to disclose the 
   related parameters MAY insert the P-Access-Network-Info header in 
   any SIP message request. 
    
   The UAC inserting this information MUST trust the home network proxy 
   to protect its privacy by deleting the header before forwarding the 
   message outside of the home proxy∆s domain. In order to do this it 
   must also have transitive trust in intermediate proxies between it 
   and the home network proxy. This trust is established by business 
   agreements between the home network and the access network, and 
   generally supported by the use of standard security mechanisms, e.g. 
   IPsec, AKA, and TLS. 
    
   This document does not define either the nature of the information 
   or the messages where the P-Access-Network-Info needs to be 
   inserted. 
    
   The UA should only use the P-Access-Network-Info header in messages 
   that are to be sent to the home network proxy over a secure 
   connection.  For example, even in a private system like 3GPP, the 
   UAC should not use the P-Access-Network-Info header in the initial 
   unauthenticated unprotected REGISTER request. 
    
   8.2 Proxy behavior 
    
   A proxy MUST NOT insert or modify the P-Access-Network-Info header.  
    
   A proxy, typically located in the home network, and therefore 
   trusted, MUST delete the header when the SIP signaling is forwarded  
   to a SIP server located in a non-trusted administrative network 
   domain. The access network information is used by a home network and 
   is of no interest to the destination 
   network. 
    
   9. Security considerations 
    
   This extension assumes that the access network is trusted by the UA 
   (because the UA∆s home network has a trust relationship with the 
   access network), as described in section 7. 

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        5 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

    
   This extension assumes that the information added to the header by 
   the UAC should be sent only to trusted entities and should not be 
   used outside of the trusted administrative network domain. 
    
   The home network uses the information contained in this header to 
   provide additional services  and 
    
   UAs are expected to provide correct information.  However, there are 
   no security problems resulting from a UAC inserting incorrect 
   information.  Networks providing services based on the information 
   carried in the P-access-network-info header will therefore need to 
   trust the UAC sending the information.  A rogue UAC sending false 
   access network information will do no more harm than to restrict the 
   user from using certain services. 
    
   The mechanism provided in this document is designed primarily for 
   private systems like 3GPP.  Most security requirements are met by 
   way of private standardised solutions.   
    
   For instance, 3GPP will use the P-Access-Network-Info header to 
   carry relatively sensitive information like the cell ID.  Therefore 
   the information MUST NOT be sent outside of the 3GPP domain.  
   Section 8.2 of this document satisfies this requirement. 
    
   The UAC is aware - if it is a 3GPP UAC - that it is operating within 
   a trusted domain. 
    
   The 3GPP UAC is aware of whether or not a secure connection to the 
   home network domain for transporting SIP signalling, is currently 
   available, and as such the sensitive information carried in the P-
   Access-Network-Info header should not be sent in any initial 
   unauthenticated and unprotected requests (e.g. REGISTER).  This is 
   stated in section 8.1 of this document. 
    
   Any UAC that is using this extension and is not part of a private 
   trusted domain should not consider the mechanism as secure and as 
   such SHOULD NOT send sensitive information in the P-Access-Network-
   Info header. 
    
   Any proxy that is operating in a private trust domain where the P-
   Access-Network-Info header is supported is required to delete the 
   header, if it is present, from any message prior to forwarding it 
   outside of the trusted domain.  This is stated in section 8.2. 
    
   Therefore, a home network that requires its UACs to send information 
   in the P-access-network-info header must ensure that either that 
   information is not of a sensitive nature or that the information is 
   not sent outside of the trust domain. 
    
   A proxy receiving a message containing the P-Access-Network-Info 
   header from a non-trusted entity is not able to guarantee the 
   validity of the contents. 
    

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        6 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   10. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document defines the SIP extension header "P-Access-Network-
   Info" which should be included in the registry of SIP headers 
   defined in SIP [3].  As required by the SIP change process draft-
   tsvarea-sipchange [6] the SIP extension header name "Access-Network-
   Info" should also be registered in association with this extension. 
    
   11. References 
    
   Normative References 
    
   1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
   9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   3. Rosenberg, J. et al, "SIP, Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 
   3261, May 2002. 
    
   4. D. Crocker, Ed., and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for syntax 
   specifications: ABNF," RFC 2234, November 1997. 
    
    
   Non-Normative References 
    
   1. Mankin, A., "SIP Change Process draft-tsvarea-sipchange", March 
   2002. 
    
   2. Garcia M. et al: "3GPP requirements on SIP", 
   draft-garcia-sipping-3gpp-reqs-03.txt, September 2002, work in 
   progress. 
    
   12. Author's Address 
    
   Duncan Mills 
   The Courtyard, 2-4 London Road 
   Newbury 
   Berkshire RG14 1JX 
   Tel: +44 1635 676074 
   e-mail: duncan.mills@vf.vodafone.co.uk 
    
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 

Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        7 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   May 2002 

   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    









































Mills                     Expiration 11/28/02                        8 