
Internet Draft                                                  M. Barnes 
Document: draft-barnes-midcom-mib-01.txt                  Nortel Networks 
                                                             Wes Hardaker 
                                                                   Sparta 
                                                            D. Harrington 
                                                       Enterasys Networks 
                                                           M. Stiemerling 
Category: Standards Track                                 NEC Europe Ltd. 
Expires: December 2003                                         June 2003 
 
        Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol Managed Objects  
     
Status of this Memo  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
        
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
        
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
        
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
    
Copyright Notice 
    
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.     
    
Abstract  
    
   This document describes and defines the managed objects for dynamic 
   configuration of middleboxes. The scope of the middleboxes to which 
   these managed objects apply is limited to NATs and Firewalls.  
   However, the MIB module as defined by this document is intended to 
   provide a baseline for the dynamic configuration of other types of 
   middleboxes. The applicability of existing Management Information 
   Base (MIB) modules to the MIDCOM requirements, framework and 
   semantics is described. Additional managed objects are defined to 
   satisfy the entirety of the MIDCOM requirements, framework and 
   semantics, providing a complete MIDCOM MIB for NATs and Firewalls to 
   fully realize the requirements of the MIDCOM protocol.  
  
 
 
Barnes,et al.           Expires December 2003                [Page 1] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
  
Table of Contents 
    
   1. SNMP Management Framework......................................3 
   2. MIDCOM Overview and SNMP Applicability.........................3 
   3. SNMP and the MIDCOM data model.................................4 
      3.1 Secure Communications......................................6 
      3.2 Device Configuration.......................................6 
      3.3 Service Configuration......................................7 
      3.4 Policy Coordination........................................8 
   4. Applicability of existing MIB modules..........................9 
      4.1 Network Address Translators (NAT) MIB.....................10 
      4.2 Policy Based Management MIB...............................10 
      4.3 IPsec Policy Configuration MIB............................10 
      4.4 Differentiated Services MIB...............................11 
   5. Additional MIDCOM specific managed objects....................11 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................12 
   7. Changes since last version....................................12 
   Normative References.............................................12 
   Informative References...........................................14 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................16 
       
Overview 
 
   This intent of this document is to define a Management Information 
   base (MIB) for dynamic configuration of middleboxes. The scope of the 
   middleboxes to which this MIB is specifically applied is limited to 
   NATs and Firewalls.  However, this MIB is intended to be extensible 
   and provide a baseline for the development of managed objects for 
   configuring other types of middleboxes.  
    
   Section 1 provides an overview of the SNMP Management Framework. 
   Section 2 provides further background on SNMP and its applicability 
   to the MIDCOM Protocol Framework, Requirements and semantics.   
    
   Section 3 provides a high level overview of some existing MIB modules 
   potentially relevant and reusable, which satisfy the MIDCOM 
   requirements and semantics, and relate to the MIDCOM architecture and 
   framework.   
    
   Section 4 provides a detailed discussion of existing MIB modules, 
   defining the level of applicability to the MIDCOM protocol 
   requirements, framework and semantics and re-usability for the MIDCOM 
   MIB.   
    
   Section 5 defines the additional MIDCOM specific managed objects 
   required to satisfy some of the requirements and to provide a linkage 
   between the existing MIB modules applicable to MIDCOM. 

 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 2] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
 
 
Conventions used in this document  
        
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
     
 
1. SNMP Management Framework 
      
   For a detailed overview of the documents that describe the current 
   Internet-Standard (SNMP) Management Framework, please refer to 
   section 7 of RFC 3410 [RFC3410]. 
    
   Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed 
   the Management Information Base or MIB.  MIB objects are generally 
   accessed through the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). 
   Objects in the MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the 
   Structure of Management Information (SMI).  This memo specifies a MIB 
   module that is compliant to the SMIv2, which is described in STD 58, 
   RFC 2578 [RFC2578], STD 58, RFC 2579 [RFC2579] and STD 58, RFC 
   2580[RFC2580]. 
    
2. MIDCOM Overview and SNMP Applicability 
    
   The MIDCOM architecture and framework [RFC3303] defines a model in 
   which trusted third parties can be delegated to assist middleboxes in 
   performing their operations, without requiring application 
   intelligence be embedded in the middleboxes. This trusted third party 
   is referred to as the MIDCOM Agent.  The MIDCOM protocol is defined 
   between the MIDCOM agent and middlebox.   
 
   The SNMP management framework provides functions equivalent to those 
   defined by the MIDCOM framework, although there are a few 
   architectural differences. 
   
   For SNMP, application intelligence is captured in MIB modules, rather 
   than in the messaging protocol. MIB modules define a data model of 
   the information that can be collected and configured for managed 
   functionality. The SNMP messaging protocol transports the data in a 
   standardized format without needing to understand the semantics of 
   the data being transferred. The endpoints of the communication 
   understand the semantics of the data.  
    
   Traditionally, the SNMP endpoints have been called Manager and Agent. 
   An SNMP manager is an entity capable of generating requests and 
   receiving notifications, and a SNMP agent is an entity capable of 
   responding to requests and generating notifications. As applied to 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 3] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   the MIDCOM framework, the SNMP Manager corresponds to the MIDCOM 
   agent and the SNMP Agent corresponds to the Middlebox.  
 
   The MIDCOM protocol is divided into three phases, per section 4 of 
   [RFC3303]: 
     . Session Setup 
     . Run-time (involving real-time configuration of the middlebox) 
     . Session Termination  
   A MIDCOM session is defined to be a lasting association between a 
   MIDCOM agent and a middlebox. The MIDCOM agent should initiate the 
   session prior to the start of the application. Although the SNMP 
   management framework does not have the concept of a session, session-
   like associations can be established through the use of managed 
   objects. Requests from the MIDCOM agent to the Middlebox are  
   performed using write access to managed objects defined in MIB 
   modules. The middlebox (SNMP agent) responds to requests by sending 
   an SNMP response message indicating the success or failure of the 
   request. The MIDCOM agent (SNMP manager) MAY verify this information 
   by reading or polling the corresponding managed objects. 
    
   The MIDCOM Protocol semantics [MDCSEM] defines two basic transaction 
   types: request transactions and notify transactions. SNMPv3 uses the 
   architecture detailed in [RFC3411], where all SNMP entities are 
   capable of performing certain functions, such as the generation of 
   requests, response to requests, the generation of asynchronous 
   notifications, the receipt of notifications, and the proxy-forwarding 
   of SNMP messages. SNMP is used to read and manipulate a virtual 
   database (the MIB) which is composed of objects representing 
   commands, controls, status, and statistics, which are defined in 
   managed-application-specific MIB modules. 
    
 
3. SNMP and the MIDCOM data model 
    
   This section provides a high level description and levels of 
   abstraction of the categories of data required to satisfy the MIDCOM 
   requirements and semantics as it relates to existing SNMP MIB 
   modules.  
    
   Application-specific MIB modules can be defined at varying levels of 
   abstraction. At the lowest level, vendor-specific, device-specific 
   parameters may be defined, for instance, to configure a specific 
   model of firewall. At a higher level, a MIB module may define an 
   abstracted view of firewall functionality that can be used to specify 
   a firewall policy, which an implementation can translate into the 
   necessary parameters to configure the specific model of firewall on 
   which the abstract MIB is implemented. At a higher level yet, a MIB 
   module may define service policies or business policies that end up 
   being translated into more detailed instructions, possibly into the 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 4] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   more detailed MIB module data schemas. It is common practice to have 
   one MIB module point to other MIB modules that contain less/more 
   concrete conceptual representations. 
    
   SNMP for the MIDCOM protocol can leverage the data schemas of many 
   existing MIB modules designed to permit secure communications, 
   configuration of devices, configuration of services and policy 
   coordination abstractions.  The actual specification of the policies 
   is outside the scope of the MIDCOM protocol.       
    
   Many existing MIB modules provide monitoring capabilities that can be 
   applied to MIDCOM functionality.  
    
   The following diagram (Figure 1) summarizes the potential relevance 
   and reusability of the data schema of existing MIB models to the 
   MIDCOM architecture to satisfy the MIDCOM protocol framework, 
   requirements and semantics: 
    
      
              +----------------------+ 
              |   Application        | 
              |                      |                       
              | +---------------+    | 
              | | MIDCOM agent  |    |   
              | |               |    | 
              | |               |    | 
              | +---------------+    |        +------------+             
              +------------^---------+        |            | 
                           .                  | Policy     | 
                           .                  |            | 
                           .                  | +--------+ |  
               Application .                  | | MIDCOM | | 
                  Requests .                 /+-|  PDP   | | 
                (via SNMP) .                / | +--------+ | 
                           .               /  +------------+ 
                           .              /     
                           .             /   
                           .            /  
                           .            |   
                           v            v  
           +-------------------------------------------+ 
           |   Middlebox   *            *              | 
           |               * a.         * b.           | 
           |               v            v              | 
           |     +-------------------------------+     | 
           |     |  Middlebox Communication      |     | 
           |     |  Protocol (MIDCOM) Interface  |     | 
           |     +-------------------------------+     | 
           |                     *                     |  
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 5] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
           |                     * c.                  |  
           |                     v                     |                              
           |     +-------------------------------+     | 
           |     |    Dynamic Device/Service     |     | 
           |     |         Configuration         |     | 
           |     +-------------------------------+     | 
           |                                           | 
           +-------------------------------------------+ 
    
    
         Legend: .... Middlebox Communication Protocol (MIDCOM) 
                 //// MIDCOM PDP Interface (outside scope of this    
                      document) 
                 **** Managed objects relevant to the MIDCOM Interface  
                      (with the associated letters referencing the  
                       MIB modules potentially applicable summarized  
                       below:  
            
                    a. gaps between existing MIB modules (b and c) and 
                    MIDCOM    requirements 
                    b. POLICY-BASED-MANAGEMENT-MIB, DIFFSERV-CONFIG-MIB,  
                    c. IPSEC-POLICY-MIB, NAT-MIB, DIFFSERV-MIB 
    
    
        Figure 1: Data relationships relevant to the MIDCOM Interface      
    
    
    
3.1 Secure Communications 
    
   MIDCOM requirements include mutual authentication, message integrity 
   checking, timeliness checking to prevent replay, message encryption, 
   and authorization controls to ensure only certain agents can modify 
   certain subsets of middlebox configurations. MIDCOM requires secure 
   request-response capabilities and secure notifications. 
    
   SNMPv3 is designed to provide secure communications between two end-
   points.  SNMPv3 defines MIB modules to allow the monitoring and 
   configuration of all these security features. They are defined in 
   RFC3411-RFC3418, and RFC3410 provides an overview of these 
   capabilities. 
   
3.2 Device Configuration 
    
   SNMP is the most commonly used standardized protocol for remotely 
   monitoring and manipulating the configuration of devices. There are a 
   large number of IETF standard and vendor-specific MIB modules 
   available. 
 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 6] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   Most IETF standard MIB modules do not provide much configuration 
   support because SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c were non-secure, and it is 
   difficult to standardize abstractions that provide enough information 
   to configure device implementations that require vendor-specific 
   parameters. There are many vendor-specific MIB modules that permit 
   configuration of the vendor's devices. 
    
   SNMP MIB modules are definitions of virtual databases with scalars 
   and tables of data. SNMP supports multiple mechanisms to define 
   relationships between entries in different tables. For example, 
   entries in multiple tables are often related by common indices. SNMP 
   uses a standardized hierarchical namespace, so the value of a field 
   in one table can serve as the index into another table. 
    
   The ability to define relationships between MIB module tables 
   (including tables in different MIB modules) allows an abstracted 
   configuration policy to point to a vendor-specific configuration MIB 
   module for more detailed instructions.  
    
   There are multiple ways to send policies to middleboxes, including 
   SNMP and COPS/PR and RADIUS/Diameter, and most policies are auto-
   magically converted into low-level configuration commands that set 
   the correct operational parameters to enforce desired behavior. 
    
   Some middlebox functionalities are related to physical and logical 
   topologies that are created by dynamically manipulating device 
   configurations. Some MIB modules that can be used for topology 
   configuration would include the 802.1X MIB [81XMIB] and the 
   Interfaces MIB [RFC2863] to enable or disable a physical port or 
   logical interface, the Bridge MIB [BREMIB]to assign interfaces into 
   virtual LANs and to enable port mirroring functionality for IDS 
   usage, the Layer Two Tunneling MIB or IPSec MIB to create topology 
   tunnels for VPNs, and so on. 
    
   There are many IETF standard MIB modules that monitor traffic, which 
   can be used to verify that a policy is being enforced. Most 
   "transmission" MIB modules, those that fall under the { MIB-2 
   transmission } subtree relative to Interfaces MIB entries, provide 
   statistics about traffic going in or out of ports on a device. The 
   Bridge MIB can be used to monitor the amount of traffic being 
   forwarded into or out of virtual LANs, and so on. 
    
    
3.3 Service Configuration 
    
   A middlebox may be able to support multiple types of services, and a 
   MIDCOM agent must determine which services are available and running, 
   and which have stopped running. Middlebox functionalities are 
   applications that run on a middlebox, and there are multiple MIB 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 7] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   modules designed to monitor applications and their operational 
   characteristics. Most of the MIB modules described here are for 
   monitoring only, but could be extended with application-specific MIB 
   modules for configuration and additional monitoring.  
    
   The Host Resources MIB [RFC2790] provides monitoring of hardware 
   resources, such as memory and CPU load, and monitors installed 
   applications, running applications, and application performance. 
   These can be used to do capability discovery for a middlebox, and 
   these factors can be important to consider before configuring 
   additional functionality or sessions on a middlebox. 
    
   The Network Services Monitoring MIB [RFC2788] module provides objects 
   for monitoring high-level concepts related to network services, such 
   as their current run status and their associations. This MIB works 
   with supplemental service-specific MIB modules, including 
   configuration objects. 
    
   The Systems Application MIB [RFC2287] monitors installed 
   applications, running applications, and running processes. The 
   installed application information can be important for determining 
   the actual capabilities of the model and version of firewall 
   installed.  
    
   However, MIDCOM is primarily about dynamically configuring middlebox 
   functionality, so MIB modules associated with configuration, 
   specifically any associated with the configuration of firewalls and 
   NATS, are the main focus.  
    
   The Diffserv MIB [RFC3289] describes the configuration and management 
   of a Differentiated Services interface in terms of one or more 
   Traffic Conditioning Blocks (TCB), each containing, arranged in the 
   specified order, by definition, zero or more classifiers, meters, 
   actions, algorithmic droppers, queues and schedulers. The "linked-
   list" approach is very flexible, and could be used to configure some 
   firewall tasks. 
    
   The IPSec Policy MIB [IPCMIB] defines objects that could be reused 
   for purposes of filtering service-related traffic and subsequent 
   policy actions.  
    
    
3.4 Policy Coordination 
    
   To properly coordinate policy application, it is necessary to 
   determine if a device has the capabilities needed to effectively 
   enforce a policy, and to coordinate the application of policies 
   according to time constraints, priorities, rule groupings, policy 
   sessions, and so on. 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 8] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
    
   The SNMPCONF working has developed a number of MIB modules designed 
   for the purpose of policy coordination.  
    
   Many policies are dependent on factors that are not so much traffic-
   related as business related. For example, the role that a device 
   serves in the network or the geographic location of a device may 
   impact a policy. The SNMPCONF Policy MIB [PBMMIB] allows an 
   administrator to define roles, and associate them with policies.  
    
   The SNMPCONF MIB modules include a policy download table, a policy 
   registration table, and a scheduling function for defining when a 
   policy should be made active and when it should be made dormant. Time 
   schedules can be grouped for easier manipulation, and wildcards are 
   supported. To ease integration with other policy efforts, the 
   schedule table is modeled after the Policy Core Information Model 
   scheduler. 
    
   SNMPCONF provides a capabilities table to advertise the functionality 
   available for policy enforcement, including configuration parameters 
   to enable a MIDCOM agent to be notified when new capabilities are 
   installed on a system. Capabilities may be available on some 
   components of a system and not others, such as a board in a chassis, 
   but also may be accessible only in certain logical partitions, such 
   as the community profile (more accurately, the SNMPv3 context) of the 
   super-user. 
    
   SNMPCONF defines tracking tables, so an administrator can determine 
   which elements are being controlled by which policies. The MIB also 
   includes debugging tables for logging policy enforcement run-time 
   exceptions. An administrator can disable policies in place, if they 
   desire. 
    
 
4. Applicability of existing MIB modules 
    
   This section summarizes the details of the applicability of existing 
   MIB modules to the MIDCOM data model.  As highlighted in Figure 1, 
   the MIDCOM protocol itself is only defined to be the interface from 
   the MIDCOM agent (SNMP manager) to the middlebox or MIDCOM Interface.  
   However, requests from the MIDCOM agent to the MIDCOM Interface must 
   be evaluated against the installed policies and must contain all the 
   data required for the specific device/service configuration. In 
   addition, the session setup reply includes capabilities of the 
   middlebox, several of which relate to policies.  Thus, although the 
   Policy interface itself is out of scope of the MIDCOM protocol, the 
   correlation of the policy related data in the form of rules to the 
   data associated with the MIDCOM Interface is imperative. In effect, 
   an instance of the "MIDCOM MIB" comprises the data from the semantics 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003                [Page 9] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   evaluated against the policy and applied to configure the 
   device/service.  
 
   Several of the MIB modules discussed in section 3 were analyzed and 
   and the following were found to have general applicability and 
   varying levels of re-usability for MIDCOM: 
     . Network Address Translators (NAT) MIB [NATMIB] 
     . Policy Based Management MIB [PBMMIB] 
     . IPsec Policy Configuration MIB [IPCMIB] 
     . Differentiated Services MIB [RFC3289]  
 
   4.1 Network Address Translators (NAT) MIB 
    
   The NAT MIB module [NATMIB] is intended to be used for configuration 
   as well as monitoring of a device capable of traditional NAT 
   functions. The NAT MIB module appears to meet all of the MIDCOM 
   requirements concerning NAT control.  Additional MIB modules, such as 
   those defined by SNMP Policy Based Management MIB (as described in 
   section 4.2), allowing the definition of policy rulesets and grouping 
   of policy rules also required.  
    
   4.2 Policy Based Management MIB  
    
   This MIB defines managed objects that enable policy-based monitoring 
   and management of SNMP infrastructure.  The Policy Based Management 
   MIB defines MIB objects for the following areas: roles, capabilities 
   and time.  
    
   [Editor's note: Although the policy interface itself to the middlebox 
   is out of scope for the MIDCOM protocol, the rules associated with 
   the MIB module(s) for MIDCOM are in scope and thus it is anticipated 
   that there is some reusability of the mangaged objects defined by the 
   PBMMIB, rather than of the entire application of this MIB itself.  
   This section will be expanded once more detailed analysis has been 
   completed].   
 
 
   4.3 IPsec Policy Configuration MIB 
 
   The IPSEC-POLICY-MIB is a large MIB designed to support IPsec and IKE 
   management in a policy and rule oriented fashion.  The MIB module is 
   divided into 3 portions, only one of which would be useful for reuse 
   with the MIDCOM MIB.  Specifically, the IPSEC-POLICY-MIB provides a 
   generic mechanism for performing packet processing based on a rule 
   set.  Rules within the IPSEC-POLICY-MIB are generic and simply bind a 
   filter to an action.  Filters provided within the IPSEC-POLICY-MIB 
   itself are numerous and fairly complete for most common packet 
   filtering usage but externally defined filters (like those that may 
   need to be developed within a MIDCOM specific MIB module) are 
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 10] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   supported.  The actions encapsulated within the IPSEC-POLICY-MIB are 
   mostly related to IKE and IPsec and thus aren't very useful as 
   applied to MIDCOM.  However, actions (like filters) can be externally 
   defined.  Compound filter and action sequences can be defined for 
   administrators that need more complex boolean logic or need to chain 
   multiple actions together based on success/failure states.  The 
   compound mechanisms are also generic and would let MIDCOM specific 
   MIB elements to be used within the compound bindings if necessary. 
 
   [Editor's note: this is an initial analysis; a more detailed analysis 
   to be included once the details are completed].   
    
   4.4 Differentiated Services MIB 
    
   The Diffserv MIB is a very powerful and flexible MIB module, however, 
   this flexibility is too broad in general for the MIDCOM protocol 
   requirements. In addition, the requirement for NAT support, and 
   specifically policy rule lifetimes in the MIDCOM protocol, further 
   highlight that the Diffserv MIB alone is unsuitable as the MIDCOM MIB 
   Module. 
    
   However, the Diffserv model of using different tables for data path 
   elements could be applied to the MIDCOM MIB module.  The use of 
   RowPointers as connectors in the Diffserv MIB allows for the simple 
   extension of the MIB. The RowPointers, whether "next" or "specific", 
   may point to Entries defined in other MIB modules. This mechanism can 
   point to other, possibly vendor-specific, configuration MIB modules. 
   In addition, the reuse of some specific definitions out of the 
   DIFFSERV MIB module is worth further consideration for the MIDCOM MIB 
   module, (e.g. the diffServMultiFieldClfrTable).  
    
 
   [Editor's note: Once we start needing to fill in the gaps as 
   highlighted in item a of the diagram in Figure 1, this will be 
   revisited]. 
 
    
   4.5 Summary of applicability of existing MIB modules 
    
   < To Be Completed >  
    
   <Diagram showing these MIB modules as applied to the basic data 
   model> 
    
    
    
5. Additional MIDCOM specific managed objects 
 

 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 11] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   <MIDCOM specific managed objects may be required to satisfy some of 
   the requirements and to provide a linkage between the existing MIB 
   modules applicable to MIDCOM.>  
 
   < To Be Completed >  
    
6. Security Considerations 
 
   The MIDCOM requirements [RFC3304] defines the general security 
   requirements for the MIDCOM protocol.  The SNMPv3 User-based Security 
   Model (USM, [RFC2574]) satisfies those requirements. USM defines 
   three standardized methods for providing authentication, 
   confidentiality, and integrity. The method to use can be optionally 
   chosen.  The methods operate securely across untrusted domains. 
   Additionally, USM has specific built-in mechanisms for preventing 
   replay attacks including unique protocol engine IDs, timers and 
   counters per engine and time windows for the validity of messages. 
    
7. Changes since last version 
 
   The following summarizes the major changes made to this document from 
   the previous version (draft-barnes-midcom-mib-00):  
     . Miscellaneous editorial changes include basic formatting and 
        changing references of mib to MIB, and mibs to MIB modules.  
     . Removed reference to SNMP proxy functionality as that's not 
        applicable to MIDCOM.  
     . Updated references to include additional informational 
        references for Diffserv and updated versions on some drafts. 
     . Incorporated "Protocol" into the title of the document.  
     . In general, attempted to clarify references to policy to be 
        specific to the rulesets as they apply to a session. 
     . Some minor re-arranging of text in section 2 to try to improve 
        the readability of the document.   
     . Clarified that the configuration relevant to MIDCOM is primarily 
        dynamic.  
     . Removed some of the non-relevant text in sections 3 (eg. 
        References to CLI in the configuration section and some details 
        in the Policy Coordination Section).  Totally removed the Policy 
        Specification section since it is out of scope. 
      
 
Normative References  
   
   [RFC3304] R. Swale, P. Mart, P. Sijben, S. Brim, M. Shore, "Middlebox 
   Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol Requirements", RFC 3304, August, 
   2002. 
    


 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 12] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   [RFC3303] P. Srisuresh, J. Kuthan, J. Rosenberg, A. Molitor, A. 
   Rayhan, "Middlebox Communications Architecture and Framework", RFC 
   3303, August, 2002.  
    
   [MDCSEM] Stiemerling, M., Quittek, J., Taylor, T., "MIDCOM Protocol 
   Semantics", draft-ietf-midcom-semantics-02.txt, May, 2003.  
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC2578] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
   Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Structure of Management Information 
   Version 2 (SMIv2)", STD 58, RFC 2578, April 1999. 
    
   [RFC2579] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
   Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Textual Conventions for SMIv2", STD 58, 
   RFC 2579, April 1999. 
    
   [RFC2580] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
   Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Conformance Statements for SMIv2", STD 
   58, RFC 2580, April 1999. 
 
   [RFC3411] Harrington, D., Presuhn, R., and B. Wijnen, "An 
   Architecture for Describing SNMP Management Frameworks", STD 62, RFC 
   3411, November 2002. 
 
   [RFC3412] Case, J., Harrington D., Presuhn R., and B. Wijnen, 
   "Message Processing and Dispatching for the Simple Network Management 
   Protocol (SNMP)", STD 62, RFC 3412, November 2002. 
 
   [RFC3413] Levi, D., Meyer, P., and B. Stewart, "SNMPv3 Applications", 
   STD 62, RFC 3413, November 2002. 
    
   [RFC3414] Blumenthal, U., and B. Wijnen, "User-based Security 
   Model(USM) for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol 
   (SNMPv3)", STD 62, RFC 3414, November 2002. 
    
   [RFC3415] Wijnen, B., Presuhn, R., and K. McCloghrie, "View-based 
   Access Control Model (VACM) for the Simple Network Management 
   Protocol (SNMP)", STD 62, RFC 3415, November 2002. 
 
   [NATMIB] Raghunarayan, R., Pai, N., Rohit, R., Wang, C., Srisuresh, 
   P., "Definitions of Managed Objects for Network Address Translators 
   (NAT)", draft-ietf-nat-natmib-05.txt, November, 2002.  
 
   [PBMMIB]  Waldbusser, S., Saperia, J., Hongal, T., "Policy Based 
   Management MIB", draft-ietf-snmpconf-pm-13.txt, March, 2003.  
 

 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 13] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   [IPCMIB] Baer, M., Charlet, R., Hardaker, W., Story, R., Wang, C., 
   "IPsec Policy Configuration MIB module", draft-ietf-ipsp-ipsec-conf-
   MIB-06.txt, March, 2003.  
 
    
Informative References  
 
   [RFC3410] Case, J., Mundy, R., Partain, D., and B. Stewart, 
   "Introduction to Version 3 of the Internet-standard Network 
   Management Framework", 3410, November 2002. 
    
   [MDCPEV] Barnes, M., "Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol 
   Evaluation", draft-ietf-midcom-protocol-eval-06.txt, November, 2002. 
    
   [RFC2287] Krupczak, C. and J. Saperia, "Definitions of System-Level 
   Managed Objects for Applications", RFC 2287, February 1998. 
    
   [RFC 2475] Blake, S., et al, "An Architecture for Differentiated 
   Service", RFC 2475, December 1998. 
    
   [RFC2564] C. Kalbfleisch, C. Krupczak, R.Presuhn, J. Saperia, 
   "Application Management MIB", May 1999. 
    
   [RFC2594] H. Hazewinkel, C. Kalbfleisch, J. Schoenwaelder, 
   "Definitions of Managed Objects for WWW Services", May 1999. 
    
   [RFC2788] N. Freed, S. Kille, "Network Services Monitoring MIB", RFC 
   2788, March 2000. 
    
   [RFC2790] S. Waldbusser, P. Grillo, "Host Resources MIB", March 2000. 
 
   [RFC2863] McCloghrie, K. and F. Kastenholz, "The Interfaces Group MIB 
   using SMIv2", RFC 2863, June 2000. 
    
   [RFC3289] Baker, F., Chan, K., Smith, A., "Management Information 
   Base for the Differentiated Services Architecture", RFC 3289, May 
   2002. 
    
   [RFC3290] Bernet, Y., et al, "An Informal Management Model for 
   Differentiated Services Routers", RFC 3290, May 2002. 
    
   [DPCMIB] Hazewinkel, H, Partain, D., "The Differentiated Services 
   Configuration MIB", draft-ietf-snmpconf-diffpolicy-05.txt, June 2002. 
    
   [BRGMIB] Norseth, K.C. and Bell, E., "Definitions of Managed Objects 
   for Bridges", draft-ietf-bridge-bridgeMIB-smiv2-04.txt, October 2002. 
    


 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 14] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
   [BREMIB] Ngai, V., "Definitions of Managed Objects for Bridges with 
   Traffic Classes, Multicast Filtering and Virtual LAN Extensions", 
   draft-ietf-bridge-ext-v2-01.txt, September 2002. 
 
   [81xMIB] Norseth, K.C. "Definitions for Port Access Control (IEEE 
   802.1X) MIB", draft-ietf-bridge-8021x-01.txt, February, 2003. 
               
 
Acknowledgements 
 
   The authors would like to thank Randy Presuhn and Pyda Srisuresh for 
   their comments and feedback on the initial version of this document.  
 
 
Authors' Address 
        
   Mary Barnes  
   Nortel Networks 
   2380 Performance Drive          
   Richardson, TX 75082 
   USA              
    
   Phone:  1-972-684-5432 
   Email:  mbarnes@nortelnetworks.com  
    
   Wes Hardaker 
   <to be completed> 
   USA        
    
   Phone:  
   EMail: hardaker@tislabs.com 
    
    
   David Harrington, Co-chair SNMPv3 WG 
   Enterasys Networks 
   35 Industrial Way               
   Rochester, NH 03867-5005 
   USA        
    
   Phone: +1 603-337-2614 
   EMail: dbh@enterasys.com 
    
 
   Martin Stiemerling 
   NEC Europe Ltd. 
   Network Laboratories 
   Adenauerplatz 6 
   69115 Heidelberg                
   Germany    
 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 15] 
                         MIDCOM Protocol MIB                June 2003 
 
 
                         
   Phone: +49 6221 90511-13 
   Email: stiemerling@ccrle.nec.de 
    
    
     
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
       
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained 
   herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
    
 














 
 
Barnes, et al.          Expires December 2003               [Page 16] 
