



COINRG                                                           I. Fink
Internet-Draft                                                 K. Wehrle
Intended status: Informational                    RWTH Aachen University
Expires: 25 April 2022                                   22 October 2021


        Enhancing Security and Privacy with In-Network Computing
                      draft-fink-coin-sec-priv-03

Abstract

   With the growing interconnection of devices, cyber security and data
   protection are of increasing importance.  This is especially the case
   regarding cyber-physical systems due to their close entanglement with
   the physical world.  Misbehavior and information leakage can lead to
   financial and physical damage and endanger human lives and well-
   being.  Thus, hard security and privacy requirements are necessary to
   be met.  Furthermore, a thorough investigation of incidents is
   essential for ultimate protection.  Computing in the Network (COIN)
   allows the processing of traffic and data directly in the network and
   at line-rate.  Thus, COIN presents a promising solution for
   efficiently providing security and privacy mechanisms as well as
   network monitoring.  This document discusses select mechanisms to
   demonstrate how COIN concepts can be applied to counter existing
   shortcomings of cyber security and data privacy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 25 April 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Protection Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Encryption and Integrity Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Authentication and Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.4.  In-Network Vulnerability Patches  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.5.  Anonymization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Intrusion and Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  Intrusion Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2.  Dead Man's Switch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Network Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   With the ongoing digitalization, previously isolated devices and
   systems are increasingly connected to the Internet, concerning all
   aspects of life.  In particular, in the context of Cyber-Physical
   Systems (CPS) and the (Industrial) Internet of Things, machines and
   infrastructure are equipped with additional sensors and CPUs to allow
   for automatization and higher processing efficiency.  The
   entanglement of the sensors with the physical world leads to high
   sensitivity of the transmitted and collected data.

   Consequently, digitalization expands the attack surface and the
   possible impacts of cyber attacks, increasing the importance of
   proper protection mechanisms.









Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   Devices in CPS are often resource-constrained and do not offer the
   possibility to implement elaborate security mechanisms.  Furthermore,
   legacy devices and communication protocols are often still used in
   industrial networks but were not designed to face the security and
   privacy challenges the new interconnection brings.  Thus,
   communication and access are often unprotected.

   Upgrading legacy devices with protection mechanisms is an effortful
   and expensive procedure.  A promising approach for retrofitting
   security is the deployment of suitable mechanisms within the network.
   To date, this is mainly realized using middle-boxes, leading to
   overhead and the need for additional hardware.

   One general and widespread security component is Intrusion Detection
   Systems (IDS) to detect and, ideally, prevent undesired events in a
   network.  However, IDS are usually implemented in software, again
   running on middle-boxes or edge devices in the same network.  Thus,
   their reaction time is limited as well as their information gain,
   which is usually addressed by deploying additional IDS components for
   traffic monitoring.

   Last, the after-treatment of incidents in networks is critical to
   detect exploited vulnerabilities and prevent future attacks.  Network
   forensics serves to retrace and comprehend the origin and course of
   malicious events.  However, to provide high performance, the
   underlying monitoring of network traffic requires dedicated
   networking devices and/or expensive subscriptions to respective
   features, leading to high costs.

   One common problem is that security is usually provided by software
   solutions.  These often require additional hardware and lead to
   performance overhead, which is especially unfavorable in the context
   of time-sensitive applications, e.g., in industry.  Existing high-
   performance solutions, e.g., running on traditional networking
   devices, require dedicated, costly, and unsustainable hardware.

   Computing in the Network (COIN) covers these shortfalls by using
   programmable networking devices to conduct dynamic and custom
   processing of network packets at line-rate.  Thus, security-related
   functions and packet inspection can be implemented and applied
   centrally in the network, e.g., at a programmable switch.










Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   This draft explores the opportunities of COIN for improving security
   and privacy as follows: We first describe feasible mechanisms for
   preventing attacks and intrusion in the first place.  Then, we
   present which mechanisms we can implement with COIN for detecting
   intrusion and undesired behavior when it has already taken place.
   Last, we explore how COIN can improve network monitoring for
   detecting, analyzing and following up incidents, thus fixing
   vulnerabilities.

2.  Protection Mechanisms

   The common ground for providing security and data privacy is to
   protect against unauthorized access.  That protection is primarily
   provided by basic security mechanisms such as encryption, integrity
   checks, authentication, and authorization.  These are often missing
   in resource-constrained environments or regarding legacy industrial
   devices.  [RFC7744] thoroughly discusses the need for authentication
   and authorization in resource-restrained environments.  [RFC8576]
   presents security and privacy risks and challenges specific to the
   IoT.  In the following, we describe how COIN can help to retrofit
   suitable mechanisms.

2.1.  Encryption and Integrity Checks

   Encryption is critical to preserve confidentiality when transmitting
   data.  Integrity checks prevent undetected manipulation, which can
   remain unnoticed even despite encryption, e.g., in case of flipped
   bits.  Due to resource-constraints, many devices in CPS do not
   provide encryption or calculation of check-sums.

   By default, secure cryptographic functions are not supported by
   current programmable switches either and hard to realize due to their
   computational constraints.  However, there are efforts by researchers
   to implement AES encryption with scrambled lookup tables [CHEN] and
   cryptographically secure keyed hash functions [YOO] on existing
   programmable hardware switches.  Furthermore, future generations of
   programmable hardware switches might provide secure cryptographic
   functions by design.

   With secure cryptography at hand, COIN would allow to encrypt and
   hash packet contents efficiently while passing a respective
   programmable networking device.  Concretely, data could be encrypted
   and supplemented with a check-sum directly at the first networking
   device passed by a packet before forwarding it through the Internet
   to its designated destination.  Subsequent decryption and integrity
   checks could be executed at the last networking device before the
   destination.  Alternatively, this could be implemented at the
   destination if supported by the respective device.  This approach



Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   does not require deployment of or forwarding to additional middle-
   boxes.  Thus, no additional attack surface or processing overhead is
   introduced, presenting a promising foundation for retrofitting
   security in time-sensitive scenarios such as industrial processes.

   Another use-case is the implementation of whole standards for secure
   communication on programmable networking devices, offering new
   flexibility.  For example, researchers examined the benefits of
   deploying IPsec and MACsec on programmable switches
   [HAUSER-IPsec],[HAUSER-MACsec] but their implementations only target
   software switches due to the missing cryptographic capabilities of
   existing programmable hardware switches.

   Future research is needed to clarify if and at which costs hardware
   for enabling cryptographic calculations could and should be embedded
   in future generations of programmable networking devices.

2.2.  Authentication and Authorization

   Authentication and authorization mechanisms are needed to avoid
   unauthorized access to devices and their manipulation in the first
   place.  With COIN, networking devices can flexibly decide whether to
   forward packets, thus offer efficient and fine-granular access
   control.

   One possibility is to conduct a handshake between the sender and
   networking device before starting the communication with industrial
   devices.  Cryptographic calculations (e.g. required for certificate-
   based authentication) can be offloaded to the control plane if not
   feasible in the data plane of the networking device due to
   computational constraints.  Existing research also proposed and
   implemented authentication in the data plane, e.g., using port-
   knocking [ALMAINI].  Authorization information can be stored in
   tables in the data plane or requested from the control plane.  Since
   authentication and authorization is only needed when starting or
   refreshing a connection, the necessity and overhead for consulting
   the control plane are limited.  Subsequent to the authentication and
   authorization process, the respective decisions can be flexibly
   enforced by the networking device.  For example, different fine-
   granular policies can be linked to different authorization levels and
   different devices.  In the case of unsuccessful authorization or
   authentication, networking devices can inform the network
   administrator about possible intrusion of the system.

   Overall, COIN can realize efficient and flexible access control,
   reducing overhead and attack surface.





Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


2.3.  Policies

   Control processes can include communication between various parties.
   Even despite authorization and authentication mechanisms, undesired
   behavior can occur.  For instance, malicious third-party software
   might be installed on the approved device and thus implicitly gain
   access.  Depending on the involved devices and their capabilities,
   proper authorization and authentication might not be possible at all.
   An effective way to exclude malicious behavior nevertheless is
   policy-based access control.

   [RFC8520] proposes the Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD), a
   standard for defining the communication behavior of IoT devices,
   which use specific communication patterns.  The definition is
   primarily based on domain names, ports, and protocols (e.g., TCP and
   UDP).  Further characteristics as the TLS usage
   [I-D.draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-05] or the required bandwidth of a
   device [I-D.draft-lear-opsawg-mud-bw-profile-01] can help to define
   connections more narrowly.  By defining the typical behavior, we can
   exclude deviating communication, including undesired behavior.
   Likewise to IoT devices, industrial devices usually serve a specific
   purpose.  Thus, applying MUD or similar policies is viable in
   industrial scenarios as well.

   The problem that remains is the efficient enforcement of such
   policies through fine-granular and flexible traffic filtering.  While
   middle-boxes increase costs and processing overhead, primary SDN
   approaches as OpenFlow allow only filtering based on match-action
   rules regarding fixed protocol header fields.  Evaluation of traffic
   statistics for, e.g., limiting the bandwidth, requires consultation
   of the remote controller.  This leads to latency overheads, which are
   not acceptable in time-sensitive scenarios.

   In contrast, the COIN paradigm allows flexible filtering even
   concerning the content of packets and connection metadata.
   Furthermore, traffic filtering can be executed by programmable
   networking devices at line-rate.

   Last, not only network communication behavior of devices can be
   defined in policies.  For example, COIN can be also used to consider
   additional (contextual) parameters, e.g., the time of day or activity
   of other devices in the network [KANG].









Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


2.4.  In-Network Vulnerability Patches

   Resource-constrained devices are typically hard to update.  Thus,
   device vulnerabilities often cannot be fixed after deployment.  As a
   remedy and special case of policies, rules could be defined to
   describe known attack signatures.  By enforcing these rules at
   programmable networking devices, e.g., by dropping matching traffic,
   COIN would offer an efficient way to avoid exploitation of device
   vulnerabilities.  Another potential advantage is the easy and
   extensive roll-out of such "in-network patches" in the form of
   (automatic) software updates of the networking device.

   Future research is needed to evaluate the potential and benefits of
   in-network patches compared to traditional security measures, e.g.,
   firewalls, and provide proof of concepts using existing devices and
   vulnerabilities.

2.5.  Anonymization

   Due to their interconnection with the physical world, the generation
   of sensitive data is inherent to CPS.  Smart infrastructure leads to
   the collection of sensitive (user) data.  In industrial networks,
   information about confidential processes is gathered.  Such data is
   increasingly shared with other entities to increase production
   efficiency or enable automatic processing.

   Despite the benefits of data exchange, manufacturers and individuals
   might not want to share sensitive information.  While deployment of
   privacy mechanisms is usually not possible at resource-constrained or
   legacy devices, COIN has the potential to apply privacy mechanisms in
   a flexible and comprehensive manner.

   Data could be pseudonymized at networking devices by, e.g.,
   extracting and replacing specific values.  Furthermore, elaborate
   anonymization techniques could be implemented in the network by
   sensibly decreasing the data accuracy.  For example, concepts like
   k-Anonymity could be applied by aggregating the values of multiple
   packets before forwarding the result.  Noise addition could be
   implemented by adding a random number to values.  Similarly, the
   state-of-the-art technique differential privacy could be implemented
   by adding noise to responses to statistical requests.

   Indeed, recent research exploits programmable hardware switches to
   implement performant and light-weight anonymization of communication
   by rewriting source addresses and information and hiding path
   information, e.g., using randomization [MOGHADDAM].  Similarly,
   [WANG] realizes traffic obfuscation by encrypting IPv4 addresses in
   the data plane.



Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   Future research is needed to implement and evaluate further privacy
   mechanisms and COIN's potential for this field.

3.  Intrusion and Anomaly Detection

   Ideally, attacks are prevented from the outset.  However, in the case
   of incidents, fast detection is critical for limiting damage.
   Deployment of sensors, e.g., in industrial control systems, can help
   to monitor the system state and detect anomalies.  This can be used
   in combination with COIN to detect intrusion and to provide advanced
   safety measures, as described in the following.

3.1.  Intrusion Detection

   Data of sensors or monitored communication behavior can be compared
   against expected patterns to detect intrusion.  Even if intrusion
   prevention is deployed and connections are allowed when taken
   individually, subtle attacks might still be possible.  For example, a
   series of values might be out of line if put into context even though
   the individual values are unobtrusive.  Anomaly detection can be used
   to detect such abnormalities and notify the network administrator for
   further assessment.

   While intrusion detection systems (IDS) are usually deployed at
   middle-boxes or external servers, COIN provides the possibility to
   detect anomalies at-line rate, e.g., by maintaining statistics about
   traffic flows.  This decreases costs and latency, which is valuable
   for a prompt reaction.  Another advantage is that one central
   networking device can monitor traffic from multiple devices.  In
   contrast, multiple distributed middle boxes are usually needed to
   achieve the same information gain.  Last, programmable networking
   devices can be used to preprocess traffic and reduce load on
   subsequent in IDS components as examined by [LEWIS].

   Besides intrusion, anomalies can also imply safety risks.  In the
   following, we pick up the potential of COIN to support safety.















Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


3.2.  Dead Man's Switch

   [I-D.draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-00] addresses the potential of COIN
   for improving industrial safety.  Detection of an anomaly in the
   sensor data or operational flow can be used to automatically trigger
   an emergency shutdown of a system or single system components if the
   data indicates an actual hazard.  Apart from that, other safety
   measures like warning systems or isolation of areas can be
   implemented.  While we do not aim at replacing traditional dead man's
   switches, we see the potential of COIN to accelerate the detection of
   failures.  Thus, COIN can valuably complement existing safety
   measures.

4.  Network Monitoring

   After detecting an incident, it is essential to investigate its
   origin and scope.  The results of this analysis can be used to allow
   for consistent recovery, to adapt protection mechanisms, and prevent
   similar events in the future.  For enabling potential investigation,
   traffic is constantly captured (e.g., in the form of flow records),
   which requires dedicated hardware in large networks.  Furthermore, it
   might be preferable to exclude traffic, e.g., from specific subnets,
   from the analysis.  Dynamic and fine-granular traffic filtering is
   not possible with traditional networking devices, leading to storage
   and processing overhead.

   With COIN, networking devices can be programmed to export traffic
   characteristics without significant overhead when forwarding a
   packet.  Furthermore, monitoring can be done more flexibly, e.g., by
   applying fine-granular traffic filtering.  Also, header fields of
   particular interest can be efficiently extracted.  Therefore, COIN
   can considerably decrease the load and increase the efficiency of
   security-related network monitoring.

   The presented prospects are underlined by recent work.  For example,
   in [SONCHACK], flow records are created in the control plane of
   programmable hardware switches while expensive packet preprocessing
   is offloaded to the data plane.

5.  Security Considerations

   When implementing security and privacy measures in networking
   devices, their security and failure resistance is critical.  Related
   research questions to clarify in the future are stated in
   [I-D.draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02].






Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


6.  IANA Considerations

   N/A

7.  Conclusion

   COIN has the potential to improve and retrofit security and privacy,
   especially with regard to resource-restrained and legacy devices.

   First, COIN can provide intrusion prevention mechanisms like
   authentication and efficient enforcement of (context-based) policies.
   Easily deployable in-network patches of device vulnerabilities could
   further improve security.  Encryption and integrity checks are
   limited by the current hardware but already targeted by recent
   research.

   Second, COIN allows examining packet contents at networking devices,
   which can help implement fast and comprehensive anomaly and intrusion
   detection.

   Last, COIN can contribute to an efficient and targeted traffic
   monitoring for incident analysis.

   Further investigation of the feasibility and potential of the
   presented mechanisms is subject to future research.

8.  Informative References

   [ALMAINI]  Almaini, A., Al-Dubai, A., Romdhani, I., Schramm, M., and
              A. Alsarhan, "Lightweight edge authentication for software
              defined networks", Computing 103, 291-311 (2021), August
              2020, <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
              s00607-020-00835-4>.

   [CHEN]     Chen, X., "Implementing AES Encryption on Programmable
              Switches via Scrambled Lookup Tables", In Proceedings of
              the Workshop on Secure Programmable Network
              Infrastructure, August 2020,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3405669.3405819>.

   [HAUSER-IPsec]
              Hauser, F., Häberle, M., Schmidt, M., and M. Menth,
              "P4-IPsec: Site-to-Site and Host-to-Site VPN With IPsec in
              P4-Based SDN", In IEEE Access, vol. 8, July 2020,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9151942>.






Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   [HAUSER-MACsec]
              Hauser, F., Häberle, M., Schmidt, M., and M. Menth,
              "P4-MACsec: Dynamic Topology Monitoring and Data Layer
              Protection With MACsec in P4-Based SDN", In IEEE Access,
              vol. 8, March 2020,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9044731>.

   [I-D.draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-05]
              Reddy, T., Wing, D., and B. Anderson, "Manufacturer Usage
              Description (MUD) (D)TLS Profiles for IoT Devices", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-05,
              27 July 2021, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-05>.

   [I-D.draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-00]
              Kunze, I., Wehrle, K., Trossen, D., and M.J. Montpetit,
              "Use Cases for In-Network Computing", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-00, 17
              February 2021, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-irtf-
              coinrg-use-cases-00>.

   [I-D.draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02]
              Kutscher, D., Karkkainen, T., and J. Ott, "Directions for
              Computing in the Network", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02, 31 July 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-kutscher-
              coinrg-dir-02>.

   [I-D.draft-lear-opsawg-mud-bw-profile-01]
              Lear, E. and O. Friel, "Bandwidth Profiling Extensions for
              MUD", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-lear-opsawg-
              mud-bw-profile-01, 8 July 2019,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-lear-opsawg-
              mud-bw-profile-01>.

   [KANG]     Kang, Q., Morrison, A., Tang, Y., Chen, A., and X. Luo,
              "Programmable In-Network Security for Context-aware BYOD
              Policies", In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Security
              Symposium (USENIX Security 20), August 2020,
              <https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/
              presentation/kang>.

   [LEWIS]    Lewis, B., Broadbent, A., and N. Race, "P4ID: P4 Enhanced
              Intrusion Detection", 2019 IEEE Conference on Network
              Function Virtualization and Software Defined Networks
              (NFV-SDN), November 2019,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9040044>.




Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   [MOGHADDAM]
              Moghaddam, H. and A. Mosenia, "Programmable In-Network
              Obfuscation of Traffic", arXiv:1911.09642 [cs.CR],
              November 2019, <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09642>.

   [RFC7744]  Seitz, L., Ed., Gerdes, S., Ed., Selander, G., Mani, M.,
              and S. Kumar, "Use Cases for Authentication and
              Authorization in Constrained Environments", RFC 7744,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7744, January 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7744>.

   [RFC8520]  Lear, E., Droms, R., and D. Romascanu, "Manufacturer Usage
              Description Specification", RFC 8520,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8520, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8520>.

   [RFC8576]  Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "Internet of
              Things (IoT) Security: State of the Art and Challenges",
              RFC 8576, DOI 10.17487/RFC8576, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8576>.

   [SONCHACK] Sonchack, J., Aviv, A., Keller, E., and J. Smith,
              "Turboflow: Information Rich Flow Record Generation on
              Commodity Switches", In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
              EuroSys Conference, April 2018,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3190508.3190558>.

   [WANG]     Wang, L., Kim, H., Mittal, P., and J. Rexford,
              "Programmable In-Network Obfuscation of Traffic",
              arXiv:2006.00097 [cs.NI], 2020,
              <https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00097>.

   [YOO]      Yoo, S. and X. Chen, "Secure Keyed Hashing on Programmable
              Switches", In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2021 Workshop
              on Secure Programmable Network INfrastructure, August
              2021, <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09642>.

Authors' Addresses

   Ina Berenice Fink
   RWTH Aachen University
   Ahornstr. 55
   D-52062 Aachen
   Germany

   Phone: +49-241-80-21419
   Email: fink@comsys.rwth-aachen.de




Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy         October 2021


   Klaus Wehrle
   RWTH Aachen University
   Ahornstr. 55
   D-52062 Aachen
   Germany

   Phone: +49-241-80-21401
   Email: wehrle@comsys.rwth-aachen.de











































Fink & Wehrle             Expires 25 April 2022                [Page 13]
