 
                                                        Harri Hakala, 
                                                        Leena Mattila   
INTERNET-DRAFT                                          Ericsson,               
Draft:<draft-hakala-diameter-credit-control-02.txt>     Juha-Pekka  
Expires: September 2002                                 Koskinen 
                                                        Nokia  
    
                                                        March 2002 
                                                                          
                                     
                                                                         
    
                  Diameter Credit Control Application 
                                     
    
Status of this memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions 
   of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to produce derivative 
   works is not granted. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This document is an individual submission to the IETF. Comments 
   should be directed to the authors. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document specifies a Diameter application that is used for real-
   time cost and credit control between a service element and a Credit 
   Control Server in service environment. 
    
   Diameter accounting messages with additional AVPs are used to 
   transfer service and credit control information between the service 
   element and the Credit Control Server. 
 
    
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    
   1.0  Introduction 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 1]  

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
        1.1  Requirements language 
        1.2  Terminology 
        1.3  Advertising application support   
   2.0  Architecture Model     
   3.0  Service Credit Control 
        3.1 Session Based Credit Control 
           3.1.1 First Interrogation 
           3.1.2 Interim Interrogation 
           3.1.3 Final Interrogation        
        3.2 One Time Event 
           3.2.1 Service Price Enquiry 
           3.2.2 Balance Check 
           3.2.3 Direct Debiting  
           3.2.4 Refund 
   4.0  Accounting AVPs 
       4.1 Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP 
       4.2 Accounting-Correlation-Id AVP    
       4.3 Check-Balance-Result AVP 
       4.4 Cost AVP 
       4.5 Cost-Information AVP 
       4.6 Currency-Code AVP 
       4.7 Event-Timestamp    
       4.8 Final-Unit-Indication AVP 
       4.9 Granted-Service-Unit AVP 
       4.10 Requested-Action AVP  
       4.11 Requested-Service-Unit AVP 
       4.12 Service-Parameter-Info AVP 
       4.13 Service-Parameter-type AVP 
       4.14 Service-Parameter-Value AVP                                               
       4.15 Subscription-Id AVP 
       4.16 Subscription-Id-Data AVP    
       4.17 Subscription-Id-Type AVP    
       4.18 Unit-Type AVP 
       4.19 Unit-Value AVP 
       4.20 Used-Service-Unit AVP 
   5.0 Result-Code AVP Values 
       5.1 Transient Failures 
        5.2 Permanent Failures 
   6.0  AVP Occurrence Table 
       6.1 Accounting AVP Table 
   7.0 IANA Considerations 
       7.1 Command Codes 
       7.2 AVP Codes 
       7.3 Result-Code AVP Values 
       7.4 Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP 
       7.5 Check-Balance-Result AVP 
       7.6 Requested-Service-Unit AVP 
       7.7 Subscription-Id-Type AVP 
       7.8 Unit-Type AVP                           
       7.9 Application Identifier                                      
   8.0  Security Considerations 
   9.0  References 
       9.1  Normative 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 2] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
       9.2  Non-Normative 
   10.0  Acknowledgements 
   11.0  Authors addresses 
   12.0  Full Copyright Statement 
   13.0  Expiration Date 
    
1.0 Introduction 
 
   This Diameter application, combined with the Diameter base protocol 
   [DIAMBASE], describes the accounting protocol that can be used for 
   real time cost and credit control in the service environment. 
 
   The next generation wireless networks specify (e.g. 3G Charging and 
   Billing requirements [3GPPCHARG]) more critical requirements for the 
   accounting applications. The accounting application must be able to 
   rate accounting information in real-time. For example, for the 
   service environment it is vital to be able to rate service event 
   information instantly.  
    
   There also exists a demand for the end user credit control. The 
   accounting application must be able to check the end user's account 
   for coverage for the requested service event charge prior to 
   execution of that service event. All the chargeable events related to 
   a specific account must be prevented from the end user when the 
   credit of that account is exhausted or expired. 
    
   Also a mechanism SHOULD be provided to indicate to the end user of 
   the charges to be levied for a chargeable event.  
    
   There are as well services such as gaming or advertising that in some 
   situations rather refund than deduct the end user∆s account.    
    
   To fulfill all these needs a new type of accounting application is 
   needed, the credit control application. This application is used for 
   real-time delivery of service event information in the service 
   environment from the service element to the Credit Control Server to 
   minimize the financial risk. This protocol is not only restricted to 
   be used in the service environment (it can for example also be used 
   for access control), but the focus is service control in service 
   environment. 
 
1.1. Requirements language 
    
   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "optional", 
   "recommended", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as 
   described in [KEYWORDS]. 
    
1.2  Terminology 
 
   AAA 
    Authentication, Authorization and Accounting 
    
   Accounting 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 3] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
     The act of collection of information on resource usage for the 
     purposes of  trend analysis, auditing, billing or cost allocation.  
    
   Accounting Server 
     The accounting server receives accounting data from the service 
     elements and other devices and translates it into session records. 
     It acts as an interface to back-end rating, billing, and operations 
     support systems. 
    
   Billing    
     The act of preparing an invoice. 
    
   Charging 
     In the telecom world charging is almost synonym with accounting. A 
     function whereby information related to a chargeable event is 
     transferred in order to make it possible to determine usage for 
     which the charged party may be billed. 
              
   Credit Control 
    Credit Control is a mechanism, which directly interacts in real-
    time with an account and controls or monitors the charges, related 
    to the service usage. Credit control is a process of checking if 
    credit is available, credit-reservation, reduction of credit from 
    the end user account when service is completed and refunding of 
    reserved credit not used. 
    
   Credit Control Server 
     It is located in the home environment and is accessed by service 
     elements in real-time for purpose of price determination and credit 
     control before the service event is delivered to the end-user. It 
     also interacts with business support systems. 
 
   Diameter Credit Control Client 
     A Diameter Credit Control Client is an entity that interacts with a 
     Credit Control Server.  
 
   Diameter Credit Control Server 
     A Diameter Credit Control server is an entity that handles credit 
     control request. 
      
   Rating 
     The act of determining the cost of the service event. 
 
   Service 
     A type of task that is performed by a service element for a service 
     consumer. 
 
   Service Consumer 
     Client of a service element. End user of a network service. 
 
   Service Element 
     A network element that provides a service to service consumers. 

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 4] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
     A service element itself can include the application service 
     providers or application service providers can be located in an 
     other domain. 
       
   Service Event  
     Any event which creates value for the end-user. 
      
1.3 Advertising application support 
    
   Diameter nodes conforming to this specification MAY advertise support 
   by including the value of TBD (X) in the Acct-Application-Id AVP of 
   the Capabilities-Exchange-Request and Capabilities-Exchange-Answer 
   command [2]. 
      
2.0 Architecture Model 
    
   A service element provides services to service consumers. When 
   accounting is used a service element collects service event 
   information and reports it while and/or after services are provided 
   to an accounting server by using an accounting protocol. 
   Alternatively the accounting server may query the service element for 
   service event information. 
    
   The accounting protocol can for example be RADIUS accounting protocol 
   or the Diameter base protocol with a Diameter application. 
    
   If real-time Credit Control is required, the service element contacts 
   the Credit Control Server with service event information included 
   before the service is provided. The Credit Control Server, depending 
   on the service event information, MAY perform the rating of the 
   service event, pricing of the service event, credit check and credit-
   reservation from the account. The service element monitors the 
   service execution according to the instructions returned by the 
   Credit Control Server. After the service completion the Credit 
   Control Server deducts the money from the account. 
    
   If direct debiting/refunding is requested, the Credit Control Server 
   deducts/increases the end user∆s account, respectively. The service 
   element can also enquire the price of the service or the account 
   balance status from the Credit Control Server. 
    
   The credit control protocol is the Diameter base protocol with the 
   Diameter credit control application. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 5] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
                                        accounting           
     +------------+       +-----------+ protocol     +--------------+ 
     |  Service   |<----->|  Service  |<------------>| Accounting   | 
     |  Consumer  |   +-->|  Element  |<-----+       |   Server     | 
     +------------+   |   +-----------+      |       +--------------+ 
                      |                      |               
     +------------+   |                      |               
     |  Service   |<--+                      |       +--------------+ 
     |  Consumer  |                          +------>|Credit Control| 
     +------------+                  credit control  |   Server     | 
                                        protocol     +--------------+ 
                                                                                      
    
   The Credit Control Server and Accounting Server in this architecture 
   model are logical entities. The real configuration MAY combine them 
   into a single host.  
 
3.0 Service Control 
    
   When an end user requests a service the request is forwarded to a 
   service element in the home domain, that is the same administrative 
   domain, in which the end user's Credit Control Server is located. In 
   some cases it might be possible that the service element in the 
   visited domain can offer service event to the end user, but in that 
   case a commercial agreement must exist between the service element in 
   the visited domain and Credit Control Server in the home domain. 
    
   The service element SHOULD authenticate and authorize the end user 
   before any request is sent to the Credit Control Server. The way how 
   the authentication and/or authorization are performed in the service 
   element and the authentication and/or authorization messages that are 
   used are not defined in this application. The methods defined in 
   other Diameter applications or other legacy authentication and 
   authorization methods can be used.  
    
   The Diameter Credit Control Client in the service element gets 
   information from the authorization server regarding the way 
   accounting data shall be forwarded (accounting protocol or credit 
   control protocol) based on its knowledge of the end user. This means 
   that the accounting information is forwarded to the accounting server 
   as defined [DIAMBASE] or the Credit Control Server must be contacted 
   before the service event is offered to the end user. 
    
   The authorization server MAY include the Accounting-Interim-Interval 
   AVP to control the operation of the device in the service element 
   operating as a client as defined in [DIAMBASE]. If the Accounting-
   Interim-Interval AVP is included then the interim interval must be 
   present in the request message sent to the Credit Control Server.  
    
   The Diameter Credit Control Server MAY override the interim interval. 
   It is up to the Credit Control Server to determine, even 
   independently from the requested value, the allowed interim interval 
   to be used for consumption of the granted service units. The Credit 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 6] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   Control Server MAY return the interim interval in the Answer message 
   to the Credit Control Client. It can be included in the Answer 
   message even in case it is not present in the Request message. 
   Alternatively the accounting interim interval can be omitted from the 
   Answer message. 
    
   The Diameter protocol's Session-Id AVP, which is globally and 
   eternally unique [DIAMBASE], is used to identify a particular 
   session. Each credit control session MUST have globally unique 
   Session-Id and it MUST NOT be changed during a life of credit control 
   session.  
    
   During authorization, the authorization server MAY return the 
   Accounting-Multi-Session-Id, which the Diameter Credit Control 
   Clients MUST include in all subsequent accounting messages. The 
   Accounting-Multi-Session-Id AVP MAY include the value of the original 
   Session-Id. It's contents are implementation specific, but MUST be 
   globally unique across other Accounting-Multi-Session-Id, and MUST 
   NOT be changed during the life of a credit control session.  
    
   There are certain applications that require multiple accounting sub-
   sessions. Such applications would send messages with a constant 
   Session-Id AVP, but a different Accounting Sub-Session-Id AVP. 
   If several credit sub-sessions will be used, all sub-sessions MUST be 
   closed separately before the closing the main session. The absence of 
   this AVP implies no sub-sessions are in use.  
 
   The Diameter Credit Control Client and Server MUST support the 
   accounting session state machine defined in the Diameter base 
   protocol [DIAMBASE].   
    
   If the Credit Control Client wants to perform credit-reservation 
   before granting service to the end user it MUST use several 
   interrogations towards the Credit Control Server. In this case the 
   Credit Control Server MUST maintain the accounting session state. 
    
   A one time event MAY be used when there is no need to maintain any 
   state in the Diameter Credit Control Server, for example enquiring 
   the price of the service.   
 
3.1 Session Based Credit Control 
      
   For a session based Credit Control several interrogations are needed: 
   the first, intermediate (optional) and the final interrogation.  
 
3.1.1 First Interrogation 
 
   The first interrogation MUST be sent before the Diameter Credit 
   Control Client in a service element allows any service event to the 
   end user. The Accounting-Record-Type is set to the value START_RECORD 
   in the first request message. The Subscription-Id-Data AVP MUST be 
   included to identify the end-user in the Credit Control Server.  
     
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 7] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   If the Diameter Credit Control Client knows the cost of the service 
   event the monetary amount to be charged is included in the Requested-
   Service-Unit AVP. If the Diameter Credit Control Client does not know 
   the cost of the service event, the Requested-Service-Unit AVP MAY 
   contain the number of requested service events and the Service- 
   Parameter-Info AVP SHOULD contain the service event information to be 
   rated by the Credit Control Server. The Service-Parameter-Info AVP 
   always refers to the requested service units. 
 
   The Event-Timestamp AVP contains the time when the service event is 
   requested in the service element. 
    
   The Credit Control Server SHOULD rate the service event and make a 
   credit-reservation from the end user's account that covers the cost 
   of the service event. If the type of the Requested-Service-Unit AVP 
   is money, no rating is needed but the corresponding monetary amount 
   is reserved from end user's account.  
    
   The Credit Control Server returns the Granted-Service-Unit AVP in the 
   Answer message to the Diameter Credit Control Client. The Granted-
   Service-Unit AVP contains the amount of service units that the 
   Diameter Credit Control Client can provide to the end user until a 
   new Accounting-Request MUST be sent to the Credit Control Server. If 
   several unit types are sent in the Answer message the Credit Control 
   Client MUST handle each unit type separately. When the granted 
   service units for one unit type have been spent a new Accounting-
   Request MUST be sent to the Credit Control Server even though there 
   would be service units left for other units types. The type of the 
   Granted-Service-Unit AVP can be time, volume, event or money 
   depending on the type of service event. It is not possible to change 
   the unit type(s) within the session. 
    
   The Accounting-Answer message MAY also include the Final-Unit-
   Indication AVP to indicate that the Answer message contains the final 
   units for the service session. After these units have been used by 
   the end user, the Diameter Credit Control Client is responsible for 
   terminating the service session and the credit control session by 
   sending the final interrogation to the Credit Control Server. 
    
3.1.2 Intermediate Interrogation 
 
   When all the granted service units for one unit type are spent by the 
   end user or the interim interval is expired the Diameter Credit 
   Control Client MUST send a new Accounting-Request to the Credit 
   Control Server. In case the Accounting-Interim-Interval is used it is 
   always up to the Diameter Credit Control Client to send a new request 
   well in advance before the expiration of the previous request in 
   order to avoiding interruption in the service element. Even if the 
   granted service units reserved by the Credit Control Server have not 
   been spent upon expiration of the accounting interim interval, the 
   Diameter Credit Control Client MUST send a new Accounting-Request to 
   the Credit Control Server. 
     
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 8] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   There can be also mid-session service events, which might affect the 
   rating of the current service events. In this case a spontaneous 
   updating (a new Accounting-Request) SHOULD be sent including 
   information related to the service event even if all the granted 
   service units have not been spent or the accounting interim interval 
   has not expired. 
    
   When the used units are reported to the Credit Control Server the 
   Credit Control Client will not have any units in its possession 
   before new granted units are received from the Credit Control Server. 
   When the new granted units are received from the Credit control 
   Server these units apply from the point where the measurement of the 
   reported used units stopped. 
 
   The Accounting-Record-Type AVP is set to the value INTERIM_RECORD in 
   the intermediate request message. The Subscription-Id-Data AVP MUST 
   also be included in the intermediate message to identify the end user 
   the in Credit Control Server.  
    
   The Requested-Service-Unit AVP contains the new amount of requested 
   service units, the Used-Service-Unit AVP contains the amount of used 
   service units since the previous Answer message. The same unit types 
   that are used in the previous message MUST be used. If several unit 
   types were included in the previous Answer message the used service 
   units for each unit type MUST be reported. 
    
   The Event-Timestamp AVP contains the time of the event that triggered 
   the sending of the new Accounting-Request. 
    
   The Credit Control Server MUST refund the reserved credit amount not 
   used to the end user's account and deduct the used monetary amount 
   from the end user's account. 
 
   The rating of the new service event, the credit-reservation from the 
   end user's account and the possible final unit indication SHOULD be 
   handled a similar way as described in the first interrogation. 
    
   The Accounting-Answer message with the Accounting-Record-Type AVP is 
   set to the value INTERIM_RECORD MAY include the Cost-Information AVP 
   containing the accumulated cost for the session without taking any 
   credit-reservation into account.    
 
   There MAY be several intermediate interrogations within a session. 
    
3.1.3 Final Interrogation 
 
   When the end user terminates the service session or when all the 
   granted units are used after a Final-Unit-Indication AVP has been 
   received from the Credit Control Server, the Diameter Credit Control 
   Client MUST send a final Accounting-Request message to the Credit 
   Control Server. The Accounting-Record-Type AVP is set to the value 
   STOP_RECORD. 
    
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                 [Page 9] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   The Event-Timestamp AVP MAY contain the time of the session was 
   terminated.  
    
   The Used-Service-Unit AVP contains the amount of used service units 
   since the previous answer message. If several unit types were 
   included in the previous answer message the used service units for 
   each unit type MUST be reported. 
    
   After final interrogation the Credit Control Server MUST refund the 
   reserved credit amount not used to the end user's account and deduct 
   the used monetary amount from the end user's account. 
    
   The Accounting-Answer message with the Accounting-Record-Type set to 
   the value STOP_RECORD SHOULD include the Cost-Information AVP 
   containing the total cost for the session in question. 
    
3.2 One Time Event 
 
   The one time event is used when there is no need to maintain 
   accounting session state in the Credit Control Server.  
    
   The one time event can be used when the service element wants to know 
   the cost of the service event without any credit-reservation or to 
   check the account balance without any credit-reservation. It can be 
   used also for refunding service units on the user's account or direct 
   debiting without any credit-reservation.  
    
3.2.1 Service Price Enquiry 
    
   Sometimes the service element needs to know the price of the service 
   event. There might exist services offered by application service 
   providers, whose prices are not known in the service element. End 
   user might also want to get an estimation of the price of a service 
   event before requesting it. 
    
   A Diameter Credit Control Client requesting the cost information MUST 
   set the Accounting-Record-Type AVP equal to EVENT_RECORD, include the 
   Requested-Action AVP set to PRICE_ENQUIRY and set the requested 
   service event information into the Service-Parameter-Info AVP in the 
   Accounting-Request message. 
    
   The Credit Control Server calculates the cost of the requested 
   service event, but it does not perform any account balance check or 
   credit-reservation from the account. 
    
   The price of the requested service event is returned to the Credit 
   Control Client in the Cost-Information AVP in the Accounting-Answer 
   message. 
    
3.2.2 Balance Check 
 
   Sometimes Diameter Credit Control Client needs only to verify that   
   the end user∆s account balance covers the cost for a certain service 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 10] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   without reserving any units from the account at the time of the 
   enquiry. This method does not guarantee that there would be credit 
   left when the Diameter Credit Control Client requests the debiting of 
   the account with a separate request. 
   
   A Diameter Credit Control Client requesting the balance check MUST 
   set the Accounting-Record-Type AVP equal to EVENT_RECORD, include 
   Requested-Action AVP set to CHECK_BALANCE and include the 
   Subscription-Id-Data to identify the End-User in the Credit Control 
   Server. 
    
   The Credit Control Server makes the balance check, but it does not do 
   any credit-reservation from the account. 
    
   The result of balance check (Credit/No Credit) is returned to the 
   Credit Control Client in the Check-Balance-Result AVP in the 
   Accounting-Answer message. 
 
3.2.3 Direct Debiting 
    
   There are certain one time events for which service execution is 
   always successful in the service environment. In these cases the 
   Diameter Credit Control Client can use the one time event scenario 
   for direct debiting. The Diameter Credit Control Client MUST be sure 
   that the requested service event execution will be successful, when 
   this scenario is used.   
 
   The Accounting-Record-Type is set to the value EVENT_RECORD and the 
   Requested-Action AVP set to DIRECT_DEBITING in the Accounting-Request 
   message. The Subscription-Id-Data AVP MUST be included to identify 
   the End-User in the Credit Control Server. The Event-Timestamp AVP 
   contains the time when the service event is requested in the service 
   element. 
    
   The Diameter Credit Control Client MAY include the monetary amount to 
   be charged in the Request-Service-Unit AVP, if it knows the cost of 
   the service event. If the Diameter Credit Control Client does not 
   know the cost of the service event, then the Service-Parameter-Info 
   AVP SHOULD contain the service event information to be rated by the 
   Credit Control Server. The Service-Parameter-Info AVP always refers 
   to the requested service unit.  
    
   The Credit Control Server SHOULD rate the service event and deduct 
   the corresponding monetary amount from end user's account. If the 
   type of the Requested-Service-Unit AVP is money, no rating is needed 
   but the corresponding monetary amount is deducted from the End User's 
   account. 
    
   The Credit Control Server returns the Granted-Service-Unit AVP in the 
   Answer message to the Diameter Credit Control Client. The Granted-
   Service-Unit AVP contains the amount of service units that the 
   Diameter Credit Control Client can provide to the end user. The type 

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 11] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   of the Granted-Service-Unit can be time, volume, event or money 
   depending on the type of service event. 
    
   The Accounting-Answer message SHOULD also include the Cost-
   Information AVP containing the total cost of the requested service.  
    
3.2.4 Refund  
   
   There MAY be a need to refund service units on the end user∆s 
   account, for example gaming services. 
   
   The Credit Control Client MUST set Accounting-Record-Type AVP to the 
   value EVENT_RECORD and the Requested-Action AVP to REFUND in the 
   Accounting-Request message. The Subscription-Id-Data AVP MUST be 
   included to identify the End-User in the Credit Control Server. 
    
   The Diameter Credit Control Client MAY include the monetary amount to 
   be refunded in the Request-Service-Unit AVP, if it knows the cost of 
   the service event. If the Diameter Credit Control Client does not 
   know the cost of the service event, then the Service-Parameter-Info 
   AVP SHOULD contain the service event information to be rated by the 
   Credit Control Server. The Service-Parameter-Info AVP always refers 
   to the requested service unit. 
    
4.0 Accounting AVPs 
 
   This section defines the accounting AVPs that are specific to 
   Diameter Credit Control Application and MAY be included in the 
   Diameter accounting messages [DIAMBASE]. 
    
   Accounting-Request command MAY include a following additional AVPS: 
     [ Subscription-Id ] 
     [ Requested-Action ] 
     [ Event-Timestamp] 
    *[ Requested-Service Unit ] 
    *[ Used-Service-Unit ] 
    *[ Service-Parameter-Info ] 
     [ Abnormal-Termination-Reason] 
    *[ Accounting-Correlation-Id ] 
     
   Accounting-Answer command MAY include a following additional AVPS: 
     [ Subscription-Id ] 
    *[ Granted-Service-Unit ] 
     [ Cost-Information] 
     [ Final-Unit-Indication ] 
     [ Check-Balance-Result ] 
    
4.1 Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP 
      
  The Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type 
  Enumerated and contains information about the reason for an abnormal 
  service termination in a service element. 
   
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 12] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   The following reasons are defined: 
    
       SERVICE_ELEMENT_TERMINATION                         0 
            An error occurred in the service element. 
    
       CONNECTION_TO_END-USER_BROKEN                       1 
            The connection to the end-user is broken.  
      
4.2 Accounting-Correlation-Id AVP 
 
  The Accounting-Correlation-Id AVP (AVP Code TBD) is type of 
  OctetString and contains information to correlate accounting data 
  generated for different components of the service, e.g. transport and 
  service level.  
      
4.3 Check-Balance-Result AVP 
 
  The Check Balance Result AVP (AVP code TBD) is of type Enumerated and 
  contains the result of the balance check. This AVP is applicable only 
  when the Requested-Action AVP indicates CHECK_BALANCE in the 
  Accounting-Request command.  
   
  The following values are defined for the Check-Balance-Result AVP. 
   
      ENOUGH_CREDIT                                       0 
           There is enough credit in the account to cover the requested 
           service. 
        
      NO_CREDIT                                           1 
            There isn∆t enough credit in the account to cover the 
            requested service.   
      
4.4 Cost AVP 
 
   The Cost AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Float64 and contains the cost 
   estimate of the service in case of price enquiry or the accumulated 
   cost in the case of credit control session. 
          
4.5 Cost-Information AVP 
    
   The Cost-Information AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Grouped and is 
   used to return the cost information of a service in the Accounting-
   Answer command. The included Cost AVP contains the cost of the 
   service event and the Currency-Code specifies in which currency the 
   cost was given. 
     
   When the Requested-Action AVP with value PRICE_ENQUIRY is included in 
   the Accounting-Request command the Cost-Information AVP sent in the 
   succeeding Accounting-Answer command contains the cost estimation of 
   the requested service, without any reservation being made. 
    
   The Cost-Information AVP included in the Accounting-Answer command 
   with the Accounting-Record-Type set to INTERIM_RECORD contains the 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 13] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   accumulated cost for the session without taking any credit-
   reservation into account.  
    
   The Cost-Information AVP included in the Accounting-Answer command 
   with the Accounting-Record-Type set to EVENT_RECORD or STOP_RECORD 
   contains the total cost for the requested service.  
 
   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
    
          <Cost-Information>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 
                            { Cost } 
                             { Currency-Code } 
 
4.6 Currency-Code AVP 
    
   The Currency-Code AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Unsigned32 and 
   contains a currency code that specifies in which currency the values 
   of AVPs containing monetary units were given. It is specified using 
   the numeric values defined in the ISO 4217 standard. 
    
4.7 Event-Timestamp AVP 
 
   The Event-Timestamp AVP is of type Time (AVP Code TBD). In the first 
   Accounting-Request message it contains the time when the service is 
   requested in the service element. The succeeding Accounting-Request 
   messages it contains the time of the event that triggered the sending 
   of the Accounting-Request message (e.g. mid-session service event, 
   expiry of granted units or interim interval, termination of service). 
   
4.8 Final-Unit-Indication AVP 
 
   The Final-Unit-Indication AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Unsigned32 
   and indicates that the Granted-Service-Unit AVP in the accounting 
   command contains the final units for the service. After these units 
   have expired, the Diameter Credit Control Client in a service element 
   is responsible for terminating the service and sending the 
   STOP_RECORD to the Credit Control Server. 
   If included in a command, the value of this AVP is always 1. 
 
4.9 Granted-Service-Unit AVP 
    
   Granted-Service-Unit AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Grouped and 
   contains the amount of units that the Diameter Credit Control Client 
   can provide to the end user until the service must be released or the 
   new Accounting-Request must be sent. The Unit-Value AVP contains the 
   granted Unit-Value and the Unit-Type AVP defines the type of the 
   unit. If the unit type is money, a Currency-Code AVP SHOULD be 
   included. 

   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
     
          <Granted-Service-Unit>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 14] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
                                       { Unit-Type } 
                                       { Unit-Value } 
                                       [ Currency-Code ] 
      
4.10 Requested-Action AVP 
 
   The Requested-Action AVP (AVP Code TBD) is type of Enumerated and 
   contains the requested action being sent by Accounting-Request 
   command where the Accounting-Record-Type is set to EVENT_RECORD. 
   The following values are defined for the Requested-Action AVP: 
   
       DIRECT DEBITING                              0 
       Direct debiting indicates that the request is to decrease the 
       end user∆s account according to information specified in the 
       Requested-Service-Unit AVP and/or Service-Parameter-Info AVP. 
       The Granted-Service Unit AVP in the Accounting-Answer command 
       contains the debited units. 
    
       REFUND ACCOUNT                               1 
       Refund account indicates that the request is to increase the end 
       user∆s account according to information specified in the 
       Requested-Service-Unit AVP and/or Service-Parameter-Info AVP. 
       The Granted-Service Unit AVP in the Accounting-Answer command 
       contains the refunded units. 
        
       CHECK_BALANCE                                2 
       Check balance indicates that the request is a balance check 
       request. In this case the checking of the account balance is 
       done without any credit reservation from the account. The Check-
       Balance-Result AVP in the Accounting-Answer command contains the 
       result of the Balance Check. 
        
       PRICE_ENQUIRY                                3 
       Price Enquiry indicates that the request is a price enquiry 
       request. In this case neither checking of the account balance 
       nor reservation from the account will be done, only the price of 
       the service will be returned in the Cost-Information AVP in the 
       Accounting-Answer Command. 
        
4.11 Requested-Service-Unit AVP 
    
   The Requested-Service-Unit AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Grouped and 
   contains the amount of requested units specified by the Diameter 
   Credit Control Client. The included Unit-Value AVP contains the 
   requested Unit-Value and the Unit-Type AVP defines the type of the 
   unit. If the unit type is money, a Currency-Code AVP SHOULD be 
   included. 
      
   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
    
          <Requested-Service-Unit>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 


 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 15] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
                                   { Unit-Type } 
                                   { Unit-Value } 
                                   [ Currency-Code ] 
    
4.12 Service-Parameter-Info AVP 
 
   The Service-Parameter-Info AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Grouped and 
   contains a service specific information used for price calculation or 
   rating. The Service-Parameter-Type AVP defines the service parameter 
   type and the Service-Parameter-Value AVP contains the parameter 
   value. The actual contents of these AVPs are not within the scope of 
   this document and SHOULD be defined in additional service specific 
   documentation. 
    
   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
    
          <Service-Parameter-Info>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 
                                   { Service-Parameter-Type } 
                                   { Service-Parameter-Value } 
    
4.13 Service-Parameter-Type AVP 
 
   The Service-Parameter-Type AVP is of type Unsigned32 (AVP Code TBD) 
   and defines the type of the service event specific parameter (e.g. it 
   can be end-user location, contents provider Id, tax percentage). The 
   different parameters and their types are service specific and the 
   meanings of these parameters are defined between the service element 
   and the Credit Control Server.   
 
4.14 Service-Parameter-Value AVP 
 
   The Service-Parameter-Value AVP is of type UTF8String (AVP Code TBD) 
   and contains the value of the service parameter type. 
 
4.15 Subscription-Id AVP 
 
   The Subscription-Id AVP (AVP Code TBD) is used to identify the end 
   user∆s subscription and is of type Grouped.  The Subscription-Id AVP 
   includes a Subscription-Id-Data AVP that defines the identifier type 
   and a Subscription-Id-Type AVP that holds the identifier.  
    
   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
    
                 <Subscription-Id>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 
                                   { Subscription-Id-Data } 
                                   { Subscription-Id-Type } 
 
4.16 Subscription-Id-Data AVP 
 
   The Subscription-Id-Data AVP (AVP Code TBD) is used to identify the 
   end-user and is of type UTF8String. The Subscription-Id-Type AVP 
   defines which type of identifier is used.  
    
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 16] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
4.17 Subscription-Id-Type AVP 
 
   The Subscription-Id-Type AVP (AVP Code TBD) is of type Enumerated and 
   it is used to determine which type of identifier that is carried by 
   the Subscription-Id AVP. 
    
   The identifier can be one of the following: 
    
      END_USER_MSISDN                                              0 
           The identifier is in international MSISDN format, according 
           to the ITU-T E.164 numbering plan as defined in [E164] and 
           [CE164]. 
            
       END_USER_IMSI                                                1 
           The identifier is in international IMSI format, according to 
           the ITU-T E.212 numbering plan as defined in [E121] and 
           [CE121]. 
            
       END_USER_SIP_URL                                             2 
          The identifier is in the form of a SIP URL as defined in 
          [SIP].                                                 
                         
       END_USER_NAI                                                 3 
           The identifier is in the form of a Network Access Identifier 
           as defined in [NAI]. 
            
       END_USER_PRIVATE                                             4  
           The Identifier is a Credit Control Server private identifier. 
 
4.18 Unit-Type AVP 
 
   The Unit-Type AVP is of type Enumerated (AVP Code TBD) and contains 
   the type of the unit. 
   The unit type can be one of the following: 
      
       SERVICE_CREDIT_TIME                                          0 
       The unit is of type time, given in seconds. 
    
       SERVICE_CREDIT_VOLUME                                        1 
       The unit is of type volume, given in kB. 
    
       SERVICE_CREDIT_EVENT                                         2 
       The unit is of type event, given as a number of events. 
    
       SERVICE_CREDIT_MONEY                                         3 
       The unit is of type money, given as a monetary value, whose 
       currency SHOULD be specified by the Currency-Code AVP. 
    
4.19 Unit-Value AVP 
 
   Unit-Value AVP is of type Float64 (AVP Code TBD) and contains the 
   granted or used Unit-Value. The value can be time in seconds, volume 
   in kB, number of events or monetary amount depending on the given 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 17] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   Unit-Type. 
    
   If the Unit-Type AVP is set to time in the Accounting-Answer command, 
   the Unit Value AVP specifies the granted time in seconds (measured 
   from the moment when the services becomes active or from the previous 
   Answer command) until a new Accounting-Request MUST be sent.  
   If the Unit Type AVP is set to time in the Accounting-Request 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the used time since previous 
   report or time requested by the Credit Control Client. 
    
   If the Unit-Type AVP is set to volume in the Accounting-Answer 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the granted volume in kB 
   (measured from the moment when the services becomes active or from 
   the previous Answer command) until a new Accounting-Request MUST be 
   sent.  
   If the Unit-type AVP is set to volume in the Accounting-Request 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the used volume since previous 
   report or volume requested by the Credit Control Client. 
    
   If the Unit-Type AVP is set to event in the Accounting-Answer 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the granted number of events 
   (measured from the moment when the service becomes active or from the 
   previous Answer command) until a new Accounting-Request MUST be sent.  
   If the Unit-type AVP is set to event in the Accounting-Request 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the used number of events since 
   previous report or number of events requested by the Credit Control 
   Client. 
    
   If the Unit-Type AVP is set to money in the Accounting-Answer 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the granted monetary amount, 
   which the end user can use until a new Accounting-Request MUST be 
   sent.  
   If the Unit-Type AVP is set to money in the Accounting-Request 
   command, the Unit-Value AVP specifies the used monetary amount since 
   previous report or the monetary amount requested by the Credit 
   control Client. 
    
4.20 Used-Service-Unit AVP 
 
   The Used-Service-Unit AVP is of type Grouped AVP (AVP Code TBD) and 
   contains the amount of used units since the previous Accounting-
   Answer command. The included Unit-Type AVP defines the type of the 
   unit and the Unit-Value AVP contains the used amount. If the unit 
   type is money, a Currency-Code AVP SHOULD be included. 

   It has the following ABNF grammar: 
     
              <Used-Service-Unit>::=< AVP Header: TBD > 
                                   { Unit-Type } 
                                   { Unit-Value } 
                                   [ Currency-Code ] 
 

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 18] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
5.0 Result Code AVP values 
 
   This section defines new Result-Code AVP [DIAMBASE] values that must 
   be supported by all Diameter implementations that conform to this 
   specification. 
    
   The Accounting-Answer message includes the Result-Code AVP, which MAY 
   indicate that an error was present in the Accounting-Request message. 
   A rejected Accounting-Request message SHOULD cause the user∆s session 
   to be terminated. 
    
5.1 Transient Failure 
 
   Errors that fall within the transient failures category are used to 
   inform a peer that the request could not be satisfied at the time it 
   was received, but MAY be able to satisfy the request in the future. 
   
     DIAMETER_END_USER_SERVICE_DENIED                         40XX 
     The Credit Control Server denies the service request due to 
     service restrictions or limitations related to the end-user, for 
     example the end-user∆s account could not cover the requested 
     service. 
 
5.2 Permanent Failures 
    
   Errors that fall within permanent failure category are used to inform 
   the peer that the request failed, and should not be attempted again. 
    
      DIAMETER_END_USER_NOT_FOUND                              50XX 
      The specified end user could not be found in the Credit Control 
      Server. 
 
6.0 AVP Occurrence Table 
 
   The following table presents the AVPs defined in this document, and 
   specifies in which Diameter messages they MAY, or MAY NOT be present. 
   Note that AVPs that can only be present within a Grouped AVP are not 
   represented in this table. 
    
   The table uses the following symbols: 
         0     The AVP MUST NOT be present in the message. 
         0+    Zero or more instances of the AVP MAY be present in the 
               message. 
         0-1   Zero or one instance of the AVP MAY be present in the 
               message. It is considered an error if there are more than 
               once instance of the AVP. 
         1     One instance of the AVP MUST be present in the message. 
         1+    At least one instance of the AVP MUST be present in the 
               message. 
 
6.1 Accounting AVP Table 
 

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 19] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
   The table in this section is used to represent which Credit Control 
   applications specific AVPs defined in this document are to be present 
   in the accounting messages. 
    
                                    +-----------+ 
                                    |  Command  | 
                                    |    Code   | 
                                    |-----+-----+ 
      Attribute Name                | ACR | ACA | 
      ------------------------------|-----+-----+ 
      Abnormal-Termination-Reason   | 0-1 | 0   | 
      Accounting-Correlation-Id     | 0-1 | 0   | 
      Check-Balance-Result          | 0   | 0-1 | 
      Cost-Information              | 0   | 0-1 | 
      Event-Timestamp               | 0-1 | 0   | 
      Final-Unit-Indication         | 0   | 0-1 | 
      Granted-Service-Unit          | 0   | 0+  | 
      Requested-Action              | 0-1 | 0   |     
      Requested-Service-Unit        | 0-1 | 0   | 
      Service-Parameter-Info        | 0+  | 0   | 
      Subscription-Id               | 1   | 0-1 | 
      Used-Service-Unit             | 0+  | 0   | 
      ------------------------------|-----+-----+                 
 
7.0 IANA Considerations 
    
   This section contains the namespaces that have either been created in 
   this specification, or the values assigned to existing namespaces 
   managed by IANA. 
 
7.1 Command Codes 
    
   This specification uses the value 271 from the Command code namespace 
   defined in [DIAMBASE].  
 
7.2 AVP Codes  
 
   This specification assigns the values TBD - TBD from the AVP code 
   namespace defined in [DIAMBASE] See section 4.0 for the assignment of 
   the namespace in this specification. 
    
7.3 Result-Code AVP Values 
    
   This specification assigns the values 40XX and 50XX from the Result-
   Code AVP (AVP Code 268) value namespace defined in [DIAMBASE]. See 
   section 5.0 for the assignment of the namespace in this 
   specification. 
 
7.4 Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP 
 
   As defined in Section 4.1, the Abnormal-Termination-Reason AVP (AVP 
   Code TBD) defines the values 0-1. All remaining values are available 
   for assignment via Designated Expert [IANA]. 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 20] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
    
7.5 Check-Balance-Result AVP 
    
   As defined in Section 4.3, the Check-Balance-Result AVP (AVP Code 
   TBD) defines the values 0-1. All remaining values are available for 
   assignment via Designated Expert [IANA]. 
    
7.6 Requested-Action AVP 
 
   As defined in Section 4.10, the Requested-Action AVP (AVP Code TBD) 
   defines the values 0-3. All remaining values are available for 
   assignment via Designated Expert [IANA]. 
 
7.7 Subscription-Id-Type AVP 
    
   As defined in Section 4.17, the Subscription-Id-Type AVP (AVP Code 
   TBD) defines the values 0-4. All remaining values are available for 
   assignment via Designated Expert [IANA]. 
    
7.8 Unit-Type AVP 
    
   As defined in Section 4.18, the Unit-Type AVP (AVP Code TBD) defines 
   the values 0-3. All remaining values are available for assignment via 
   Designated Expert [IANA]. 
      
7.9 Application Identifier 
    
   This specification assigns the value TBD to the application 
   Identifier namespace defined in [DIAMBASE]. See section 1.3 for more 
   information. 
    
8.0 Security Considerations 
 
   The security models as defined in the Diameter base protocol 
   [DIAMBASE] applies to this application too. 
    
 
9.0 References 
 
9.1 Normative 
    
[DIAMBASE]  P. Calhoun, J. Arkko, E. Guttman, G Zorn, J Loughney 
            "Diameter Base Protocol", draft-ietf-aaa-diameter-10.txt,  
            IETF work in progress, March 2002. 
 
[3GPPCHARG]  3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification 
            Group Services and System Aspects, Service aspects; 
            Charging and Billing, (release 5), 3GPP TS 22.115 v. 5.1.1, 
            2001-06   
      
[SIP]       M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg. 
            "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",  

 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 21] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
            draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-09.txt, IETF work in progress, 
            February 2002. 
              
[NAI]       Aboba, Beadles "The Network Access Identifier." RFC 2486. 
            January 1999. 
  
[E164]      Recommendation E.164/I.331 (05/97): The International 
            Public Telecommunication Numbering Plan. 1997. 
  
[CE164]     Complement to ITU-T Recommendation E.164 (05/1997):"List of 
            ITU-T Recommendation E.164 assigned country codes", June 
            2000. 
  
[E212]      Recommendation E.212 (11/98): The international 
            identification plan for mobile terminals and mobile users. 
            1998. 
  
[CE212]     Complement to ITU-T Recommendation E.212 (11/1997):" List 
            of mobile country or geographical area codes ", February 
            1999.  
  
[IANA]      Narten, Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA 
            Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 
            1998 
  
9.2 Non-Normative 
 
[KEYWORDS]  S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
            Requirement Levelsˆ, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  
 
[ACCMGMT]   B.Aboba, J.Arkko, D.Harrington. "Introduction to Accounting            
            Management", RFC 2975, October 2000. 
 
10.0 Acknowledgement 
 
11.0 Author's Address 
    
     Harri Hakala                  
     Oy L M Ericsson Ab 
     Joukahaisenkatu 1  
     20520 Turku 
     Finland 
                       
     Phone: +358 2 265 3722 
     EMail: Harri.Hakala@lmf.ericsson.se 
    
     Leena Mattila 
     Oy L M Ericsson Ab 
     Joukahaisenkatu 1  
     20520 Turku 
     Finland 
                       
    Phone: +358 2 265 3731 
 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 22] 

 
INTERNET-DRAFT    Diameter Credit Control Application       March, 2002 
 
    EMail: Leena.Mattila@lmf.ericsson.se 
     
    Juha-Pekka Koskinen 
    Nokia Networks 
    HatanpÑÑnvaltatie 30 
    33100 Tampere 
    Finlad 
     
    Phone: +358 7180 74027 
    Email: juha-pekka.koskinen@nokia.com 
 
    
12.0 Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this docu- 
   ment itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the 
   copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will 
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
13.0 Expiration Date 
     
   This memo is filed as <draft-hakala-diameter-credit-control-02.txt> 
   and expires in September 2002. 
    











 
Hakala et al.            expires September 2002                [Page 23] 
