

Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                              May 23, 2004
Expires: November 21, 2004


          Valuable Antique Documents: A Model for Advancement
                 draft-klensin-newtrk-antiques-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 21, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   RFC 2026 and some of its predecessors require that Proposed and Draft
   Standards either advance in grade within a reasonable period of time
   or that they expire and be moved to Historic.  That procedure has
   never been followed on a systematic basis.  A new procedure has been
   proposed that would make that action easier for protocols that have
   not gotten any real acceptance.  In the interest of symmetry,
   fairness, and an orderly attic, it is worth noting that there are a
   number of protocol descriptions which have been at less than Full
   Standard level for a long time but which have proven their value by
   the traditional criteria of multiple interoperable implementations



Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


   and wide deployment and use.

   This document provides a procedure for upgrading such documents to
   Full Standards without creating an unreasonable burden on authors
   purely to meet the needs of procedural rituals or placing an
   unreasonable load on groups charged with performing other tasks in
   the IETF.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Modified Advancement Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Candidates for Advancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Advancement of Individual Documents  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  RFC Boilerplate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Selection of the Commission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Temporary Note to the Newtrk WG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   10.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8





























Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


1.  Introduction and History

   This document is intended to be read in conjunction with the proposal
   to use a "Commission for Protocol Obsolescence" to make
   recommendations to the IESG for downgrading or progressing documents
   on the IETF standards track [1] and is probably meaningless in its
   present form unless that proposal is adopted.  The difference between
   the two is that the cited document focuses on downgrading -- retiring
   of a document to Historic -- while this one focuses on getting
   documents advanced when they describe protocols that have already
   proven their value, i.e., are "mature".

   That document notes that documents to retire descriptions of immature
   standards "require significant time and effort on the part of
   authors, area directors, and the RFC Editor" and that "no document
   should be required for an immature standard to be retired to Historic
   status".  Using much the same reasoning, we suggest that, in many or
   most cases, no document (or, at most, only trivial modifications,
   should be required to advance a fully-mature standard whose
   usefulness has been widely demonstrated.

   Over the years, there have been many discussions in the IETF
   community about why documents never move beyond "Proposed" status
   even when they describe protocols that are obviously widely deployed
   and for which multiple interoperable implementations exist.  Many
   reasons have been suggested, but at least the following seem to be
   significant:

   o  Once a Proposed Standard protocol has been implemented and
      deployed, and the specification has proven, in practice, to be
      adequate to support multiple conforming implementations, it is
      extremely difficult to stimulate authors to produce revisions to
      the description to advance it in grade.  Even if the authors can
      be convinced to do so, that may not be in the best interest of the
      IETF community: authors and editors who might do the document
      upgrading work might better be doing work with real, rather than
      procedural, impact.
   o  Similarly, over the years, IETF requirements for standards-track
      documents and standards-track protocols have steadily increased,
      with new sections and levels of detail being required that were
      not required when the documents for some of our proven, mature,
      standards were written.  While most or all of those additional
      requirements are justified for new protocols, retroactively
      imposing burdensome additional documentation requirements on
      proven protocols has been another disincentive to advancement of
      those protocols.
   o  Even worse, from the standpoint of getting these documents
      advanced, there has been some history of second-guessing older



Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


      protocols in the light of more recent thinking.  Specifically, if
      an attempt is made to advance a protocol that has been deployed
      and established for years, the question may be asked by the IESG
      or others as to whether it would be designed the same way today.
      If the answer is "no", or even "probably not", the protocol has
      often been rejected for advancement.

   This combination of circumstances sends a powerful message to
   authors, and that message is "do not even bother trying to advance
   the protocol".

2.  Modified Advancement Model

   The IETF community has long claimed to believe, not only in "rough
   consensus and running code", but in interoperable implementations and
   deployment.  The procedure outlined below is based on the assumption
   that the basic functional requirements for Draft and Full Standard
   outlined in RFC 2026 [2] are, for mature, deployed, and proven
   protocols, more important than documentation "nits" or procedural
   rituals.  The empirical observation that a protocol has been widely
   deployed and used for many years without significant harm being done
   to the Internet is, in that context, more important than an extensive
   theoretical presentation of scaling or security issues.

   This model, and the specific suggestions that follow, depend
   critically on the community remembering and understanding that
   "Internet Standard" designates a protocol that is sufficiently
   specified to facilitate independent interoperable implementations,
   that is widely deployed, and that has been found significantly
   useful.  It does not imply that the protocol is either recommended or
   required: when we had those categories, they were considered
   orthogonal to standards track maturity levels.

   It also depends critically on the community making the distinction
   between a mature, useful, and widely implemented and deployed
   protocol and a document of that protocol that may not be optimal
   under contemporary standards.  It suggests that, for those cases, it
   is better to explicitly advance a protocol with a weak or incomplete
   specification than it is to pretend (even by omission) that the
   protocol is not, de facto, a Standard.

3.  Candidates for Advancement

   The advancement procedure for mature standards has the following
   steps.  These closely parallel the steps of [1] and are intended to
   use the same Commission.  Having two separate bodies parse the
   collection of older standards track documents is almost certainly
   inefficient.



Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 4]


   o  In the process of its investigations as to whether documents
      should be reclassified as Historic according to RFC 2026, the
      Commission may identify some documents as likely candidates for
      treatment as "mature standards".  The definition of those
      standards is as described above, i.e., in spite of being
      officially at Proposed or Draft levels, they are widely accepted
      in the community, widely deployed, and appear to be the
      beneficiaries of independent implementations.
   o  For each such RFC, the Commission sends out a message to the IETF
      list and the lists deemed relevant, asking for comments on
      implementation experience and active usage.
   o  Unless those reports cause the Commission to determine that the
      standards are, in fact, not mature, it will treat each one as
      discussed in the next section.

4.  Advancement of Individual Documents

   While some other options are possible, and might be attractive, this
   document assumes that any advancement in grade will need to be
   considered individually and subjected to a formal IETF Last Call.
   The goal of the procedure outlined here is to avoid even more
   complicated procedures, time-consuming and frustrating document
   rewriting, etc., where possible.

   To the three alternatives listed under "Individual Decommissioning
   Procedure" in [1], this document adds "Advancement of Grade".  The
   intent is to move all "mature" standards to Full Internet Standard
   unless there are significant and substantive reasons to not do so.
   Because of the requirements of RFC 2026, Proposed Standard documents
   for mature standards must be advanced in two steps, but the IESG is
   strongly encouraged to make the second of those steps completely pro
   forma, with no change in the published RFC.

   If the Commission recommends that a specification be advanced, and
   the community (as determined by the IESG) agrees, rewriting of the
   relevant RFC should be avoided to the extent possible.  As suggested
   above, if the specification was good enough to support multiple
   independent implementations and wide deployment, then it is
   sufficient for an Internet Standard.  If additional text is required,
   it should take the form of supplemental comments to be published
   either separately or as an appendix to an otherwise substantially
   identical RFC.  If the Commission and community determine that the
   protocol is mature, contemporary standards for documentation and
   specification shall not be applied retroactively.

   The "Procedure" to be used is identical to that discussed in [1].
   The "Evaluation Criteria" are those discussed above for determining
   whether or not a standard is mature.  Put differently, those criteria
   are the ones listed for Internet Standard in RFC 2026, independent of
   judgments about document editorial quality.



Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


5.  RFC Boilerplate

   This document explicitly contemplates the advancement to Internet
   Standard of documents that would not pass muster for Proposed if
   first written today.  It also contemplates the publication, as part
   of advancement of other documents that, similarly, would not meet
   today's criteria.  The RFC Editor and IESG are encouraged to work out
   a suitable "boilerplate" statement that indicates that the documents
   describe mature specifications designated as Internet Standards
   because they represent common and established practice rather than
   because the documents are of the quality expected today for such
   Standards.

6.  Selection of the Commission

   Since this procedure is expected to use the same Commission as in
   [1], whatever selection mechanism is specified in that document and
   its successors will apply here as well.

7.  Temporary Note to the Newtrk WG

   While I didn't intend it when I agreed to write this draft, it became
   clear to me in doing so that, if viewed as an ongoing procedure
   rather than a one-time cleanup mechanism, it actually provides an
   alternate standards track mechanism.  Viewed that way, we end up with
   the same maturity levels as in 2026, but two ways of getting past
   Proposed.  One involved being very diligent about writing and
   upgrading documents, as 2026 more or less explicitly contemplates.
   The other involves producing Proposed Standard documents of
   sufficient quality to support interoperable implementations, getting
   them implemented and deployed widely enough to meet both the criteria
   for full Standard and a perhaps-somewhat-stronger standard of
   usefulness and then, after period of time long enough to establish
   the specification as common practice, just promoting the documents as
   written.  While some of the language above contemplates documents of
   the quality and content that was considered acceptable a decade or
   two ago going to full Standard essentially unchanged, more recent
   Proposed Standard documents would presumably be more complete and
   meet contemporary criteria, thereby requiring fewer disclaimers.

   The document deliberately does not specify how elderly a document
   must be for this procedure to be invoked.  While some guidelines
   might be possible and should be discussed, I am comfortable leaving
   that question to the discretion of the Commission, subject to the
   bounds set by RFC 2026.






Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


8.  Security Considerations

   See [1] which doesn't seem to have one of these sections either :-)

9.  Acknowledgements

   This document arose out of a discussion of [1] that, in turn, led to
   this author's volunteering to put together an "advancement"
   discussion to match that one's downgrading.  The contributors to that
   discussion, and especially the co-authors of the partner document
   (from whom many ideas and much text has been appropriated) are
   gratefully acknowledged.

10  Normative References

   [1]  Alvestrand, H. and E. Lear, "Moving documents to Historic: A
        procedure", draft-alvestrand-newtrk-historical-00 (work in
        progress), March 2004.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com



















Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Advancing Antiques                   May 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                Expires November 21, 2004                [Page 8]


