

PKIX Working Group                                           J. Schaad 
Internet Draft                                 Soaring Hawk Consulting 
Document: draft-ietf-pkix-cmc-trans-01.txt                     M.Myers 
March 2002                                         TraceRoute Security 
Expires: September 2002                                          X.Liu 
                                                                  Cisco
                                                           J. Weinstein
 
                             CMC Transport 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   Comments or suggestions for improvement may be made on the "ietf- 
   pkix" mailing list, or directly to the author. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines a number of transport mechanisms that are used 
   to move [CMC] messages.  The transport mechanisms described in this 
   document are: HTTP, file, mail and TCP.  
    
    
1. Overview 
 
   This document defines a number of transport methods that are used to 
   move [CMC] messages.  The transport mechanisms described in this 
   document are: HTTP, file, mail and TCP. 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119]. 
    
    


2. File based protocol 
    
   Enrollment messages and responses may be transferred between clients 
   and servers using file system-based mechanisms, such as when 
   enrollment is performed for an off-line client.  When files are used 
   to transport binary, BER-encoded Full Enrollment Request and 
   Response messages.  There MUST be only one instance of a request or 
   response message in a single file.  The following file type 
   extensions SHOULD be used: 
    
   Message Type                   File Extension 
    
   Full PKI Request                 .crq 
    
   Full PKI Response                .crp 
    
3. Mail based protocol 
    
   MIME wrapping is defined for those environments that are MIME 
   native. 
    
   The basic mime wrapping in this section is taken from [SMIMEV2] and 
   [SMIMEV3].  Simple enrollment requests are encoded using the 
   "application/pkcs10" content type.  A file name MUST be included 
   either in a content type or a content disposition statement.  The 
   extension for the file MUST be ".p10". 
    
   Simple enrollment response messages MUST be encoded as content-type 
   "application/pkcs7-mime".  An smime-type parameter MUST be on the 
   content-type statement with a value of "certs-only." A file name 
   with the ".p7c" extension MUST be specified as part of the content-
   type or content-disposition statement. 
    
   Full enrollment request messages MUST be encoded as content-type 
   "application/pkcs7-mime".  The smime-type parameter MUST be included 
   with a value of "CMC-enroll".  A file name with the ".p7m" extension 
   MUST be specified as part of the content-type or content-disposition 
   statement. 
    
   Full enrollment response messages MUST be encoded as content-type 
   "application/pkcs7-mime".  The smime-type parameter MUST be included 
   with a value of "CMC-response."  A file name with the ".p7m" 
   extensions MUST be specified as part of the content-type or content- 
   disposition statement. 
    
   MIME TYPE                       File Extension        SMIME-TYPE 
    
   application/pkcs10                .p10                  N/A 
   (simple PKI request) 
    
   application/pkcs7-mime            .p7m                  CMC-request 
   (full PKI request) 
    
   application/pkcs7-mime            .p7c                  certs-only 
   (simple PKI response) 
    


   application/pkcs7-mime            .p7m                  CMC-response 
   (full PKI response) 
    
4. HTTP/HTTPS based protocol 
    
   HTTP messages are wrapped with by a mime object as specified above. 
    
5. TCP based protocol 
    
   When CMC messages are sent over a TCP-Based connection, no wrapping 
   is required of the message.  Messages are sent in their binary 
   encoded form. 
    
   The connection is closed by the server after generating a response 
   for the client.  (All CMC request messages from client to server 
   generate a response message.)  If a second set of messages from the 
   client to the server is required to complete the transaction, the 
   client generates a new TCP-Based connection for this purpose, it 
   cannot reuse an existing one. 
    
   Out of band setup can be used to keep a TCP-Based connection open 
   for more than one message pair.  A situation where this can occur is 
   an RA talking to a CA over a specially setup TCP connection. 
    
6  Socket-Based Transport 
    
   When enrollment messages and responses are sent over sockets, no 
   wrapping is required.  Messages MUST be sent in their binary, BER-
   encoded form. 
    
7.  Security Considerations 
    
   Mechanisms for thwarting replay attacks may be required in 
   particular implementations of this protocol depending on the 
   operational environment. In cases where the CA maintains significant 
   state information, replay attacks may be detectable without the 
   inclusion of the optional nonce mechanisms. Implementers of this 
   protocol need to carefully consider environmental conditions before 
   choosing whether or not to implement the senderNonce and 
   recipientNonce attributes described in section 5.6.  Developers of 
   state-constrained PKI clients are strongly encouraged to incorporate 
   the use of these attributes. 
 
8. Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Brian LaMacchia for his work in 
   developing and writing up many of the concepts presented in this 
   document.  The authors would also like to thank Alex Deacon and Barb 
   Fox for their contributions. 
    
9. References 
    
   [CMC]      J. Schaad, M. Myers, X. Liu, J. Weinstein, ôBASEö, 
   <base>. 
    
   [CMS]      Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax", RFC 2630,       
     


              June 1999. 
    
   [CRMF]     Myers, M., Adams, C., Solo, D. and D. Kemp, "Internet 
              X.509 Certificate Request Message Format", RFC 2511, 
   March             
              1999. 
    
   [DH]       B. Kaliski, "PKCS 3: Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement v1.4" 
    
   [DH-POP]   H. Prafullchandra, J. Schaad, "Diffie-Hellman Proof-of- 
              Possession Algorithms", Work in Progress. 
    
   [HMAC]     Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M. and R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-      
      
              Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC 2104, February      
      
              1997. 
    
   [PKCS1]    Kaliski, B., "PKCS #1: RSA Encryption, Version 1.5", RFC     
       
              2313, March 1998. 
    
   [PKCS7]    Kaliski, B., "PKCS #7: Cryptographic Message Syntax 
   v1.5",             
              RFC 2315, October 1997. 
    
   [PKCS8]    RSA Laboratories, "PKCS#8: Private-Key Information Syntax    
        
              Standard, Version 1.2", November 1, 1993. 
    
   [PKCS10]   Kaliski, B., "PKCS #10: Certification Request Syntax         
   
              v1.5", RFC 2314, October 1997. 
    
   [PKIXCERT] Housley, R., Ford, W., Polk, W. and D. Solo "Internet        
    
              X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL 
              Profile", RFC 2459, January 1999. 
    
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate          
  
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [SMIMEV2]  Dusse, S., Hoffman, P., Ramsdell, B., Lundblade, L. and 
   L.             
              Repka, "S/MIME Version 2 Message Specification", RFC 
   2311,             
              March 1998. 
    
   [SMIMEV3]  Ramsdell, B., "S/MIME Version 3 Message Specification",      
      
              RFC 2633, June 1999. 
    
   [X942]     Rescorla, E., "Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement Method", RFC     
       
              2631, June 1999. 
    
10. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Jim Schaad 
   Soaring Hawk Consulting 
    
   EMail:  jimsch@exmsft.com 
    
    


   Michael Myers 
   TraceRoute Security, Inc. 
 
   EMail: myers@coastside.net 
    
    
   Xiaoyi Liu 
   Cisco Systems 
   170 West Tasman Drive 
   San Jose, CA 95134 
    
   Phone: (480) 526-7430 
   EMail: xliu@cisco.com 
    
    
   Jeff Weinstein 
    
   EMail: jsw@meer.net 
    
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
