





Network Working Group                                      Glenn M Keeni
Internet Draft                                      Cyber Solutions Inc.
Expires: April 27, 2003                                    Hiroyuki Ohno
                                                            WIDE Project
                                                        October 28, 2002



                           INCH Requirements
                     <draft-glenn-inch-req-00.txt>

Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 1, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.













Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 1]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


Abstract


   The purpose of the Incident Report Format is to facilitate the
   exchange of incident information and statistics among involved
   parties and responsible Computer Security Incident Response Teams
   (CSIRTs) for reactionary analysis of current intruder activity and
   proactive identification of trends that can lead to incident
   prevention. A common and well defined format will help in retrieving,
   archiving and exchanging Incident Reports across organizations,
   regions and countries.

   This document describes the requirements for an Incident Report
   format.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction .................................................. 3
   2.  Incident Report Information ................................... 3
   3.  General Requirements .......................................... 3
   4.  Format Requirements ........................................... 3
   5.  Communication Requirements .................................... 4
   6.  Content Requirements .......................................... 4
   7.  Intellectual Property ......................................... 6
   8.  Acknowledgements .............................................. 6
   References ........................................................ 7
   Security Considerations ........................................... 7
   Authors' Addresses ................................................ 8
   Full Copyright Statement .......................................... 9






















Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 2]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


1. Introduction

   Computer security incidents occur across administrative domains often
   spanning different organizations and national borders. Therefore, the
   exchange of incident information and statistics among involved
   parties and the responsible Computer Security Incident Response Teams
   (CSIRTs) is crucial for both reactionary analysis of current intruder
   activity and proactive identification of trends that can lead to
   incident prevention.

   In the following we refer to the information pertaining to an
   incident as an Incident Report (IR).

   This document defines the high-level functional requirements of the
   format of an IR to facilitate collaboration between CSIRTs and
   parties involved when handling computer security incidents.

2. The Information.

   To make the information useful for search, retrieval, aggregation and
   analysis related processing the semantics of the contents should be
   well defined. It should be noted that there is a generic difference
   between "alerts" [Cite idwg-requirements-doc] and incident reports.
   The IDMEF alerts are generated by "sensors" and processed by managers
   (applications). On the other hand  the incident  reports will be
   generated by human beings and will also be consumed by human beings.
   In the case of incident reports, the intent is
       - to make its semantics as clear and unambiguous as possible
         even across regional and national boundaries.
       - to have a well defined syntax (atleast for parts of it),
       - to enable categorization and statistical analysis
       - to make it possible to ensure integrity of the message,
         and the authenticity of the message source authenticated
3. General Requirements

3.1. The Incident Report Format (IRF) shall reference and use
     previously published RFCs where possible.

4. Format Requirements

4.1  A major part of the IR will comprise of human-readable text.
     The IRF must support full internationalization and localization,
     so that  all users of the Internet can use their own language
     and its standard character set to express themselves. This
     will require compliance with the IETF Character Set Policy
     [RFC2277].

4.2  IRF must be structured to support search and retrieval,



Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 3]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


     filtering and aggregation. The structure will contain several
     components and some components may be structures themselves.  Each
     component of a structure will have a well defined semantics.

4.3  An IR may evolve with time. As investigation proceeds more
     information about an incident may be revealed and parts of the
     earlier information will be refined/obsoleted. The IRF must be able
     to support an accurate record of the evolution of the IR with
     appropriate timestamps identifying the epochs in the lifetime of an
     IR..

4.4  All time references in the IR should  be interpreted
     in an unambigious manner. It should be possible to transform
     the time references to any of the standard time references e.g.
     UTC.

4.5  An IR may contain sensitive information. The IRF must
     support an access control mechanism. It must be possible to define
     the access control for the individual components of the IR and for
     individual accessing entities.

4.5  An IR must be globally uniquely identifiable. It should be
     possible to map the origin of an IR from its globally unique
     identifier.

4.6. The IRF itself must be extensible.  The extension will be
     in terms of addition of components and/or extending the
     components.

5. Communications Requirements

5.1. IR generation and exchange will normally be initiated by
     humans using standard communication protocols, for example, e-mail,
     HTTP, FTP, etc. The communication mechanism must have no bearing on
     the authenticity, integrity, confidentiality of the IR itself.

6. Content Requirements
     The IRF must be flexible enough to support various degrees
     of completeness. At the same time it must clearly state
     the minimal information without which the information in the
     IR will be seriously degraded.

6.1  An IR will generally refer to one or more entities. The entity
     may be an attacker, a victim or an observer. There are several
     facets of an entity involved in an IR. The entity may have
     zero or more network addresses and names as well as zero or more
     location names, organizational name, person names, machine names
     etc. The IRF should support various facets describing the entities



Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 4]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


     involved.

6.2  There may be different rules and conventions for naming
     entities in different regions and networks. The IRF must be able
     to accomodate these rules and conventions. The format must be able
     to identify the rule or convention  that is used in the naming.

6.3  And IR must contain information based on which globally
     uniquely identifier for the IR will be formed.

6.4  The IR should contain a classification of the attack.
     The IRF must support well known classification/enumeration
     schemes.

6.5  The IR must contain information about the originator of
     the various components of the report.

6.6  The IR should contain information about the attacker and victim,
     if known.

6.7  The IR should contain reference to advisories corresponding
     to the IR e.g. CERT/CC, CVE,

6.8  The IR should contain a description of the incident.

6.9  The IR should contain additional references/pointers/information
     This information should include IDMEF [4] messages which
     may have been generated by security devices.

6.10 The IR should describe the Impact on the target, if known.
     There should be guidelines to describe the impact on the target
     to ensure a uniform interpretation of the description.

6.11 The IR should decribe the actions taken since the occurance
     of the incidence.

6.12 The IR should carry information whereby its authenticity, integrity
      can be verified and non-repudiation can be guaranteed.

6.13 The semantics of the IRF must be well defined.
     The various components of the IRF should have a well defined
     semantics. [Cant say the same about the contents of all components]









Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 5]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


7.  Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

8. Acknowledgments.

   The precursor of this document is "IODEF Requirements" [RFC3067]
   which is based on the work done at Incident Taxonomy and Description
   Working Group at TERENA. Subsequent work and discussion has been
   carried out in the INCH-BOF and in the WIDE-WG on Network Management
   and Security.






















Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 6]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


9. References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Incident Taxonomy and Description Working Group Charter -
        http://www.terena.nl/task-forces/tf-csirt/i-taxonomy/

   [3]  Intrusion Detection Exchange Format Requirements by Wood, M. -
        December 2000, Work in Progress.

   [4]  Intrusion Detection Message Exchange Format Extensible Markup
        Language (XML) Document Type Definition by D. Curry, H. Debar -
        February 2001, Work in Progress.

   [5]  Guidelines for Evidence Collection and Archiving by Dominique
        Brezinski, Tom Killalea - July 2000, Work in Progress.

   [6]  Brownlee, N. and E. Guttman, "Expectations for Computer Security
        Incident Response", BCP 21, RFC 2350, June 1998.

   [7]  Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary", FYI 36, RFC 2828, May
        2000.

   [8]  Establishing a Computer Security Incident Response Capability
        (CSIRC). NIST Special Publication 800-3, November, 1991

   [9]  Handbook for Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs),
        Moira J. West-Brown, Don Stikvoort, Klaus-Peter Kossakowski. -
        CMU/SEI-98-HB-001. - Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
        1998.

   [10] A Common Language for Computer Security Incidents by John D.
        Howard and Thomas A. Longstaff. -  Sandia Report: SAND98-8667,
        Sandia National Laboratories -
        http://www.cert.org/research/taxonomy_988667.pdf


8. Security Considerations

   This does not describe a protocol by itself memo it describes
   the requirements for an Incident Report. It reports themselves
   are about security incidents. The contents of the Incident Reports
   will have significant direct and/or indirect impact on the security
   and privacy of a network and/or individuals. Protocol designers
   should take care to analyze and implement the requirements
   stated in 4.5 and 6.12.




Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 7]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


Authors' Addresses

   Glenn Mansfield Keeni
   Cyber Solutions Inc.
   Sendai
   Japan

   EMail: glenn@cysols.com

   Hiroyuki Ohno
   WIDE Project, Japan

   Email: hohno@wide.ad.jp






































Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 8]






Internet Draft                                           October 28 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Expires: April 27, 2003                                         [Page 9]



