
Network Working Group                             A. Malpani (ValiCert)
Category: INTERNET-DRAFT                                   October 1999
Expires April 2000


		 The NULL Public Key Algorithm (NPKA)
		     <draft-malpani-npka-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Comments on this draft should be sent to ietf-pkix@imc.org.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo defines the NULL public key algorithm. The original goal
   of this effort was to be able to allow people to optionally sign
   data, without needing the make the signature optional in the ASN.1.
   While we were at it, we decided to, for completeness, also specify
   the method for NULL public key encryption.

1.  Introduction

   This memo defines the NULL public key algorithm. It explains how NPKA
   NULL algorithm should be used both for digital signatures and
   encryption/key exchange.

   Despite the fact that we are not lawyers, we are relatively confident
   that it is quite safe to use this algorithm for export for any key
   length size. It is also quite impossible for people to discover your
   private key via timing, power analysis or other cryptographic
   methods, as long as you are only using this algorithm.

2. Algorithm Details

2.1 Algorithm Definition

   In this section, we will show how NPKA can be used for both digital
   signatures and key exchange. We use the following notation:

    B represents the puBlic key
    V represents the priVate key
    C is the Clear text message
    E is the Encrypted message
    S is the Signing algorithm
    G is the siGnature verification algorithm
    Y is the key/data encrYption algorithm
    D is the key/data decryption algorithm
    F{x, y} is the function F on data elements x and y

2.1.1 Digital Signatures

   This section shows how a private key is used to create a digital
   signature and a public key used to verify the digital signature.

   For signatures, the holder of the private key uses the message and
   the private key to produce a digital signature, which can be verified
   by anyone with the holder's public key.

   S{C, V} => C
   G{E, B} => E

   Note: This satisfies the property required by all public key
   signature algorithms - G{S{C, V}, B} => C

2.1.2 Encryption/Key Exchange

   This section shows how a public key is used to encrypt data/keys
   and a public key used to decrypt the data.

   Y{C, B} => C
   D{E, V} => E

   Note: This satisfies the property required by all public key
   encryption algorithms - D{Y{C, B}, V} => C

2.2 Keying Material

   Like other modern ciphers, e.g., RC5 [RFC-2040], NPKA
   can make use of keys of varying lengths.  However, no
   measurable increase in security is afforded by the use of longer key
   lengths.

2.3 Padding

   NULL has a block size of 1 byte, thus padding is not necessary.

2.4. Performance

   The NULL encryption algorithm is significantly faster than other
   commonly used symmetric encryption algorithms and implementations of
   the base algorithm are available for all commonly used hardware and
   OS platforms.

2.5 Test Vectors

   [TBD]
   We should also show what a cert with an NPKA signature looks like

3. Object Identifiers

   [TBD]
   We need to create the OIDs for sha1withNPKA, md4withNPKA, ...

4. Operational Requirements

   [TBD]

5. Security Considerations

   If you do implement this algorithm, please make sure that signatures
   using that algorithm are only accepted in places where you do not need
   signatures. Similarly, encryption with this algorithm is only performed
   where you do not want encryption.

6. Algorithm properties

   In this section, we try to outline the main properties of NPKA.

   - Very, very high performance for both encryption and decryption,
   for key exchange and signing.
   - No export restrictions (for any key length).
   - No risk of exposing your private key to any potential attacks.
   - Short key sizes are as strong as keys twice as long.
   - Small algorithm footprint - excellent for smart card support or other
   low memory devices.
   - Support for any sized key.
   - Can easily be used in both a block or streaming mode.
   - Great synchronization properties - loss of a single bit in transmission
   results in only a single bit loss at the receiver (?)

7. Intellectual Property Rights

   [TBD]

8. Acknowledgments

   Spiritual and textual guidance for this document we provided by
   [RFC2410].

9.  References

   [RFC-2410]   Glenn R., and Kent, S., "The NULL Encryption Algorithm and
		Its Use With IPsec", RFC 2410, November 1998.

10.  Editors' Addresses

   Ambarish Malpani
   ValiCert, Inc.
   1215 Terra Bella,
   Mountain View, CA 94043

   EMail: ambarish@valicert.com
   Phone: 650.567.5457


11.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Expires April 2000