



Network Working Group                                         A. Schmidt
Internet-Draft                                            Fraunhofer SIT
Expires: December 22, 2005                                    T. Gondrom
                                                   Open Text Corporation
                                                             L. Masinter
                                                           Adobe Systems
                                                           June 20, 2005


      Requirements for Data Validation and Certification  Services
                    draft-ietf-ltans-notareqs-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 22, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document establishes the goals and requirements for protocols
   and data structures for use with services that provide additional
   means for users to ensure and prove the validity of data, especially
   digitally signed data, in a common and reproducible way.  The data
   being validated may correspond to assertions about real-world facts



Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   or events.  This document establishes the need for components to be
   used in addition to or in conjunction with long-term archive
   services.  It provides some use cases and scenarios, and establishes
   technical requirements for protocols and data structures to support
   them.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Specific workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1   Record transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2   Archiving signed document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Technical Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1   Representations for Assertions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2   Protocols for interaction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3   Long-term archives of records  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.4   Validation of Digital Signatures and X.509 certificates  .  8
   6.  Operational Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 11


























Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


1.  Introduction

   In many scenarios, users need to be able to ensure and prove the
   existance and validity of documents and data, including digitally
   signed data, in a common and reproducible way, over a long period of
   time.  A long-term archive service[3] may provide assurances about
   the integrity of data and past validity of digital signatures.
   However, additional mechanisms are required, in real workflows, to
   provide the technical means to satisfy user requirements.  In many
   circumstances, the documents or data being validated or signed
   corresponds to assertions about real-world facts or events; for
   example, a contract or a business record.

   Usually, the scenarios for long-term validation involve a trusted
   third party who is willing, over a period of time, to accept data and
   validate it, or to witness events; the trusted third party offers to
   subsequently make assertions about those events or data.  In many
   legal jurisdictions, a 'notary' is a person with credentials
   recognized by that jurisdiction to perform these services, in a way
   that gives their certification a special legal standing.  Indeed,
   some types of transactions may require an official certification by
   someone with specific notary credentials.

   This document establishes the goals and requirements for protocols
   and data structures for use with services that provide additional
   means for users to ensure and prove the validity of data, especially
   digitally signed data, in a common and reproducible way.  It provides
   some use cases and scenarios, and establishes technical requirements
   for protocols and data structures to support them.

2.  General Requirements

   It is desirable that the protocols and data structures established be
   usable by an official notary to provide appropriate assertions for
   electronic documents.  Of course, nothing in a technical document can
   provide for legal standing of any such assertions.

   Requirements for data certification services may vary widely across
   different processes and jurisdictions.  For this reason, the
   technical standards for data certification should provide a common
   base of mechanisms, useful across jurisdictions and work processes,
   and the means for extending these to support particular additional
   workflows.

3.  Use cases

   This section gives some examples workflows where data certification
   services and assertions by trusted third parties might be used, as a



Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   way of motivating the subsequent requirements.
   record transactions:  In the case of an agreement between two (or
      more) parties, a trusted third party records the transaction, and
      the fact that all of the parties agreed to the final documents and
      that all of the necessary information has been provided to all of
      the involved parties.  The trusted third party acts as a witness
      to the agreement at the time it is made, and, at a later date, may
      be called upon to attest to the validity of the agreement.  This
      kind of service might be used for a contract between individuals,
      e.g., a private transfer of ownership of private property, or a
      public transfer of ownership of land.
   negotiation support:  In some cases, a trusted third party is used
      during the negotiation of a complex agreement in order to support
      the mechanisms of coming to the agreement.  For example, a trusted
      third party might gather and store the documents during the course
      of a negotiation, making it impossible for any party to delete the
      document or repudiate a partial agreement; there might be time
      deadlines established for submitting information or approvals, or
      information may be held back from release until a particular time.
      For example, this kind of service might be used for the awarding
      of public contracts based on private bids.
   certification of copies and conversions:  In many cases, a trusted
      third party or service is used to certify the validity of a
      transformation or translation of a document from one form to
      another.  Classically, a notary might attest to the validity of a
      paper copy of a document.  The ability to attest to the validity
      of a wide variety of transformations are important, including the
      transformation of documents from one electronic format to another,
      or possibly the validity of conversion between paper and
      electronic forms.  The third party should be able to attest that
      one document contains the same information as another and the
      validity of all contained digital signatures and the identity of
      the signers.
   record events:  In this case, a trusted third party or service is
      used to document and later provide proof that a certain event has
      happened.  Initially, the service identifies the involved entities
      and verifies that all necessary preconditions are met.  After
      this, an event or ceremony is held; during the event, the service
      ensures that all entities understood and received all appropriate
      information about the event and its consequences.  After the
      event, a record of the event is issued to all of the entities;
      additional copies are retained for later documentation.
   administering of oaths:  In some cases, the event being recorded is
      the performance, by an individual, of a particular agreement or
      'oath'.  The trusted third party is used to document and later
      provide proof that an individual has made a particular statement
      or agreement, in a specified ceremony or event.




Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   evidence management:  Transactions between parties over the Internet
      may have records of those transactions.  In general, it is
      desirable to have services which accept, verify, record, and later
      provide evidence of those records.  In many cases, this may
      involve creating a certified archive of detailed and signed logs.

4.  Specific workflows

   This sections describes some concrete scenarios based on the use
   cases introduced in the previous section.

4.1  Record transactions

   The following example will show the additional benefits of a
   certification service in the case of private transactions.  We start
   with a basic protocol that achieves, upon completion, a state of
   mutual non-repudiation between two parties, A and B. Suppose, A wants
   to offer an electronic contract (contract_A) to B, where "contract_A"
   means that A has digitally signed the contract with her private key.
   This is sent as an offer to B:
   contract_A -> B

   B, after receiving and accepting contract_A, counter-signs the
   contract and sends it back to A as an acceptance of A's offer:
   (contract_A)_B -> A

   Now, A has to confirm reception of the acceptance.  He signs
   (contract_A)_B and sends it back to B:
   ((contract_A)_B)_A -> B

   After that, both parties have a document with at least two
   signatures, and neither party can succeed in repudiating the validity
   of the contract.

   Now let's see what happens when we put a certification service N as a
   trusted third party between A and B. When B gets the contract from A
   and accepts it, he signs the contract and sends it to N:
   (contract_A)_B -> N

   The certification service confirms receipt of the contract with a
   signature and sends it to both A and B:
   ((contract_A)_B)_N -> A, B

   After that, both parties have a document signed by A, B, and N. Since
   N is trusted, A and B can be sure that the other party has a contract
   which is signed by both.  We have the same level of trust as in the
   scenario without the certification service.  However, an additional
   benefit of using a certification service in this case can be the



Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   archiving of the contract, as may be required by the law for certain
   types of contracts.

   In order to allow for N to provide documentation that all necessary
   information has been provided to both parties, the scenario can be
   extended as follows:

   When A and B get the confirmation ((contract_A)_B)_N from N, both A
   and B send an acknowledgement to N:
   ack_A -> N ack_B -> N

   After N received the two acknowledgements he sends a notification to
   both A and B that confirms that the transaction is completed:
   not_N -> A, B

   For both ack_A/B and not_N it suffices to contain (sufficiently
   secure) hash values of the pertaining original documents, and the
   same is true for the third message sent from N in the protocol above,
   but not for the second one, if the contract is to be archived by N.

   The utility of certification services in these generic scenarios is
   twofold: They can accomplish the fulfillment of technical
   requirements, e.g., archiving of transaction records, which may in
   turn be entailed by legal requirements.  And they can be instrumental
   in the fulfillment of genuine legal requirements, like documentation
   that all necessary information has been provided to all involved
   parties.

4.2  Archiving signed document

   A signed document enters an archive.  Initially, the signature is
   validated (there is not much point to archive a document with invalid
   signatures, although such scenarios are also possible).  We need is a
   fixation in time that signature (and document) existed at some point
   in time (the archiving time).  Providing evidence for a document is
   not a problem;  a signature there are some sequence issues.

   Preserving signatures is based on reference information and evidence
   record.  Let's start with T1, when a CRL has been issued and the next
   time the CRL is issued is marked with T5.  Now we need to collect
   some reference information (certificates, CRLs, etc.), validate the
   signature and pack everything together before creating the evidence
   record (timestamp).  At time T2 a timestamp is requested for
   collected data following by timestamp issued at T3.  Until T5 we have
   enough time to revoke the certificate related to digital signature
   archived, which happens at T4 and we can end up with archived invalid
   signature, although it was submitted to the archive before revocation
   happened.



Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   The problem with CRLs is that they might not be synchronized with
   revocation mechanisms and there is no real information whether a
   signature is valid or not at specific point in time.  In theory CRLs
   should be issued immediately after a certificate is revoked, but in
   practice things are not the same, since the procedure itself already
   has some timeframe (the ideal solution is to stop the time during the
   validation process).

   Now, there are options to use more than one evidence record for a
   single data (signature) but such procedures might get overall concept
   very complicated and bulky, especially when performing procedures
   over groups of data.

   The archive package should contain the CRL used to verify the
   transaction.  That coupled with other times will show when the
   transaction was received and processed.

   When speed is of not essence, the relying party can always wait for a
   CRL issued after the transaction was received to verify.  This will
   ensure that the certificate was not revoked in the interim.  Relying
   party can use the later CRL for archiving the transaction.

   An evidence record is relative to a single time T1, e.g. the time of
   submission to the archive.  Retroactive revocation would need to be
   considered before committing the data to an archive and initiating an
   evidence record.  Even if a CRL were issued immediately when a cert
   was revoked, it's revocation time might be before T1.  It is unlikely
   that retroactive revocation applied after several periodic refresh
   operations (which should be relatively infrequent) at time T4 should
   invalidate a signature generated at, or before, time T1.

5.  Technical Requirements

   This section describes some of technical requirements associated with
   certification services

5.1  Representations for Assertions

   The primary technical requirement is for a data structure that can
   represent the assertion, by the certification service, that a
   particular service has been performed.  The data structure should
   include the identity (as known) of the participants, the credentials
   of the certification service and its operator, the date and time that
   the service was performed, and other information relevant to the
   acknowledgement of the service.  The data structure should be signed
   by the certification service.





Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


5.2  Protocols for interaction

   Secondarily, there should be protocols for requesting services,
   monitoring the progress of the service, participating in services
   that require contemporaneous participation, cancelling ongoing
   services.

5.3  Long-term archives of records

   Some services also require the certification service to maintain a
   long-term archive of records of events that it has certified; the
   users of a certification service may request operations that cause
   archived certificates to be accessed, forwarded, or possibly even
   deleted.

5.4  Validation of Digital Signatures and X.509 certificates

   One way in which participants in a transaction, negotation, or event
   conducted over the Internet signal their intentions is through the
   use of digital signatures.  Digital signatures may use X.509
   certificates to assert the validity of the public key of a named
   participant in the transaction.  A validation service should be able
   to represent the fact of its testing the validity of digital
   signatures, including the non-revocation of X.509 certificates used
   within those signatures, as part of validating a transaction.  This
   way it might provide proof that the signatures attached to a given
   document had been verified at a given date (different from the
   signature date.)

6.  Operational Considerations

   Data validation and certification services may have strong
   performance and scalability requirements.  A certification service
   must be able to work efficiently even for large amounts of data
   objects and requests.

   In order to limit expenses and to achieve high performance, the
   involvement of other trusted third parties should be minimized.

7.  Security Considerations

   Trust is the principal asset of a certification service.  The
   implementation of such a service must be very careful so that no data
   integrity can be lost or manipulation of the system can be done.

   The protocols and data structures described in this document are
   primarily intended to be useful to increase the trustworthiness of
   networked transactions.  As such, their primary value is in



Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   resistance to any imaginable security threats.

   The nature of the threats for long-term services are signficantly
   greater and more difficult to protect against.  In particular, it is
   necessary to design protocols and data structures so that even if
   currently acceptable secure one-way hash algorithms and encryption
   algorithms are compromised, either through advancements in analysis
   of their algorithms or through increased computational power and
   novel computing architectures, that the overall security of the
   application can be protected.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to members of the LTANS mailing list for review of earlier
   drafts and many suggestions.

9.  Informative References

   [1]  Adams, C., Sylvester, P., Zolotarev, M., and R. Zuccherato,
        "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Data Validation and
        Certification Server Protocols", RFC 3029, February 2001.

   [2]  Adams, C., Cain, P., Pinkas, D., and R. Zuccherato, "Internet
        X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Time-Stamp Protocol (TSP)",
        RFC 3161, August 2001.

   [3]  Wallace, C., "Long-Term Archive Service Requirements",
        draft-ietf-ltans-reqs-03 (work in progress), October 2004.

   [4]  Brandner, R., "Evidence Record Syntax (ERS)",
        draft-ietf-ltans-ers-02 (work in progress), April 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Andreas U. Schmidt
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Dolivostrasse 15
   Darmstadt  64293
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (6151) 869 60 227
   Fax:   +49 (6151) 869 704
   Email: Andreas.U.Schmidt@sit.fraunhofer.de
   URI:   http://www.math.uni-frankfurt.de/~aschmidt






Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


   Tobias Gondrom
   Open Text Corporation
   Technopark 2
   Werner-von-Siemens-Ring 20
   Grasbrunn, Munich  D-85630
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 89 4629-1816
   Fax:   +49 (0) 89 4629-33-1816
   Email: tobias.gondrom@opentext.com


   Larry Masinter
   Adobe Systems
   345 Park Ave
   San Jose, CA  95110
   US

   Phone: +1 408 536 3024
   Email: LMM@acm.org
   URI:   http://larry.masinter.net






























Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Data Certification Requirements           June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schmidt, et al.         Expires December 22, 2005              [Page 11]


