


Mobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET)                               J. Haerri
Internet-Draft                         Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Intended status: Experimental                             (KIT), Germany
Expires: January 15, 2009                                      C. Bonnet
                                                               F. Filali
                                                Institut Eurecom, France
                                                           July 14, 2008


        MANET Position and Mobility Signaling: Problem Statement
            draft-haerri-manet-position-problem-statement-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2009.















Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


Abstract

   This document states the problem of optimizing the structures created
   by mobile network or MANET protocols to a mobile network topology.
   It also justifies the use and the transmission of position
   information to mitigate this problem.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Wireless Sensor Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Mobile Wireless Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Geographic Routing Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Routes and Links Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Approach Rationals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Routes and Links Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.3.  Route Optimizations for NEMO and MIPv6 . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18




















Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


1.  Introduction

   The current effort in mobile wireless network protocols is to make
   them perform better at a lower maintenance overhead.  For that
   matter, a joint effort has been conducted in order to better adapt
   the structures created by the protocols to the dynamic topology
   created by nodes mobility, yet still limiting te requirement to a
   ressource demanding maintenance process.

   Unfortunately, the current mobile network protocols haven not been
   created to understand and benefit from nodes mobility but have
   instead only been designed to react blindly to the effects of
   mobility on the network topology.  They are notably unable to benefit
   from the knowledge of nodes mobility in order to optimize the
   structure with respect to the instantaneous or an expectedd future
   network topology.

   The knowledge of position information is one of the solutions to
   improve mobile network protocols and optimize their maintenance in
   order to make them more reactive with respect to the constraints
   created by nodes mobility on the network topology.  The community
   working in this field became aware of the potential benefits from
   using position information in order to improve links stability,
   periodic maintenance, power consumption or even security.

   In challenging vehicular environments for example, various consortia
   (VII, C2C-CC, ISO CALM) even assume the native availability of
   position information and are currently standardizing the content and
   format of the information that should be transmitted between
   vehicles.

   The aim of this document is to describe possible new orientations in
   protocol design that would benefit from position information and to
   provide some approach rationals in that domain.  This document is
   also the problem description and justification for the proposal of an
   extension to the metricTLV document [MEXT] that is able to exchange
   mobility information for MANET protocols.














Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


2.  Terminology

      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
      in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

      Additionally, this document introduces the following terminology

   GPS -  Global Positioning System.  A geolocalization system
      developped and operated by the US Department of Defense that is
      able to provide accurate worldwide coordinates of devices equiped
      with GPS receivers.  A similar European system is currently under
      developpement under the name of Galileo.  The GPS system does not
      work without a clear access to at least 3 satellites, thus is
      inoperable for indoor positioning.

   GPS-free Positioning -  A set of techniques that has been developped
      in order to provide a mean of localization in situation when a
      clear access to satellites is not possible.  Most of the methods
      use multilateration techniques and require either a formal
      training, or an anchor node that knows its accurate position.

   Time -  The universal GPS time expressed in seconds.

   Longitude -  The longitude describes the location of a place on Earth
      east or west of a north-south line called the Prime Meridian
      located in Greenwich, UK.  Longitude is given as an angular
      measurement ranging from 0 degree at the Prime Meridian to +180
      degree eastward and -180 degree westward.

   Latitude -  The latitude gives the location of a place on Earth north
      or south of the equator.  Latitude is an angular measurement
      ranging from 0 degree at the Equator to 90 degree at the poles.

   Elevation -  The elevation is the altitude of an object from a known
      level or datum.  Common datums are mean sea level and the surface
      of the WGS-84 geoid, used by GPS.

   Azimuth -  Azimuth is the horizontal component of a direction,
      measured around the horizon, from the north toward the east in the
      northern hemisphere, and from the south toward the west in the
      southern hemisphere.

   Mobility -  mobility information related to a specific address, which
      MAY consist of a longitude, latitude and elevation, a velocity, an
      azimuth, or the time this mobility information has been sampled.





Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


   VANET -  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks.  A particular set of MANET where
      cars and road infrastructures are equiped with wireless devices.

















































Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


3.  Use Cases

3.1.  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks

   A vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) is a specific case of mobile ad
   hoc networks, where vehicules and road infrastructures are equiped
   with wireless devices.  Accordingly, vehicles are able to communicate
   with each others as well as interacting with the road infrastructure.
   One straightforward application of VANETs is safety, where
   communications are exchanged in order to improve the driver's
   responsiveness and safety in case of road incidents.

   A Vehicular ad hoc network is set up between cars and between cars
   and road infrastructures.  Due to the increased mobility, basic MANET
   routing protocols are inefficient.  Novel approaches have been
   suggested such as state-less geographical routing, where packets are
   routed without any specific route setup in the direction of the
   maximum progress toward the destination node.  This class of routing
   protocols require the knowedge of, at least, the destination and the
   forwarding node positions.  Most of them use GPS-provided
   coordinates.

   In order to obtain a routing decision, nodes MUST exchange position
   data by means of level 3 messages between cars, road infrastructures,
   and location servers.

3.2.  Wireless Sensor Networks

   A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is an extreme form of a MANET in
   terms of the amount of devices and of their highly limited
   capabilities.  Sensors can be low cost, mass produced devices
   operating for years on a pair of AAA batteries.  A sensor dust can be
   spread over a monitored location, and from that moment on, the
   sensors are fixed and operate for the lifetime of their batteries,
   which are their most critical resource.

   Around a Sensor Network, sinks are deployed in order to collect the
   measurements from the sensors and relay the commands from the
   controllers.  Thus, sensors automatically form a structure to forward
   unicast packets from the sensors to the sinks, and to propagate
   broadcast packets across the network from the sinks.

   In order to establish a routing infrastructure and scale to a large
   geographic area, sensors can be deployed to form a tree, a mesh or
   any kind of distributed graph that aims at optimizing communication
   and energy consumption.  Due to the challenging routing environment,
   position information could be used to improve the routing structure.




Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


   The IETF Roll WG [ROLL] currently reviews the available routing
   protocols developped by the MANET and OSPF WGs for routing in low
   power and lossy environments.  If these protocols are not
   satisfactory, new approaches might be envisionned, possibly
   containing position information.

   As sensor may only be aware of their own location, in order to
   improve the creation of a routing topology, position information MAY
   be exchanged between sensors and sinks.  Moreover, as a mean of
   improving the detection and localization of a device moving in a
   monitored area, sensors MAY also have to exchanged location or
   mobility information between each others.

3.3.  Mobile Wireless Networks

   A Mobile Wireless Network is a network where at least a group of
   nodes are mobile.  A Mobile Wireless Network includes infrastructure
   and ad-hoc networks, VANETs, WSN, or Mesh Networks.

   The mobility of routers or clients involved in a Mobile Wireless
   Network is a major source of burden in standard routing protocols,
   including handovers, route errors, and reduced capacity.  In order to
   improve this effort, mobility COULD be estimated in order improve
   mobility and ressource management techniques or Quality of Service.

   With the current activity of the IETF Mext WG [MEXT], it is
   envisioned to allow NEMO Route Optimizations (RO) when a mobile
   device leaves the area covered by an Access Router and makes a NEMO
   tunnel to its Home Agent suboptimal.  Such decision COULD be made
   based on position information.





















Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


4.  Requirements

   MANET Position and Mobility Signaling has the following requirements

   R1:  All nodes requirering position information SHOULD be equipped
      with GPS devices.  That will allow the network to have a
      synchronized time as well as position information.

   R2:  Location signaling MUST be compatible with non-location
      signaling format, more specifically, the generalized packet/
      message format [PacketBB] and the Metric TLV format [MetricTLV]








































Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


5.  Problem Statement

   When designing routing protocols for mobile networks, it is crutial
   to make them adapted to the dynamic topology created by nodes
   mobility.  The more a protocol knows about the current topology or
   the estimated future changes of such topology, the better is its
   routing structure.  To reach this objective, one method is to
   increase the rate of the maintenance procedure at the consequence of
   an increased maintenance overhead.  On another hand, the transmission
   of position information could be a mean to provide hints to the
   routing protocol of the evolution of the mobile topology without
   increasing the maintenance overhead.

   All protocols standardized or currently in the process of being
   standardized neither make any assumption on a positioning system nor
   on protocols to exchange position information, which could provide a
   mean of knowing neighboring nodes' coordinates and mobility.  A node
   ID is the major (sometimes the only) source of information about
   other nodes.

   Whereas those protocols have been designed to work without this kind
   of strong assumption, a growing popularity appeared in the community
   for location-enhanced protocols, the objective being to reduce the
   maintenance process and improve the reliability of the created
   structure.

   The benefits of transmitting position information is possibility
   related to the following working groups:

   o  Existing Routing Protocols ([MANET], [OSPF])

   o  Mobility EXTensions for IPv6 (Mext) [MEXT]

   o  Ad-Hoc Network Autoconfiguration (AUTOCONF) [AUTOCONF]

   o  Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (ROLL) [ROLL]

5.1.  Geographic Routing Protocols

   The Manet working group within the IETF standardized two well known
   protocols, AODV and OLSR.  AODV is a reactive protocol, which opens a
   route on the specific request from a source node.  On the other hand,
   OLSR is a proactive, also called table-driven protocol, which
   computes all possible routes from and to any reachable destination.
   In that perspective, the IETF is providing the community with two
   sets of protocols for different applications, possiblity working
   together in hybrid configurations.




Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


   However, in recent years, a new class of routing protocol appeared.
   Geographical Routing Protocols, also called Stateless Routing as no
   formal routing techniques are considered, choose the forwarder based
   on the "best" progress towards a destination node.  The "best"
   progress is not only the maximum progress, but includes a set of
   heuristics that chooses the optimal forwarder based on positions,
   directions, local density, or even interference level.  The common
   point in all these techniques is that they guarantee packet correct
   delivery and rely on the knowledge of the destination and the
   potential forwarder's locations.

   In particularly challenging environment, where a statefull approach
   may not be considered, geographic routing MAY be a promizing solution
   that could also be standardized by the IETF.

5.2.  Routes and Links Instability

   In the Mobile Ad Hoc Network community, a major source of instability
   in the provided protocols comes from nodes mobility.  OLSR uses
   periodic topology maintenance, and AODV developped local route
   breaches repairing techniques.  Yet, any kind of optimization based
   on a static topology (even related to a large set of nodes) needs to
   be run again after a couple of seconds when nodes are moving.
   However, although those techniques may be appropriate for low mobile
   networks, they reach their limits when local mobility is sudden or
   lacks any correlation with the neighboring nodes.  That is indeed not
   a surprise if geographic routing protocols became popular in VANET,
   where maintaining even a single open route (not mentionning a set of
   routing tables) is often impossible.

   In order to solve this issue, a growing popularity came from
   mobility-aware or mobility prediction techniques used as means to not
   only choose the best "actual" forwarder, but the best forwarder over
   time or the best actual AND future forwarders that would reduce the
   maintenance burden.  Similarly to Geographical Forwarding Protocols,
   the common points in all mobility predictions techniques is a node's
   access to its own location and a method to spread it to neighoring
   nodes.  Mobility Predictions has been widely successfully studied in
   the last three years, from reactive to proactive approaches even to
   geographical routing protocols.











Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


6.  Approach Rationals

   MANET Position and Mobility Signaling aims at extending a node metric
   TLV as defined in [MetricTLV] to define a standardized stucture to
   exchange position and mobility information and to improve the
   stability of MANET routing protocols.  This section covers the
   rationale behind this approach.

6.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols

   There is a large source of litterature on Geographic Routing
   Protocols [Survey].  The most widely known is the Greedy Perimeter
   Stateless Routing [GPSR] protocol.  The major source of burden in
   geographical forwarding techniques is to avoid falling into local
   maxima, which is when a node cannot find any neighbor providing a
   better progress than itself to the destination.  In that case, one
   has to define backoff techniques, which guarantee to leave the local
   maximum at a cost of local detours.  This is not the purpose of this
   document to be exhaustive on all geographical routing protocols
   developped so far.  The German project Networks on Wheels (NoW) [NoW]
   has been studying and improving this approach on Vehicular Ad Hoc
   Networks for the last 3 years and could be a good starting point.

6.2.  Routes and Links Instability

   It has been shown that a simple single order mobility prediction
   model was able to deliver superior routing performances than DSR or
   AODV [AGAR].  A similar study has been extended to location services
   [KUMAR].  The conclusions were quite similar, by noticing that the
   diffusion of predicted future locations of nodes in the network could
   improve the performances of location services.

   On the other side of the routing techniques, different groups
   developped mobility prediction techniques in order to improve
   proactive protocols.  It has been shown that the choice by OLSR of
   nodes moving in similar direction could improve its performance
   [MOLSR].  Moreover, an appropriate choice of Multipoint Relays based
   on actual and the predicted future topology configuration could
   significantly improve the MPR protocol, and accordingly, OLSR [KMPR].

6.3.  Route Optimizations for NEMO and MIPv6

   To the objective of providing internet connectivity to VANETs, a
   general structure has been proposed by the various consortia related
   to vehicular communication and the IETF in which a vehicle is
   virtually connected to a Home Agent (HA) using NEMO and IPv6-in-IPv6
   tunnels.  The precise wireless multi-hop route employed between the
   vehicle and an access router located in a road-side unite is



Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


   currently not specified.  A sub-IP routing mechanism has yet the
   favor of the various consortia, where geographic routing, as a more
   efficient mechanism in highly mobile environment than statefull
   routing, is currently perferred.

   When vehicles are moving, they change from access router along their
   trip.  Keeping the tunnel binding from a vehicle to its home agent
   through a specific access router may be seen as suboptimal, notably
   when the physical distance between the vehicle and the destination is
   considerably smaller than to its home agent.  It is currently
   envisioned at the Mext WG [MEXT] to propose a Route Optimization (RO)
   mechanism to update the IPv6-in-IPv6 tunnel with the closest access
   router to the vehicle.  In order to provide sufficient information
   for a correct and possibly anticipated handover decision, the
   position of the vehicle and that of the AR would be necessary.  More
   information related to NEMO requirements for RO for automotive
   environment may be found in [NemoROAuto]


































Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


7.  IANA considerations

   This document does not require any IANA action.
















































Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


8.  Security considerations

   This document is a problem statement and does not create any security
   threat.  It discusses the concepts of the use of Position and
   Mobility information in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.














































Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [MetricTLV]
              Dean, J., "Representing metric values in MANETs",
              <tools.ietf.org/id/draft-dean-manet-metriclv-01.txt>.

   [NemoROAuto]
              Baldessari, R., Ernst, T., Festag, A., and M. Lenardi,
              "Automotive Industry Requirements for NEMO Route
              Optimization", <www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
              draft-ietf-mext-nemo-ro-automotive-req-00.txt>.

   [PacketBB]
              Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., Dean, J., and C. Adjih,
              "Generalized MANET Packet/Message Format",
              <tools.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-manet-packetbb-13.txt>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [AGAR]     Agarwal, A. and S. Das, "Dead Reckoning in Mobile Ad-Hoc
              Networks", IEEE WCNC 2003, the 2003 IEEE Wireless
              Communications and Networking Conference,  March 2003.

   [AUTOCONF]
              Singh, S. and T. Clausen, "Ad-Hoc Network
              Autoconfiguration (AUTOCONF) WG", <www.ietf.org/
              html.charters/autoconf-charter.html>.

   [GPSR]     Karp, B., "Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR)",
              <http://www.icir.org/bkarp/gpsr/gpsr.html>.

   [KMPR]     Harri, J., Filali, F., and C. Bonnet, "On the application
              of mobility predictions to multipoint relaying in MANETs:
              kinetic multipoint relays", AINTEC 2005, Asian Internet
              Engineering Conference, December 2005.

   [KUMAR]    Kumar, V. and S. Das, "Performance of Dead Reckoning-Based
              Location Service for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", IEEE
              Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Journal,
               March 2004.

   [MANET]    Macker, J. and I. Chakeres, "Mobile Ad-hoc Networks
              (MANET)", <www.ietf.org/html.charters/manet-charter.html>.



Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


   [MEXT]     Laganier, J. and M. Bagnulo, "Mobility EXTensions for IPv6
              (MEXT) WG", <www.ietf.org/html.charters/
              mext-charter.html>.

   [MOLSR]    Menouar, H., Leonardi, M., and F. Filali, "A movement
              prediction-based routing protocol for vehicle-to-vehicle
              communications", V2VCOM 2005, 1st International Vehicle-
              to-Vehicle Communications Workshop, July 2005.

   [NoW]      "Networks On Wheels (NoW)",
              <http://www.network-on-wheels.de/documents.html>.

   [OSPF]     Lindem, A. and A. Roy, "Open Shortest Path First IGP
              (OSPF) WG", <www.ietf.org/html.charters/
              ospf-charter.html>.

   [ROLL]     Vasseur, J. and D. Culler, "Routing Over Low power and
              Lossy networks (ROLL) WG", <www.ietf.org/html.charters/
              roll-charter.html>.

   [Survey]   Mauve, M., Widmer, J., and H. Hartenstein, "A Survey on
              Position-Based Routing in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks",  IEEE
              Network Magazine, 15(6):30--39, November 2001.




























Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Jerome Haerri
   Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany

   Phone: +49 721 608-6407
   Email: jerome.haerri@kit.edu


   Christian Bonnet
   Institut Eurecom, France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 8108
   Email: bonnet@eurecom.fr


   Fethi Filali
   Institut Eurecom, France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 8134
   Email: filali@eurecom.fr






























Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement        July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Haerri, et al.          Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 18]

