
Internet-Draft                                    Leslie L. Daigle
Expires October 12, 2000.                         Editor


       A Tangled Web:  issues of I18N, domain names, and the 
                  other Internet protocols

                 draft-iab-i18n-dns-00.txt


Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


0.0 Abstract

The goals of the work to "internationalize" Internet protocols
include providing all users of the Internet with the capability of
using their own language and its standard character set to express
themselves, write names, and to navigate the network. This impacts 
the domain names visible in e-mail addresses and so many of today's 
URLs used to locate information on the World Wide Web, etc.  However,
domain names are used by Internet protocols that are used across
national boundaries. These services must interoperate worldwide, or 
we risk isolating components of the network from each other along 
locale boundaries.  This type of isolation could impede not only 
communications among people, but opportunities of the areas involved 
to participate effectively in e-commerce, distance learning, and
other activities at an international scale, thereby retarding
economic development.

There are several proposals for internationalizing domain names,
however it it is still to be determined whether any of them 
will ensure this interoperability and global reach while addressing 
visible-name representation.  Some of them obviously do not. This 
document does not attempt to review any specific proposals, as that 
is the work of the Internationalized Domain Name (IDN) Working Group
of the IETF,  which is tasked with evaluating them in consideration 
of the continued global network interoperation that is the deserved 
expectation of all Internet users.

This document elaborates the scope of the problem outside of
the domain name system (DNS).


1.0 A Definition of Success

The Internationalized Domain Names (IDN) Working Group 
is one component of the IETF's continuing comprehensive effort to 
internationalize language representation facilities in the protocols 
that support the global functioning of the Internet.

In keeping with the principles of rough consensus, running code,
architectural integrity, and in the interest of ensuring the global
stability of the Internet, the IAB emphasizes that all solutions
proposed to the (IDN) Working Group will have to be evaluated not 
only on their individual technical features, but also in terms of 
impact on existing standards and operations of the Internet and the 
total effect for end-users:  solutions must not cause users to 
become more isolated from their global neighbors even if they appear 
to solve a local problem.  In some cases, existing protocols have 
limitations on allowable characters, and in other cases 
implementations of protocols used in the core of the Internet 
(beyond individual organizations) have in practice not implemented 
all the requisite options of the standards.


2.0 Technical Challenges within DNS

In many technical respects, the IDN work is not different from any 
other effort to enable multiple character set representations in 
textual elements that were traditionally restricted to English 
language characters.  

One aspect of the challenge is to decide how to represent the names 
users want in the DNS in a way that is clear, technically feasible, 
and ensures that a name always means the same thing.  Several 
proposals have been suggested to address these issues.

These issues are being outlined in more detail in the IDN WG's 
evolving draft requirements document; further discussion is deferred 
to the WG and its documents. 


2.0 Integrating with Current Realities

Nevertheless, issues faced by the IDN working group are complex and 
intricately intertwined with other operational components of the 
Internet.  A key challenge in evaluating any proposed solution is the 
analysis of the impact on existing critical operational standards 
which use DNS names.  Standards-changes can be effected, but the 
best path forward is one that takes into account current realities 
and (re)deployment latencies. In the Internet's global context, it is
not enough to update a few isolated systems, or even most of the 
systems in a country or region.  Deployment must be nearly universal
in order to avoid the creation of "islands" of interoperation that 
provide users with less access to and connection from the rest
of the world.

These are not esoteric or ephemeral concerns.  Some specific issues
have already been identified as part of the IDN WG's efforts.


2.1 Domain Names and E-mail

As indicated in the IDN WG's draft requirements document, the 
issue goes beyond standardization of DNS usage.  Electronic mail has 
long been one of the most-used and most important applications of 
the Internet.  Internet e-mail is also used as the bridge that 
permits the users of a variety of local and proprietary mail systems 
to communicate. The standard protocols that define its use (e.g., 
SMTP (STD10), RFC822, and MIME (RFC2045)) do not permit the full 
range of characters allowed in the DNS specification. Certain 
characters are not allowed in e-mail address domain portions of
these specifications.  Some mailers, built to adhere to these
specifications, are known to fail when on mail having non-ASCII
domain names in its address -- by discarding, misrouting or damaging
the mail.  Thus, it's not possible to simply switch to 
internationalized domain names and expect global e-mail to continue 
to work until most of the servers in the world are upgraded. 


2.2 Domain Names and Routing

At a lower level, the Routing Policy Specification Language (RPLS)
(RFC2622) makes use of "named objects" -- and inherits object
naming restrictions from older standards (RFC822 for the same e-mail
address restrictions, RFC1034 for hostnames).  This means that until
routing registries and their protocols are updated, it is not 
possible to enter or retrieve network descriptions utilizing
internationalized domain names.   


2.3 Domain Names and Network Management

Also, the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) uses the textual 
representation defined in RFC2579.  While that specification does 
allow for UTF-8-based domain names, an informal survey of deployed 
implementations of software libraries being used to build 
SNMP-compliant software uncovered the fact that few (if any) 
implement it.  This may cause inability to enter or display correct 
data in network management tools, if such names are internationalized
domain names.  


2.4 Domain names and security

In the Transport Layer Security protocol (TLS), it is common usage 
that a server displays a certificate containing a domain name 
purporting to be the domain name of the server, which the client can 
then match with the server name he thought he used to reach the 
service. 

Unless comparision of domain names is properly defined, the
client may either fail to match the domain name of a legitimate
server, or match incorrectly the domain name of a server
performing a man-in-the-middle attack.  Either failure could enable 
attacks on systems that are now impossible or at least far more 
difficult.




3.0 Conclusion

It is therefore clear that, although there are many possible ways to 
assign internationalized names that are compatible with today's DNS 
(or a version that is easily-deployable in the near future), not all
of them are compatible with the full range of necessary networking
tools.  When designing a solution for internationalization of domain 
names, the effects on the current Internet must be carefully
evaluated. Some types of solutions proposed would, if put into 
effect immediately, cause Internet communications to fail in ways 
that would be hard to detect by and pose problems for those who 
deploy the new services, but also for those who do not; this would 
have the effect of cutting those who deploy them off from effective 
use of the Internet.

The IDN WG has been identified as the appropriate forum for 
identifying and discussing solutions for such potential 
interoperability issues. 

Experience with deployment of other protocols has indicated that it 
will take years before a new protocol or enhancement is used all over 
the Internet.  So far, the IDN WG has benefitted from proposed
solutions from all quarters, including organizations hoping to 
provide services that address visible-name representation and 
registration -- continuing this process with the aim of getting a 
single, scalable and deployable solution to this problem is the only
way to ensure the continued global interoperation that is the 
deserved expectation of all Internet users.


4.0 References

STD10		Postel, J.B.  "Simple Mail Transfer  Protocol," STD10,
		1982.

RFC 822	Crocker, D., "Standard for the Format of ARPA 
		Internet Text Messages", RFC822, 1982.

RFC1034	Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities",
		RFC1034, 1987.

RFC2045	Freed, N., and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
		Extensions (MIME) Part One:  Format of Internet Message 
		Bodies", RFC2045, 1996.

RFC2579	McCloghrie, K., D. Perkins, J. Schoenwaelder, J. Case, and 
		M. Rose, "Textual Conventions for SMIv2", RF2579, 1999.

RFC2622	Alaettinoglu, C., C. Villamizar, E. Gerich, D. Kessens,
		D. Meyer, T. Bates, D. Karrenberg, and M. Terpstra, 
		"Routing Policy Specification Language (RPSL)", RFC2622,
		1999.


5.0 Editor Contact Information

Leslie L. Daigle
leslie@rattlenote.com

