


Network Working Group                                  P. Mohapatra, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Standards Track                         J. Scudder, Ed.
Expires: September 6, 2009                              Juniper Networks
                                                           March 5, 2009


                      BGP Prefix Origin Validation
                  draft-pmohapat-sidr-pfx-validate-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   A BGP route associates an address prefix with a set of autonomous
   systems (AS) that identify the interdomain path the prefix has
   traversed in the form of BGP announcements.  This set is represented
   as the AS_PATH attribute in BGP and starts with the AS that
   originated the prefix.  To help reduce well-known threats against BGP
   including prefix hijacking and monkey-in-the-middle attacks, one of
   the security requirements is the ability to validate the origination
   AS of BGP routes.  More specifically, one needs to validate that the
   AS number claiming to originate an address prefix (as derived from
   the AS_PATH attribute of the BGP route) is in fact authorized.  This
   document describes a simple validation mechanism to partially satisfy
   this requirement.































Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Prefix-to-AS Mapping Database  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Changes to the BGP Decision Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Policy Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Route Aggregation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Interaction with Local Cache . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10



































Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


1.  Introduction

   A BGP route associates an address prefix with a set of autonomous
   systems (AS) that identify the interdomain path the prefix has
   traversed in the form of BGP announcements.  This set is represented
   as the AS_PATH attribute in BGP and starts with the AS that
   originated the prefix.  To help reduce well-known threats against BGP
   including prefix hijacking and monkey-in-the-middle attacks, one of
   the security requirements is the ability to validate the origination
   AS of BGP routes.  More specifically, one needs to validate that the
   AS number claiming to originate an address prefix (as derived from
   the AS_PATH attribute of the BGP route) is in fact authorized.  This
   document describes a simple validation mechanism to partially satisfy
   this requirement.

   The Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) describes an approach
   to build a formally verifyable database of IP addresses and AS
   numbers as resources.  The overall architecture of RPKI as defined in
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch] consists of three main components:

   o  A public key infrastructure (PKI) with the necessary certificate
      objects,

   o  Digitally signed routing objects,

   o  A distributed repository system to hold the objects that would
      also support periodic retrieval.

   The RPKI system is based on resource certificates that define
   extensions to X.509 to represent IP addresses and AS identifiers
   [RFC3779], thus the name RPKI.  Route Origin Authorizations (ROA)
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-roa-format] are separate digitally signed objects that
   define associations between ASes and IP address blocks.  Finally the
   repository system is operated in a distributed fashion through the
   IANA, RIR hierarchy, and ISPs.

   In order to benefit from the RPKI system, it is envisioned that
   relying parties either at AS or organization level obtain a local
   copy of the signed object collection, verify the signatures, and
   process them.  The cache must also be refreshed periodically.  The
   exact access mechanism used to retrieve the local cache is beyond the
   scope of this document.

   Once the cache is made local, individual BGP speakers can utilize the
   processed data to validate BGP announcements.  The protocol details
   to retrieve the processed data from the local cache to the BGP
   speakers is beyond the scope of this document (refer to
   [I-D.ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol] for such a mechanism).  This document



Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


   proposes a simple modification to the BGP decision process that makes
   use of the processed data from signed objects and validates prefix
   origination of received BGP UPDATE messages.

   Note that the complete path attestation against the AS_PATH attribute
   of a route is outside the scope of this document.

   Although RPKI provides the context for this draft, it is equally
   possible to use any other database which is able to map prefixes to
   their authorized origin ASes.  Each distinct database will have its
   own particular operational and security characteristics; such
   characteristics are beyond the scope of this document.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Prefix-to-AS Mapping Database

   The resource certificates and other signed objects (e.g.  ROAs) as
   received from the RPKI repository and stored in the local cache are
   not in a suitable format to be matched against the prefixes received.
   Moreover, further processing of the objects is necessary -- e.g.  ROA
   validation is required, which involves checking against the
   corresponding EE certificate and so on up to configured trust
   anchors, presumably for the IANA and/or other registries.  But a
   validated and normalized database can be created on the router for
   efficient lookup purposes.  The primary key for this database is a
   prefix set represented as (IP prefix)/[min. length, max. length].
   The value stored against each prefix set is the set of AS numbers
   that is assigned or sub-allocated the corresponding IP address block.
   This database can be implemented as a prefix trie structure.

   Whenever UPDATEs are received from peers, a BGP speaker is expected
   to perform a lookup in this database for each of the prefixes in the
   UPDATE message.  To aid with better description, we define terms
   "UPDATE prefix" and "UPDATE origin AS number" to denote the values
   derived from the received UPDATE message, and "database prefix set"
   and "database origin AS number set" to mean the values derived from
   the database lookup.  Note that in the presence of overlapping
   prefixes, the database lookup against the "UPDATE prefix" may yield
   multiple matches.

   The following are the different types of results expected from such a
   lookup operation:



Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


   o  If the "UPDATE prefix" finds no matching or covering prefixes in
      the database, the lookup result is returned as "not found".  Due
      to incremental deployment model of the RPKI repository, it is
      expected that a complete registry of all IP address blocks and
      their AS associations is not available at a given point of time.

   o  If there are "database prefix sets" that cover the "UPDATE
      prefix", and one of them has the "UPDATE origin AS number" in the
      "database origin AS number sets", then the lookup result is
      returned as "valid".

   o  If there are "database prefix sets" which cover the "UPDATE
      prefix", but none of them has the "UPDATE origin AS number" in the
      "database origin AS number set", then the lookup result is
      returned as "invalid".

   Depending on the lookup result, we define a property for each "UPDATE
   prefix", called as the "validity state" of the prefix.  It can assume
   the following values:

                  +-------+-----------------------------+
                  | Value | Meaning                     |
                  +-------+-----------------------------+
                  |   0   | Lookup result = "valid"     |
                  |   1   | Lookup result = "not found" |
                  |   2   | Lookup result = "invalid"   |
                  +-------+-----------------------------+

   Note that all the routes, regardless of their "validity state" will
   be stored in the local BGP speaker's Adj-RIB-In.


3.  Changes to the BGP Decision Process

   If a BGP router supports prefix validation and is configured to do
   so, the validation check MUST be performed prior to any of the steps
   defined in the decision process of [RFC4271].  The validation step is
   stated as follows:

      When comparing routes for a BGP destination, if both routes have
      had their "validity state" computed, the route with the lowest
      "validity state" value is preferred.

   In all other respects, the decision process remains unchanged.







Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


3.1.  Policy Control

   It MUST be possible to enable or disable the validation step as
   defined in Section 3 through configuration.  The default SHOULD be
   for the validation step to be enabled.

   It MUST be possible to exclude routes from the BGP decision process
   based on their validation state.  In particular it is anticipated
   that it will be desirable to exclude routes from consideration when
   their validation state is "invalid"; however it may also be desirable
   to exclude routes whose validation state is "not found" as well.


4.  Route Aggregation

   When an UPDATE message carries AGGREGATOR attribute, the "UPDATE
   origin AS number" is set to the value encoded in the AGGREGATOR
   instead of being derived from the AS_PATH attribute.


5.  Interaction with Local Cache

   Each BGP speaker supporting prefix validation as described in this
   document is expected to communicate with one or multiple local caches
   that store a database of RPKI signed objects.  The protocol
   mechanisms used to fetch the data and store them locally at the BGP
   speaker is beyond the scope of this document.  Irrespective of the
   protocol, the prefix validation algorithm as outlined in this
   document is expected to function correctly in the event of failures
   and other timing conditions that may result in an empty and/or
   partial prefix-to-AS mapping database.  Indeed, if the (in-PoP) cache
   is not available and the mapping database is empty on the BGP
   speaker, all the lookups will result in "not found" state and the
   prefixes will be advertised to rest of the network (unless restricted
   by policy configuration).  Similarly, if BGP UPDATEs arrive at the
   speaker while the fetch operation from the cache is in progress, some
   prefix lookups will also result in "not found" state.  The
   implementation is expected to handle these timing conditions and re-
   validate the prefixes once the fetch operation is complete (in an
   event-driven manner).


6.  Deployment Considerations

   It is critical that IBGP speakers within an AS have a consistent
   routing view of the BGP destinations and do not make conflicting
   decisions regarding the BGP best path selection that might cause
   forwarding loops.  Thus, the best practice in BGP deployment does not



Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


   run any policy on IBGP sessions which could potentially create an
   inconsistent view.  Going by the same rules, the prefix validation
   procedures SHOULD NOT be performed on IBGP learnt routes in an AS.
   As a general principle, prefix validation SHOULD be executed on EBGP
   boundaries.  In some cases, it may be desirable to run the validation
   on centralized route servers within an AS to offload the computation.
   Care should be taken to ensure routing consistency in such cases.


7.  Contributors

      David Ward dward@cisco.com
      Cisco Systems

      Rex Fernando rex@juniper.net
      Miya Kohno mkohno@juniper.net
      Juniper Networks

      Shin Miyakawa miyakawa@nttv6.jp
      Taka Mizuguchi
      Tomoya Yoshida
      NTT Communications

      Randy Bush randy@psg.com
      Internet Initiative Japan

      Rob Austein sra@isc.org
      ISC

      Russ Housley housley@vigilsec.com
      Vigil Security

      Junaid Israr jisra052@uottawa.ca
      Mouhcine Guennoun mguennou@uottawa.ca
      Hussein Mouftah mouftah@site.uottawa.ca
      University of Ottawa School of Information Technology and
      Engineering(SITE) 800 King Edward Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
      K1N 6N5


8.  Acknowledgements

   Junaid Israr's contribution to this specification is part of his PhD
   research work and thesis at University of Ottawa, Canada.







Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


9.  IANA Considerations


10.  Security Considerations

   Although this specification discusses one portion of a system to
   validate BGP routes, it should be noted that it relies on a database
   (RPKI or other) to provide validation information.  As such, the
   security properties of that database must be considered in order to
   determine the security provided by the overall solution.  If
   "invalid" routes are blocked as this specification suggests, the
   overall system provides a possible denial-of-service vector, for
   example if an attacker is able to inject one or more spoofed records
   into the validation database which lead a good route to be declared
   invalid.  In addition, this system is only able to provide limited
   protection against a determined attacker -- the attacker need only
   prepend the "valid" source AS to a forged BGP route announcement in
   order to defeat the protection provided by this system.  This
   mechanism does not protect against "AS in the middle attacks" or
   provide any path validation.  It only attempts to verify the origin.
   In general, this system should be thought of more as a protection
   against misconfiguration than as true "security" in the strong sense.


11.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch]
              Lepinski, M., Kent, S., and R. Barnes, "An Infrastructure
              to Support Secure Internet Routing",
              draft-ietf-sidr-arch-03 (work in progress), February 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-roa-format]
              Kent, S., "A Profile for Route Origin Authorizations
              (ROAs)", draft-ietf-sidr-roa-format-03 (work in progress),
              July 2008.

   [I-D.ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol]
              Bush, R., "The RPKI/Router Protocol",
              draft-ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol-00 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3779]  Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP
              Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway



Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2009


              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Pradosh Mohapatra (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: pmohapat@cisco.com


   John Scudder (editor)
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: jgs@juniper.net






























Mohapatra & Scudder     Expires September 6, 2009              [Page 10]

