

IPv6 Working Group                                               T. Hain
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expires: June 7, 2004                                         F. Templin
                                                                   Nokia
                                                        December 8, 2003


             Goals for Organizational-Scope Communications
                draft-hain-templin-ipv6-localcomm-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 7, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The IPv6 addressing architecture specifies formats for unicast
   addresses, but provides no operational guidelines for their use.
   There is a clear need for IPv6 to support organizational-scope
   communications whether members of the organization are located in the
   same site or different sites.

   Aspects of certain types of sites introduce challenges for supporting
   organizational-scope communications. Of special interest are nomadic
   sites, e.g., sites that are intermittently-connected or disconnected
   from the global Internet, sites that frequently change provider
   points of attachment, sites that temporarily or permanently merge



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   with other sites, etc. This memo will discuss scenarios and goals for
   IPv6 support organizational-scope communications.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.   Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.1  Border Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.2  Maintaining Confidentiality of the Address Space . . . . . .   4
   3.3  Test Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.4  Static Address Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.5  Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.6  Asset Protection in Enterprise Networks  . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.7  Home Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.8  Multi-homed Sites  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.   Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.1  Easy to Acquire Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.2  Stable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.3  Multiple Link Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.4  Prefix Filtering and Hints to Applications . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.5  Globally Unique  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.6  Usable in the Absence of a Provider  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.7  Applicable in Managed/Unmanaged Environments . . . . . . . .   9
   4.8  Compatible with Name Resolutiuon . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.9  Compatible with VPN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.10 Multiple Addressing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.   Perceived Advantages of Well-Known Prefix Solutions  . . . .   9
   6.   Appeal for Alternative Proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   A.   Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  14














Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


1. Introduction

   The IPv6 addressing architecture [RFC3513] specifies unicast address
   formats. Global unicast addresses are understood to have unlimited
   scope and may be used as the source and destination addresses in
   packets that originate from any point on the connected global IPv6
   Internet. Other unicast addresses are intended for use within more
   limited scope, or scopes.

   There is a clear need for IPv6 to support organizational-scope
   communications. An "organization" may be an association or society
   (e.g., an individual's Yahoo!/AOL "buddy lists", the Audubon Society,
   etc.), or it may be an administrative or functional structure (e.g.,
   one's company of employment, the International Red Cross, etc). But,
   communications between members of an organization should be supported
   whether the individuals are located in the same site or different
   sites.

   Of special interest for study are organizational-scope communications
   for nomadic sites, e.g., sites that are intermittently-connected or
   disconnected from the global Internet, sites that frequently change
   provider points of attachment, sites that temporarily or permanently
   merge with other sites, etc. since these represent the most radical
   departure from the traditional Internet architecture. Thus, this memo
   will discuss goals for IPv6 support of organizational-scope
   communications in the context of real-world deployment scenarios for
   such sites.

2. Terminology

   organization:
      from Mirriam-Webster, a) Association, Society (e.g. charitable
      organizations) b) an administrative and functional structure
      (e.g., a business or a political party); also, the personnel of
      such a structure.

   organizational-scope communications:
      communications that are permitted only between members of an
      organization

   site:
      the same as defined in [RFC3582]: an entity autonomously operating
      a network using IP and, in particular, determining the addressing
      plan and routing policy for that network. This definition is
      intended to be equivalent to "enterprise" as defined in [RFC1918].






Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


3. Scenarios

   The following example scenarios touch on anticipated use cases for
   organizational-scope communications using IPv6:

3.1 Border Filtering

   Network managers limit specific applications to organization-scope
   use, so they configure them to only work with a filtered address
   range. This simplifies the border filter to an address prefix, rather
   than needing to employ deep packet inspection to track a potentially
   dynamic range of ports.

3.2 Maintaining Confidentiality of the Address Space

   Some organizations may wish to avoid exposing to competitors what
   internal networks they are deploying. Network managers also don't
   have to expose business plans to a registrar for evaluation for
   networks that are not attached to the global Internet. Some have
   stated that if they are required to register for public space for
   every internal use network, they are more likely to pick random
   numbers than tip off the competition.

3.3 Test Networks

   Test networks often provide a vehicle for limited experimentation
   with new Internetworking technologies prior to widescale deployment,
   but they may need to connect to the Internet to facilitate the
   experiment. Such experiments may entail large, elaborate networks
   with a mix of public and private address space, but the use of random
   unallocated space runs the risk of collision with legitimate
   addresses.

3.4 Static Address Configuration

   Applications that configure static IP addresses in ACLs or
   configurations are susceptible to operational problems due to
   renumbering. Examples include license servers that use IP addresses,
   firewalls, web access mechanisms to allow access to only certain
   subnets, etc. Stable addressing for organizational-scope
   communications is needed to satisfy such scenarios.

3.5 Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs)

   Numerous aspects of MANETs provide challenges for
   organizational-scope communications. The following scenarios provide
   some specific examples:




Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


3.5.1 Nomadic Nodes that form Temporal MANETs

   Nomadic nodes with no pre-defined group affiliation are in actuality
   singleton sites that may from time to time merge with other such
   "sites" as they move about to form MANETs. Such MANETs may exist only
   temporarily in space/time, but should allow organizational-scope
   communications between nodes even during rapidly-changing MANET
   dynamics.

3.5.2 Groups of Nodes that Travel Together

   Mobile ad-hoc networks of nodes that travel together as a group may
   have long periods of intermittent/disconnected access to the global
   Internet.  Such applications as disaster relief, coordinated
   missions, and expeditionary forces may comprise numerous ad-hoc
   networks that may merge, partition, or lose global connectivity from
   time to time. Continuous support of organizational-scope
   communications for such mobile ad-hoc networks is needed.

3.5.3 Vehicular Networks

   Vehicular networks may connect elements in an automobile to provide
   sensory and situational awareness data to the driver. Periodic
   contact with roadside Internet access points, other vehicles, etc.
   may entail sharing public information (e.g., road conditions
   encountered) while protecting private information (e.g., the
   vehicle's speedometer reading).

   Research ships at sea intermittently connect via INMARSAT, or when in
   port, the shipboard network is connected to shore via Ethernet. It is
   of utmost importance that the systems on board the ship all function,
   providing data collection and analysis without interruption. Static
   addressing is used on most intra-ship network components and servers.
   It's quite expensive to operate a research ship, so eliminating
   points of failure is important. Scientists on board collaborate with
   colleagues back home by sharing of data and email.

3.6 Asset Protection in Enterprise Networks

   Enterprise networks that protect private corporate assets (e.g.,
   printers, faxes, robotics, sensors, etc.) require addresses that
   remain stable even when Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections
   from outside occur. Such VPN connections may arise from home users,
   corporate mergers and acquisitions, bridging remote sites together,
   etc. Prefixes used for protecting private assets should not end up in
   the global routing system, even by accident.





Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


3.7 Home Networks

   Home networks with intermittent access to a service provider should
   support organizational-scope communications even when the service is
   unavailable. The home network should also be able to protect private
   assets from exposure to the global Internet and should allow
   continuous operation when VPN connections to the office or other
   remote sites are used.

   Home network users should be able to join "buddy lists" and
   communicate with other members of those "organizations" even if all
   members reside in different sites.

3.8 Multi-homed Sites

   An example chain of events that may arise in Home Networks and other
   scenarios is:

   o  site A sets up a local network with no ISP connection; the network
      should "just work" out of the box

   o  site A later connects to an ISP for external connectivity, but
      uses filtering to avoid exposing internal addressing to the
      outside

   o  in the meantime, site B performs corresponding actions

   o  sometime later, sites A and B connect, e.g., via VPN, shared link,
      etc. The sites should be able to support organizational-scoped
      communications as well as communications our either of the sites'
      ISPs

   o  sometime later, site A disconnects from its ISP and site B's ISP
      is used

   o  sometime later, site A disconnects from site B

   o  sometime later, site A registers with a new ISP

   Such chains of events should not disrupt the local communications
   within sites A and B.

4. Goals

   There is a clear need for IPv6 to support organizational-scoped
   communications. One obvious solution alternative is an easy-to-get,
   stable, Provier Independent (PI) space. The following sections
   present goals that should be met by any solution proposal. Proposals



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   should be brought forward in a timely fashion so that their merits
   can be evaluated with respect to these goals.

4.1 Easy to Acquire Addresses

   Addresses for organizational-scoped communications should be made
   available that require no public registration, payment, customer/
   provider relationship, or approval to support scenarios for which
   strict global uniqueness and conflict resolution are not necessary.
   These addresses should be architecturally supported and
   end-user-controlled.

   (Other scenarios may have more stringent requirements for global
   uniqueness and conflict resolution and may be willing to pay a
   reasonable fee to a registration authority for this assurance.)

4.2 Stable

   Applications that enable organizational-scoped communications should
   use addresses that support session stability (i.e., connection
   survivability) during intermittent connectivity, mergers, change to a
   new provider, etc. In particular, session stability should not be
   affected by renumbering events [BAKER].

   It must be considered that future use-cases (e.g., a home security
   monitoring system with 24x7 coverage) will require "always-on"
   operation such that the desired duration of stability can be regarded
   as infinite. (The infinite stability goal may be less critical for
   applications/transports that can accommodate a change of IP address
   during the session lifetime.)

4.3 Multiple Link Support

   Organizational-scope communications should be supported over multiple
   links, e.g., via L3 routing, L2 bridging or some combination thereof.
   As such, subnetting consistent with the recommendations in
   ([RFC3177], section 3) should be supported.

4.4 Prefix Filtering and Hints to Applications

   Well-known address prefixes provide applications that choose to check
   with a hint that a filtering policy has been applied somewhere in the
   network, though it does not by itself indicate where the boundaries
   are. Proposals that carve prefixes for filtering from an arbitrary
   global prefix may not provide hints to applications, but the value of
   hints to applications needs to be understood. Therefore, proposals
   should state clearly whether/how filtering, privacy, etc will be
   supported.



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


4.5 Globally Unique

   Addresses used for organizational-scope communications should be
   globally unique such that mergers will not result in collisions. When
   no central registry is used, global uniqueness is based on the
   statistical properties of inertial address allocations. Therefore,
   proposals should specify a suitable means for organizations to
   perform random prefix generation.

   Proposals should also specify a suitable means for organizations to
   procure certified prefixes through, e.g., certification through a
   central registry, distributed database, etc, when more stringent
   global uniqueness, conflict resolution, etc. are required.

   Sufficient global uniqueness is needed to support, e.g.:

   o  VPNs between enterprises

   o  dynamically created VPNs in support of temporary virtual
      organizations

   o  service provider co-location of hosts that reside in the address
      space of multiple customers

   o  formation of virtual organizations (or, grids) among enterprises

   o  mergers and acquisitions of enterprises such that address spaces
      do not collide

   Achieving these goals does not require absolute uniqueness, but an
   extremely low probability of collisions resulting in conflict is
   desired. Proposals should therefore provide statistical analysis of
   the uniqueness properties of the addressing scheme.

4.6 Usable in the Absence of a Provider

   Some organizations will need addresses that can be used when there is
   no active link to a provider. In the case of intermittently-connected
   sites, provider access may be unavailable for long periods but this
   should not disrupt organizational-scope communications. In the case
   of moving to new provider points of attachment, frequent renumbering
   events may occur but, again, organizational-scope communications
   should not be disrupted.

   Renumbering allows for overlapping of the old and new prefixes for a
   period of time such that applications can continue to use the old
   prefixes for internal sessions until the pre-planned, hard cutover.
   This may or may not satisfy the goal of stability in all scenarios.



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


4.7 Applicable in Managed/Unmanaged Environments

   Some sites (e.g., large enterprises) may have network management
   teams responsible for address planning while others (e.g., home
   networks and personal area networks) may require unmanaged operation.
   Solutions for Organizational-scope communications should be supported
   for any type of site a member may belong to - be it managed or
   unmanaged.

4.8 Compatible with Name Resolutiuon

   Organizational-scope communications should be compatible with name
   resolution systems. Examples include DNS, multicast name resolution,
   static configuration, etc.

4.9 Compatible with VPN

   VPN connections between multiple sites, e.g., to form
   geographically-extended organizations should be supported. Prefix
   delegations in effect at each constituent site should remain valid
   when connected via VPN.

4.10 Multiple Addressing

   Proposals should support multiple addressing and allow nodes to
   implement individual security policies about global visibility. This
   moves the security policy decision from the edge to the originating
   device, which allows the application which has enough information
   decide the appropriate action. In the case of devices that move
   between subnets, it also mitigates the need for continuous changes of
   access controls at the edge.

   Proposals that do not support multiple addressing should state
   clearly how security policies can be enforced. In particular, they
   should clearly state how the originating devices can implement
   security policies without the need for edge intervention when only a
   single address is available.

5. Perceived Advantages of Well-Known Prefix Solutions

   Well-known prefixes allow filtering, and filtering creates addressing
   boundaries no matter where the bits come from. The point is that some
   addresses are only valid within organizational scopes.

   Address selection policy tables might need modifications to enable
   the selection of addresses of different scope. Given such
   modifications, address selection rules will prefer the smallest range
   so organizational-scope communications are forced to stay internal by



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   the hard filter at the border.

   If an application chooses to assert a policy that is different from
   the network manager's filtering rules, it will fail. Having a
   well-known prefix that is known to have filtering applied allows
   applications to have a hint about potential range restrictions. We
   can choose to leave the network managers to figure out their own
   adhoc mechanisms, or we can put them in a structured prefix space so
   that applications will have a chance to react appropriately.

   Other proposals (e.g., those that advertise "special" prefixes via
   Router Advertisements) may provide a workable alternative.
   Operational issues between using such approaches and using well-known
   prefixes should be better understood.

6. Appeal for Alternative Proposals

   A well-known prefix space for organizational-scope communications
   would seem a logical choice to satisfy the requirements and real-life
   scenarios outlined in this document, but the authors recognize that
   it may not be the ONLY choice. Alternative solution proposals should
   be made available in a timely fashion through full disclosure to the
   public domain so that their merits can be evaluated. Such proposals
   should state clearly how they address the goals outlined in this
   document and should include mathematical formulas analyzing the
   likelyhood of duplicate address assignment, analysis of effects on
   address selection, filtering/privacy considerations, etc.

7. IANA Considerations

   This document does not introduce any IANA requirements.

8. Security Considerations

   The concept of route filtering is frequently used as a tool to aid in
   network security, so having a well-known prefix to filter enhances
   the deployment of that tool.

   Access control is one aspect of what well-known prefixes provide. It
   is a clear address space that service providers can put in filters,
   and enterprise managers can filter without having to go into detail
   about which specific devices on a subnet are allowed. It does not
   comprise a full service security solution, and should not be
   represented as such.

9. Acknowledgements

   The authors acknowledge the contributions of numerous posts on the



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   ipng mailing list [IPNG] that led to a better understanding of the
   issues. The following individuals are noted for their contributions:
   Brian Carpenter, Ralph Droms, Brian Haberman, Tim Hartrick, Dan
   Lanciani, Eliot Lear, Keith Moore, Chirayu Patel, Michel Py, Pekka
   Savola, Daniel Senie, Stephen Sprunk, Michael Thomas, and Andrew
   White.

Normative References

   [RFC3513]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "Internet Protocol Version 6
              (IPv6) Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April 2003.

Informative References

   [BAKER]    Baker, F., "Procedures for Renumbering an IPv6 Network
              without a Flag Day",
              draft-baker-ipv6-renumber-procedure-00 (work in progress),
              April 2003.

   [IPNG]     "IPng mailing list archive: ftp://playground.sun.com/pub/
              ipng/mail-archive".

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G. and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP
              5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC3177]  IAB and IESG, "IAB/IESG Recommendations on IPv6 Address",
              RFC 3177, September 2001.

   [RFC3582]  Abley, J., Black, B. and V. Gill, "Goals for IPv6
              Site-Multihoming Architectures", RFC 3582, August 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Tony Hain
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   500 108th Ave. NE
   Bellevue, WA

   EMail: alh-ietf@tndh.net










Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   Fred L. Templin
   Nokia
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA  94043

   Phone: +1 650 625 2331
   EMail: ftemplin@iprg.nokia.com

Appendix A. Change Log

   Changes since draft-03:

   o  Changed document title

   o  Added M-W definition for "organization"

   o  Incorporated comments from Keith Moore, Pekka Savola

   Changes since draft-02:

   o  Changed document ID; title

   o  Reversed order of appearance of scenarios/goals sections

   o  Incorporated comments from Ralph Droms; Brian Haberman

   Changes since draft-01:

   o  Changed document ID; title

   o  Changed "Requirements" "to "Goals" in several places

   o  Incorporated comments from Chirayu Patel, Pekka Savola

   o  Expanded "scenarios" section with several new subsections,
      including nomadic nodes in MANETs.

   o  Removed appendices

   o  Updated reference for RFC3582.

   Changes since draft-00:

   o  Changed title, and removed linkage of requirements and the
      particular solution alternative referred to as "limited range
      addressing" in the previous draft. Thanks to Eliot Lear and
      Michael Thomas for suggesting the change.




Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   o  Added real life example scenario from Andrew White


















































Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Organizational-Scope Communications      December 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Hain & Templin            Expires June 7, 2004                 [Page 15]


