
Network Working Group                                            M. Wahl
INTERNET-DRAFT                                    Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Expires in                                                September 2000


                   Administrator Address Attribute
		   draft-wahl-ldap-adminaddr-00.txt

1. Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other documents at
  any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

  This draft, file name draft-wahl-ldap-adminaddr-xx.txt, is intended 
  to be become an Informational RFC.   Distribution of this document 
  is unlimited. 

2. Abstract

  Organizations running multiple directory servers need an ability for
  administrators to determine who is responsible for a particular server.
  This is conceptually similar to the 'sysContact' object of SNMP.

3. The administratorsAddress attribute

  This attribute allows a server administrator to provide the contact 
  information of the responsible party for an LDAP server.  This can
  be used by management clients which are, for example, checking the
  state of a replication or referral topology, to provide a way for the
  user of the management client to send email to manager of a particular
  server.

  The attribute is defined as follows:

  ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.101.120.1 NAME 'administratorsAddress' 
   SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.26
   USAGE directoryOperation )

  This attribute is located in the root DSE.  It can contain one or 
  more values, each containing a URI [2].  Unlike the labeledURI [3]
  attribute, these values do not have a label.

Wahl                                                             [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 April 2000

  This document only specifies how a client can read this attribute.
  Updating this attribute over protocol is out of scope of this 
  document.  Typically this attribute would be configured through the
  server's management interface.

  In existing practice, this URI is commonly of the 'mailto:' form
  identifying a role mail address, such as 
  "mailto:helpdesk@example.com".

  (Note that this address need not be the same as that of the directory
  data administrator.  The address might not be suitable for comments or 
  problems affecting the data held in the directory server.  An 
  attribute for providing the contact details for a data administrator
  belongs in the naming contexts.)
  
4. Security Considerations

  The word SHOULD in this section is defined in [1].

  The server's access control policy SHOULD allow this information to 
  be visible to any suitable administrator in the same organization.  
  Since one use of this attribute is to find who is responsible if 
  the server is not making authentication decisions propoerly, it MAY
  be publically visible.  The administrator SHOULD then choose addresses 
  that are already publically known.

5. Acknowlegements

  The contents of this document is based on earlier work of the ASID
  Working Group of the IETF.  The contributions of its members is 
  greatly appreciated.

6. Bibliography

   [1] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels", RFC 2119.

   [2] T. Berners-Lee, L. Masinter, and M. McCahill, "Uniform
       Resource Locators (URL)", RFC 1738.

   [3] M. Smith, "Definition of an X.500 Attribute Type and Object Class
       to Hold Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 2079.










Wahl                                                             [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 April 2000

7. Authors Address

  Mark Wahl
  Sun Microsystems, Inc.
  8911 Capital of Texas Hwy, Suite 4140
  Austin, TX 78759 
  USA

  Phone: +1 512 231 1600
  EMail:  Mark.Wahl@innosoft.com

Intellectual Property Notice

  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
  intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
  might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it has
  made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
  IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
  standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. 
  Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
  such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification
  can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
  rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
  Director.

Full Copyright Statement

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999-2000).  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
  English.


Wahl                                                             [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 April 2000

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.











































Wahl                                                             [Page 4]
