





Network Working Group                                R. Atkinson, Editor
Internet-Draft                                          Extreme Networks
Expires: 22 July 2006                                   22 February 2006


                     A two stage standards process
                  draft-atkinson-newtrk-twostep-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware have
   been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes aware
   will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses, and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 22 July 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document proposes several changes to the Internet standards
   process, especially a reduction from three to two stages in the
   IETF standards track.






Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Stage 1: Proposed Standard  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Stage 2: Interoperable Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Stage 3: No stage three . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Timing rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  IS can reference PS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  The STD designation, and updates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   8.  Transitional arrangements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   9.  Not excluded  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   10. Housekeeping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   13. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   14. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


1.  Introduction

   This document proposes several changes to the Internet standards
   process defined in RFC-2026. [1] These changes are designed to
   simplify the process.  They seek to reduce the set of impediments to
   standards progression without any major changes to Internet
   engineering philosophy.

   The background for this proposal is the published analysis of
   problems in the IETF [2], various discussions in the IETF's "New IETF
   Standards Track Discussion" (newtrk) working group, various largely
   expired drafts, the original author's personal experience, and the
   editor's personal experience.  It has little claim to originality
   (see Acknowledgements).

   The problems tackled by this proposal are those of clumsiness in the
   three-stage standards process, and related clumsiness in the clarity
   and useability of IETF standards.  This draft is deliberately short
   on rationale and explanation - the interested reader should study the
   above references and discussions carefully.

2.  Stage 1: Proposed Standard

   This is exactly as described in RFC-2026. [1]

3.  Stage 2: Interoperable Standard

   This is very similar to Draft Standard as described in [1].  The name
   is changed partly to mark the change, partly because people outside
   the IETF often confuse "Draft Standard" with "Internet-Draft", and
   partly to emphasise the IETF's value statement of "rough consensus
   and running code."

   The criteria for advancing from Proposed Standard to Interoperable
   Standard are roughly the same as the current criteria for moving to
   Draft Standard.

   However, two inconveniences in the present advancement process and
   interoperability requirements have been encountered:

   1. The objective is to validate that a specification contains only
       features that have been demonstrated to be interoperable.  The
       current text does not make it crystal clear that this, and not
       the availability of conformant implementations, is being
       demonstrated: the essential difference being that all features
       must be interoperable, not that all implementations must be shown
       to support all features.




Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


   2. The current text requires features that have not been demonstrated
       as interoperable to be removed from the specification.  This may
       cause an RFC to be updated, at a cost of many months delay, even
       if only one or two features have not been demonstrated to
       interoperate.  The proposed new text would also allow an RFC to
       be upgraded without change, even if some features had not been
       proved interoperable, as long as this fact was duly documented.

   Thus, this paragraph:

   "The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft Standard
   level only if those options or features are removed."

   is replaced by:

   "The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to each of the options and features of the
   specification considered individually.  In cases in which one or more
   options or features have not been demonstrated in at least two
   interoperable implementations, the specification may advance to the
   Interoperable Standard level only if those options or features are
   removed, or marked as untested for interoperability in a revised
   specification or in an external document available at the IETF web
   site and at the IETF ftp site."

4.  Stage 3: No stage three

   The final, rare, "Standard" stage is simply abolished.  The
   difference between the second and third stages isn't enough to
   justify the extra bureaucracy, and there is nothing negative about
   "Interoperable Standard" as the final state.

5.  Timing rules

   The minimum time at "Proposed Standard" remains six months.

   The highly theoretical rule about annual review of PS documents after
   two years is dropped to a recommendation; no review cycle is mandated
   for IS documents.

   The six month (and two year) timer starts when the IESG approval
   announcement for a document is sent, not when the RFC is published.
   As an adjunct to this, approved drafts should be parked in a special
   public directory while they are in the RFC queue, so that they are



Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


   readily available to implementers.

6.  IS can reference PS

   Interoperable Standards are allowed to make normative references to
   Proposed Standards.  The current rule prohibiting "down references"
   is a major cause of stickiness in the publication process.  This
   change, in theory, allows an Interoperable Standard to reference
   features that have not been formally agreed to be demonstrably
   interoperable.  But it is a matter of common sense - if we want to be
   able to promote Proposed Standard documents expeditiously, we have to
   allow this form of down reference.  (Down references from an RFC to
   an Internet-Draft continue to be prohibited.)

7.  The STD designation, and updates

   Presently, an STD designation and number is only given to a document
   (or document set) at the full Standard level.  This can cause extreme
   confusion when a full Standard is technically obsoleted by a Proposed
   Standard.  What is an implementer to do?

   One option is to simply abolish the STD designation, which is little
   used anyway.  (The editor prefers to abolish STD on grounds that it
   eliminates needless process and is currently not often used; however,
   his view is not strongly held.)

   The alternative is to assign the STD designation (and number) to a
   document (or document set) at PS level; if a PS is promoted to IS,
   its STD number goes with it; if an IS is obsoleted by a PS, the STD
   number reverts to the PS.  In any case, this function (assigning
   documents to specific STD designations) would be an IETF (WG or IESG)
   matter and not an RFC Editor action as today.


8.  Transitional arrangements

   On the day these changes enter service, all existing Draft Standard
   and (Full) Standard RFCs would be automatically reclassified as
   Interoperable Standard RFCs.  Corresponding changes would be made to
   the RFC Index and various features of the RFC Editor site and any
   other RFC repositories displaying the status of RFCs.

   If and only if the STD designation is retained, all existing STD
   designations will be applied as follows:

   1. If the old Standard has not been obsoleted, it is now an IS with
       the same STD designation.




Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


       2. If the old Standard has been obsoleted, the STD designation
       goes to the document(s) that obsoleted it, which may be PS, IS or
       a mixture.

       3. If the old Standard has been updated, the STD designation is
       added to the document(s) that updated it, which may be PS, IS or
       a mixture.

       4. The IESG would designate a team or teams to rapidly classify
       all PS and IS documents not assigned an STD designation by the
       above process into new STD designations.

   (If the STD designation is abolished, these steps would be
   unnecessary, but various cleanings up of the RFC Index and the RFC
   Editor web site would be needed to remove all references to STD.)

9.  Not excluded

   The above changes have been constructed in such a way that they do
   not exclude the notions of WG Snapshots (drafts declared to be in a
   stable state by the WG), Stable Snapshots (drafts declared to be in a
   stable state with IESG agreement) or Internet Standards Documentation
   (ISDs, external descriptors of a set of RFCs as a single
   standard)[3].

   This document has been written such that it neither requires nor
   prohibits other unrelated process changes to be made.

10. Initial Publication as Historic RFC

   An unrelated process clarification is that, occasionally, the IESG
   may decide to approve a document for immediate publication as
   Historic (rather than Informational), when it is desired to publish
   it for the record but the document's content is already overtaken by
   events.

10.  Housekeeping

   Obviously, [1] will need considerable editing in addition to the
   above changes, for example to remove the intellectual property
   material which is already obsolete.  Also, [4], which defined the STD
   designation, should be obsoleted.  (Even if the STD designation is
   retained, it should be fully described in the replacement for [1].)

11.  Security Considerations

   This document does not directly affect the security of the Internet.




Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


12.  IANA Considerations


















































Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


   This document requests no action by the IANA.

13.  Acknowledgements

   The current editor proposed a two-stage standards track process to
   the IAB and IESG whilst he was serving on the IAB.  At that time, the
   idea did not garner much support.  Separately, a two-stage standards
   track proposal was made Spencer Dawkins, Charlie Perkins and Dave
   Crocker in 2003, which also contained a version of the WG Snapshot
   proposal.  Another variant including Stable Snapshots was made by
   Scott Bradner in 2004.  This draft was written by Brian Carpenter in
   June 2005.  The current editor took over the draft in February 2006
   with permission from Brian Carpenter.  Comments on the Brian
   Carpenter's original draft by Spencer Dawkins are gratefully
   acknowledged.

   This document was originally produced using the xml2rfc tool[5], but
   the current editor is using nroff.

14.  Informative References

   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        BCP-9, RFC-2026, October 1996.

   [2]  Davies, E., "IETF Problem Statement", RFC-3774, May 2004.

   [3] Klensin, J. and J. Loughney, "Internet Standards Documentation
        (ISDs)", draft-ietf-newtrk-repurposing-isd-03 (work in
        progress), April 2005.

   [4]  Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC-1311, March
        1992.

   [5]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC-2629, June
        1999.
















Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


Author's Address

   Randall Atkinson
   Extreme Networks
   PO Box 14129
   3306 East NC Highway 54, Suite 100
   Research Triangle Park, NC
   27709 USA

   Email: rja@extremenetworks.com









































Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be found
   in BCP-78 and BCP-79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification
   can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2006.  This document is subject to
   the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP-78, and except
   as set forth therein, the author and editor retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  Two stage               22 February 2006





















































Atkinson (Editor)         Expires 22 July 2006                 [Page 11]
