


IP flow information exchange                                    L. Coene
Working group                                                    Siemens
Internet-Draft                                                 P. Conrad
Expires: August 14, 2003                               Temple University
                                                       February 13, 2003


        Reliable Server pool use in IP flow information exchange
               <draft-coene-rserpool-applic-ipfix-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the applicability of the relialeble server
   pool architecture to the IP flow information exchange using Endpoint
   Name Resolution Protocol(ENRP) function of Rserpool only. Data
   exchange in IPFIX between the router and the datacollector can be
   using a limited retransmission protocol.









Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


1. INTRODUCTION

   Reliable server pooling provides protocols for providing higly
   available services. The services are located in pool of redundant
   servers and if a server fails, another server will take over. The
   only requirement put on these servers belonging to the pool is that
   if state is maintained by the server, this state must be transfered
   to the other server taking over. The mechanism for transfering this
   state information is NOT part of the Reliable server pooling
   architecture and/or protocols and must be provided by other
   protocols.

   The goal is to provide server based redundancy. Transport and network
   level redundancy are handle by the transport and network layer
   protcols.

   The application may choose to distribute its traffic over the servers
   of the pool conforming to a certain policy.

   The application wishing to make use of Rserpool protocols may use
   different transport layers(such as UDP, TCP and SCTP). However some
   transport layers may have restrictions build in in the way they might
   be operating in the Rserpool architecture and its protocols.

1.1 Scope

   The scope of this document is to explain the way that a minimal
   version of Reliable server pool protocols have to be used in order to
   provide a higly available service towards IP flow Information
   Exchange(IPFIX) protocols.

1.2 Terminology

   The terms are commonly identified in related work and can be found in
   the Aggregate Server Access Protocol and Endpoint Name Resolution
   Protocol Common Parameters document[RFCCOMM].















Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


2. IPFIX using Rserpool

2.1 Architecture

   IP flow information is exchanged between observation points and
   collector points. The observation points may try to find out via the
   endpoint resolution protocol(ENRP) which collector point(s) are
   active. Both the observation and the collector point may have
   limitations for exchanging the information( observation point may
   have limited buffer space and collectors points may be overburdened
   with receiving lots of flow info from different observation points).

   The observation point will query the ENRP server for resolution of a
   particular collector pool name and ENRP will return to the
   observation point of list of 1 or more collector points.

   The observation point will use its own transport protocols(TCP, UDP,
   SCTP, PR-SCTP) for exchanging the IPFIX data between the observation
   point and the collection point. If a collection point would fail,
   then the observation point will send its data towards a different
   collector point, belonging to the same collector pool.

   Collector points will announce themselves to the ENRP server and will
   be monitored for their avialebility. The observation point will only
   query the ENRP server for server pool namer resolution.


























Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


3. Transport protocols suitable for IPFIX

   The exchange of IP flow information data between a observation point
   and a collection point consists of massive ammounts of data.

   One collection point can service many observation points, therefore
   transport protocols must do congestion control(example: modifying the
   receive buffer space, thus reducing the incoming flow of data), so
   that the collection point is not overburdened by its collections
   points. Some data must arrive at the collectore while othr data migth
   arrive(if it get lost, no problem). The choice of relialeble or
   partial relialeble delivery has to be made by the observation point.
   This calls for a protocol that should have variable relialebility for
   the transport of its data, prefereably to be chosen by IPFIX
   protocols on a per-message base.

   PR-SCTP is the only know protocol which allows the choice of full,
   partial or no relialeble delivery of the message to its peer node.
   TCP will only allow full relialeble delivery, while UDP has only
   unrelialeble delivery and NO congestion control to speak of.































Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


4. Security considerations

   The protocols used in the Reliable server pool architecture only
   tries to increase the availability of the servers in the network.
   Rserpool protocols does not contain any protocol mechanisms which are
   directly related to user message authentication, integrity and
   confidentiality functions. For such features, it depends on the IPSEC
   protocols or on Transport Layer Security(TLS) protocols for its own
   security and on the architecture and/or security features of its user
   protocols.

   Rserpool architecture allows the use of different Transport protocols
   for its application and control data exchange. Those transport
   protocols may have mechanisms for reducing the risk of blind
   denial-of-service attacks and/or masquerade attacks. If such measures
   are required by the applications, then it is advised to check the
   SCTP applicability statement[RFC3057] for guidance on this issue.


































Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


5. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank X, Y and M. Stillman and many others for
   their invaluable comments.















































Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


References

   [1]  Tuexen, M., Stewart, R., Shore, M., Xie, Q., Ong, L., Loughney,
        J. and M. Stillman, "Requirements for Reliable Server Pooling",
        RFC 3237, January 2002.

   [2]  Tuexen, M., Stewart, R., Shore, M., Xie, Q., Ong, L., Loughney,
        J. and M. Stillman, "Architecture for Reliable Server Pooling",
        Draft in progress , October 2002.

   [3]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Stillman, M. and M. Tuexen, "Aggregate
        Server Access Protocol (ASAP)", Draft in progress , October
        2002.

   [4]  Xie, Q., Stewart, R. and M. Stillman, "Endpoint Name Resolution
        Protocol (ENRP)", Draft in progress , October 2002.

   [5]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Stillman, M. and M. Tuexen, "Aggregate
        Server Access Protocol and Endpoint Name Resolution Protocol
        Common Parameters", Draft in progress , October 2002.

   [6]  Conrad, P. and P. Lei, ""Services Provided By Reliable Server
        Pooling", Draft in progress , January 2003.

   [7]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C., Schwarzbauer,
        H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang, L. and V. Paxson,
        ""Stream Control Transmission Protocol"", RFC 2960, October
        2000.

   [8]  Coene, L., ""Stream Control Transmission Protocol Applicability
        statement"", RFC 3257, April 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Lode Coene
   Siemens
   Atealaan 32
   Herentals  2200
   Belgium

   Phone: +32-14-252081
   EMail: lode.coene@siemens.com








Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


   Phil Conrad
   Temple University
   zzz
   zzzz  zzzz
   USA

   Phone: zzzz
   EMail: zzzz











































Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Rspool applicability for IPFIX        February 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Coene & Conrad          Expires August 14, 2003                [Page 10]


