





Network Working Group                                            A. Main
Internet-Draft: draft-main-sane-tld-00                     Black Ops Ltd
Category: Informational                                     October 2001
Expires: April 2002


                    Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract

   This memo examines practical problems in the use of the ICANN generic
   top-level domains, in particular that they fail to provide a stable
   namespace that is required by some protocols.  The practical problems
   are traced to underlying problems in domain name allocation policy in
   those domains.  Possible solutions to the problem are discussed,
   including the possibility of a new top-level domain to be managed in
   accordance with IANA assigned-numbers principles.

1 Introduction

   Many applications and protocols, as well as people's informal
   expectations, treat the domain name system as a stable, persistent
   namespace, with persistent delegation.  The current generic top-level
   domains ("com", "net" and "org") manifestly fail to provide such a
   namespace.

   In the gTLDs there are frequent disagreements over who has the right



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   to a particular domain.  We hear reports daily about rights to domain
   names being forcibly revoked from their original registrant and
   granted to other parties, usually big businesses, that have some
   disagreement with the original registrant.  Among the technically-
   literate of the Internet community there is widespread despair at the
   way these TLDs are operated.  Plainly this is not a sane state of
   affairs.

   Section 2 of this document outlines the need for stable domain names.
   Section 3 examines the operation of the current gTLDs in more detail,
   speculates on the origin of the current problematic situation, and
   explains why the current situation is a problem.  Section 4 examines
   possible solutions.

2 Why We Need Stable Domain Names

2.1 DNSSEC

   DNSSEC [DNS-SEC] is intended to authenticate DNS lookups.  It does
   this by cryptographically verifying the chain of delegations leading
   to a domain name and the data held under that name.  This
   authenticates the entire name-to-data mapping that makes up a DNS
   lookup.

   Superficially, DNSSEC appears to authenticate an object identity-to-
   data mapping.  It does not in fact do this; doing that requires, in
   addition to DNSSEC, an authenticated object identity-to-name mapping.
   In all uses of DNSSEC, this step has been glossed over: it has been
   assumed that the process will start with the correct name.  But the
   correct name can only be reliably known if it is stable.  Users of
   DNSSEC are thus implicitly using domain names as persistent
   identifiers.

   In failing to fully authenticate an identity-to-data mapping, DNSSEC
   is, of course, working as designed.  It is solving part of that
   problem, and leaving the other part to be solved elsewhere.  But a
   name-to-data mapping, however authentic, is quite useless without an
   identity-to-name mapping.  DNSSEC is thus useless without either
   domain names being persistent identifiers or some new mechanism to
   authenticate a transient identity-to-name mapping.  Persistent domain
   names appears to be by far the simpler engineering solution.

2.2 URI Resolution

   The URI resolution process defined by [NAPTR] refers URI resolvers
   through a series of domain names to route a resolution request to the
   appropriate authority that can give a location or other information
   for a resource.  These referrals, being by name, implicitly assume



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   that the name/identity mapping is persistent.

   In particular, consider URN types that are managed and resolved by a
   single organisation, for example the "ISSN" URN namespace described
   in [ISSN-URN].  In cases like this, resources critical to the
   handling of all URIs of a particular type are named within a domain
   managed by the single organisation responsible for that URI type.
   Any interruption of name resolution in that domain, or any compromise
   of the name/identity correspondence for that domain, would be highly
   disruptive.  It is necessary in these cases that the name of a
   privately-managed domain be reliably persistent.

2.3 A6 Resolution

   The resolution of IPv6 addresses using A6 records [DNS-IP6AA] has, as
   one usage option, end-user sites referring to their ISP-provided
   address prefixes via records managed by their service provider,
   rather than giving complete addresses themselves.  The address prefix
   records are referenced by name.  If this mode of use is ever
   deployed, then the accuracy of the most commonly-requested
   information about a host, namely its network protocol addresses, will
   depend critically on the stability and availability of names that are
   administered by a completely separate organisation, namely the
   service provider.

   In order to avoid organisations risking their reachability on an
   uncontrolled risk accepted and nominally borne by another party, it
   will be necessary for service providers' A6 records to reside under
   persistent domain names, that end users can be confident will remain
   stable.  It would help if end users could instantly know that they
   are delegating the address prefix information to a persistent domain
   name.

2.4 Natural Expectations

   In both formal and informal contexts, people use domain names to
   identify organisations.  There is a natural tendency to think of a
   domain name as an unambiguous means of identifying an organisation,
   because, unlike common names, there can never be two organisations
   simultaneously with the same domain name.  The technical and precise
   nature of domain names leads people to expect that domain names can
   be treated similarly to other technical identifiers: that they will
   have the same meaning in all contexts and at all times, that they can
   be safely embedded into code, and generally that they can be treated
   as persistent identifiers.

   As an example of the use of domain names as identifiers, some
   cryptographic key certificates use domain names to identify the key



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   owner.  In such security-relevant contexts, and particularly with
   long-lived keys, it is critical that a domain name used in this way
   remains a valid identifier for the same organisation for a long time,
   at minimum for the lifetime of keys that are certificated in this
   manner.

3 Current Generic Top-Level Domains

3.1 Current gTLD Name Allocation Policy

   The current gTLDs all operate under the same name allocation policy.
   This policy was been put in place well after the gTLDs were invented
   and became popular.  It filled a void: originally there was no formal
   allocation policy specified for these domains.

   The current name allocation policy is first-come-first-served for the
   initial registration of a name, but has a concept of a priori rights
   to a domain name.  These rights are enforced by revocation of a
   previously established name registration.  ICANN's UDRP (Uniform
   Dispute Resolution Policy) [UDRP] provides the official procedure for
   determining who has what rights to a domain name, and the procedures
   for executing a revocation of a registration.  Some highlights:

   o  Domain name registrations can be forcibly revoked or suspended
      without advance notice as a result of legal processes.

   o  Owning some kind of trademark that resembles a domain name grants
      some rights to to that domain name.

   o  The type of use that is made of a domain name is significant in
      determining the rights that domain registrant has to that domain
      name.  In particular, rights are quite different depending on
      whether the use made of a domain name is primarily commercial, or
      is non-commercial, or violates any meatspace laws.

   o  "Confusing similarity" is sufficient to create a name clash for
      the purposes of determining rights.

   These rules are, as one might gather from the above excerpts, typical
   of meatspace legal constructs, and in particular resemble US
   trademark law.  But there is an inherent conflict within the rules:
   the space in which the rules are applied does not resemble the space
   in which trademark laws have previously been applied.

   o  Trademark laws have traditionally been applied to matters of
      commercial identification, whereas domain names can (and do)
      identify anything.




Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   o  Trademark laws allow for the coexistence of identical names, in
      cases where context is sufficent to disambiguate.  (Companies in
      different industries or different localities do not conflict in
      the use of a particular name.)

   o  Trademarks are used through the mechanisms of human language,
      where words need not have a precise standard form and fuzzy
      matching is normal.  Hence trademark rights cover anything very
      similar to the official mark, as compared by human language
      processors (namely humans).  By contrast, domain names are very
      precise conceptual entities, being strings of characters from a
      well-defined set; matching is normally performed by computers,
      which look for an exact character-by-character match.

   It is this inherent tension between the legal realm of trademarks and
   the technical realm of domain names that has resulted in the manifest
   problems of the UDRP.  The rules effectively governing the gTLDs are
   the union of the legal and technical rules; thus we have a situation
   where names can clash either by character-by-character equivalence
   (the technical rule) regardless of contextual disambiguation or by
   natural-language similarity (the legal rule) regardless of technical
   difference.

   This kind of uncomfortable merging of the legal and technical domains
   is entirely out of character for the Internet.  It is evidently a
   result of the historical accident that led to domain name
   registration becoming big business; once it was a business matter,
   rather than a technical matter, it started to be handled the way
   businesses handle things, i.e., with contracts and legal action.
   Thus the stage was set for what those with a technical viewpoint see
   as the encroachment of legal machinery onto technical territory.

3.2 What is Wrong with Current gTLDs

   Having deconstructed the UDRP situation to its origin in the
   influence of meatspace business concerns, let us consider what would
   have happened if the gTLDs had always been managed purely by the
   technical Internet community.  Domain names would have been managed
   more according to the natural technical principles inherent in the
   design of the DNS.  In contrast to the UDRP features listed in the
   previous section, we would have features such as:

   o  Domain name registrations would be irrevocable.  This is, of
      course, a basic requirement to provide a stable namespace.

   o  Domain names would have no connection whatsoever with trademarks.
      The use of a domain name would not be seen as having any relevance
      to any trademarks that happened to look similar, and there would



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


      be no perceived need to make domain names resemble any trademarks
      owned by the controller of the domain.  Domain names would thus be
      a completely separate namespace from trademarks and everything
      else.

   o  The type of use, or lack of use, of a domain name would have no
      bearing on the validity of its registration.

   o  Domain names would be seen as different precisely when computers
      (applying the DNS matching rules) can tell them apart. Thus
      "foobarco" and "fubarco" would be accepted as unrelated labels.

   These principles are familiar to the technical Internet community:
   they are natural requirements of a stable, persistent namespace.
   They are principles applied to protocol parameter assignments.  We
   all understand that the Internet operates as well as it does largely
   because of IANA's excellent stewardship of many protocol-established
   namespaces.  What we want, then, is a domain that is managed
   according to IANA principles, using a well-known set of guidelines.

4 Possible Solutions

   For the reasons detailed in [UNIQ-ROOT], this document does not
   consider potential solutions that would compromise the concept of a
   single DNS root.  Most of the discussion below is actually orthogonal
   to the issues of root zone management.

4.1 Use of the "arpa" TLD

   So far, where there has been a particular need for stability in the
   DNS it has been special-cased, by placing protocol-defined domains
   that need to be stable into the IAB-managed "arpa" TLD [ARPA-MGMT],
   for example the "ip6.arpa" address mapping domain [IP6-ARPA].

   This is neither a sustainable nor an appropriate solution to the
   wider problem.  As explained in section 2, there is a need for stable
   domain names under the control of many disparate Internet users, not
   just a handful of centrally-managed domains.  There is also need for
   organisations' general-purpose domains to be stable in this way; the
   problem is not limited to the kind of special-purpose domains that
   have been placed under "arpa".

4.2 Changing the Policy of the Existing Domains

   The most obvious solution is that the UDRP should be abandoned as a
   means of administering the gTLDs, and replaced by an allocation
   policy that meets the technical requirements outlined in section 3.2.
   This type of change would be fraught with political, commercial and



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   legal obstacles, and even if achieved it would cause huge upheaval in
   the gTLDs.  It does not seem to be a feasible approach.

   This leaves the only way to get the domain we need to be to create it
   anew.  We can leave .com to those content to pay the Verisign tax,
   and have a sane domain alongside the commercial gTLDs.

4.3 OID Mapping

   There is already a well-known stable namespace used in several
   protocols: OSI OIDs [OSI-GEN].  An obvious solution to the problem of
   stable domain names would be to define a mapping from OIDs into
   domain names.  Suppose for the sake of argument that it is to be to
   be rooted in a TLD named "oid".  (It could perhaps reasonably be
   "oid.arpa", to go alongside the other mappings from other address
   spaces).  We would have, for example, the domain 14.1.4.1.6.3.1.oid
   (the mapping of OID 1.3.6.1.4.1.14) irrevocably owned by BBN, and
   113556.840.2.1.oid (OID 1.2.840.113556) by Microsoft.

   The use of OIDs in this way has some great benefits.  By making use
   of a pre-existing delegated persistent namespace, there is no
   question of how to allocate names, or of who has the right to use a
   particular name.  There is also not even a perception of trademark-
   relevance: because the labels are numeric, rather than character
   strings, even those unfamiliar with the technicalities of persistent
   namespaces do not expect the names to have any connection with trade
   names that they use in informal contexts.

   Before an OID mapping zone can be established there needs to be some
   research into how it could be operated.  Because most OIDs don't need
   to be mapped into domain name space, there is a significant question
   of how the delegations should be managed.  Should IANA delegate
   directly to individual OID owners from the "oid" zone?  At what level
   should organisations be expected to manage the DNS delegations
   themselves alongside their actual OID delegations?  Fortunately, the
   definition of the OID mapping domain would be such that these
   management policies could be changed, non-disruptively, subsequent to
   initial deployment of the mapping zone.

   Such a mapping of OIDs into domain names seems worthwhile on its own
   merits, even without the problems discussed in this memo.  This is
   recommended as an area for IETF study.

4.4 A Sane Top-Level Domain

   Although mapped OIDs would satisfy our basic technical requirements,
   they don't look the way we expect domain names to look.
   Traditionally, in Internet protocols, in cases where there is no



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   pressure for a particularly compact representation, we use mnemonic
   character string identifiers.  Domain names follow that convention of
   character string names.  Furthermore, domain names, to the extent
   that they can be regarded as persistent identifiers, have really the
   Internet's equivalent of OIDs: the DNS is a structured, delegated
   namespace, and we use domain names to name any object of interest.

   For the purposes of illustration, suppose that the new domain will be
   called "tech", reflecting its primary use in technical systems that
   require persistent object naming.  This document does not advocate
   this or any other name as the actual name to use for this domain,
   should it eventually be created; the name "tech" should be
   interpreted as a placeholder for whatever name might later be chosen.

4.4.1 Why it Has to Be a Top-Level Domain

   As described in section 2.2 of [ARPA-MGMT], the IAB-managed "arpa"
   domain has to be a TLD in order to avoid potential operational
   instabilities that would result from a deeply nested domain.  While
   our hypothetical "tech" domain might not be as operationally critical
   as "arpa", the stability of its name will be crucial.

   If the new domain were to be created under a gTLD (e.g., as
   "tech.net"), it would be subject to all those problems of gTLDs that
   it is intended to avoid, not least the risk of the domain's
   delegation being suspended by the registry due to legal action.

   The new domain doesn't appear to fit reasonably under any of the
   existing special-purpose TLDs.  The only possible exception is the
   "arpa" TLD, but "arpa" is intended for specific infrastructure
   domains, whereas the hypothetical new domain would have wider use.

   This leaves only the root domain itself as an appropriate parent for
   the new domain.

4.4.2 Pre-Deployment Requirements

   Before it can be deployed, there are three major matters that need to
   be determined for the "tech" domain:

   1. its name

   2. its allocation and assignment policy

   3. who is to manage it

   This memo does not provide firm answers to any of these questions;
   these matters can only be determined through IETF study.



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


4.4.3 Who Will Manage a Sane Domain

   Who could manage a persistent namespace within the DNS?  Obviously
   IANA has a lot of experience of managing persistent namespaces,
   making them a natural choice.  There are two major questions
   concerning IANA's competence to manage this namespace.  Firstly,
   whether IANA can handle the huge number of name registrations that
   might be very rapidly requested after deployment of the domain, which
   would likely be well beyond the behaviour of any other namespace ever
   managed by IANA.  Secondly, whether IANA can withstand the political
   pressure that would inevitably be exerted by parties wishing to
   compromise the technical persistence requirements in the "tech"
   domain.

   These same problems would face any body chosen to manage the "tech"
   domain or delegated the responsibility by IANA.

4.4.4 Name Allocation Policy Basics

   The basic requirements in any name allocation policy for the "tech"
   domain are:

   o  A name assignment, once made, cannot be revoked or transferred for
      any non-technical reason.  This is the fundamental requirement of
      a stable namespace.  See section 4.4.5 for more discussion.

   o  The mere existence of a name assignment, or the attachment of data
      in the DNS to such a name, must not be considered to be relevant
      to trademark law.  See section 4.4.6 for more discussion.

   o  A domain name must be available to any organisation that has
      reasonable need for one.  See section 4.4.7 for more discussion.

   Other than these requirements, most aspects of name allocation policy
   are yet to be decided.  It would be perfectly possible to have
   multiple "tech" domains, with different allocation policies operating
   in each, just as any "tech" domain would coexist alongside the UDRP
   gTLDs.

4.4.5 Irrevocability of Domain Name Registrations

   In order to provide persistent identifiers, the persistence of names
   in the "tech" domain must be enforced.  To be precise, the
   persistence required is that after a name has been firmly assigned to
   a particular entity, such that other people might reasonably start to
   rely on that assignment (for example by using the name as an
   identifier for the assignee), then that name must never later be
   assigned to a different entity (which would break people's reasonable



Main                       expires April 2002                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   reliance on the name/entity correspondence).

   Although this strong persistence can be relied on at the "tech"
   domain level, it cannot be enforced at any lower level of subdomain.
   Whether a similar policy is applied within any particular "tech"
   subdomain is a matter to be decided by the entity to which that
   subdomain has been assigned.  Consequently, the use that a third
   party can make of a domain name under the "tech" domain depends on
   the persistence policy operated by the subdomain assignee; the strong
   persistence at the higher level is necessary in order to give name
   assignees full flexibility in determining their own persistence
   policy.

   Strong persistence requires that a domain name cannot be transferred,
   even with the full cooperation of the previous registrant.  In
   addition to the obvious problem of transfers violating third parties'
   expectations of persistence, transfers open up an avenue of legal
   attack.  If transfers are permitted at all, then contracts and courts
   will be able to force a transfer from a registrant that doesn't want
   to transfer, thus compromising the stability of the namespace just as
   the UDRP does in the current gTLDs.

   If an assigned name is no longer used for any purpose, at the request
   of the assignee, the delegation for that name in the "tech" zone
   might be removed.  However, even on request, the name must not be
   removed from the list of registered names and made available for
   reassignment.  Reassignment of the name to a different entity would
   result in any old uses of that name to refer to the old registrant,
   such as in long-lived key certificates, now unintentionally referring
   to the new registrant.  This is exactly the kind of problem that
   "tech" is supposed to avoid.  Therefore, rather than disused "tech"
   domain names being deregistered, they must be permanently retired.

   A related requirement of persistent domain names is availability.
   Where an organisation has been assigned a persistent domain name, it
   may reasonably start to rely on the availability of that name as a
   means to refer to its data in the DNS.  The name registrar,
   therefore, must not revoke the delegation of an assigned name once
   made, except with the cooperation of the assignee (who is in any case
   entitled to call for changes to the delegation details).  This must
   apply even if the name was assigned erroneously (e.g., a second name
   assigned to an entity if there is a policy of only assigning one
   name).

4.4.6 Trademark Status of Domain Names

   Although it is argued that assignment of a name in the "tech" TLD
   should be considered irrelevant to trademark law, it remains possible



Main                       expires April 2002                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   that mentioning such a domain name in some circumstances could
   violate trademark law.  If a company that happened to have a domain
   name that resembled the name of one of its competitors were to
   advertise in a way that made the domain name particularly prominent,
   it is likely that they would be found to be passing themselves off as
   their competitor, and if the competitor's name is a trademark then
   they would be violating the trademark.  Note that it is the
   advertising in this case that violates the law, not the registration
   or operation of the domain.

   The same issues apply with any laws that restrict speech.  For
   example, if there were a domain "jesus-was-a-rapist.tech" (perhaps
   owned by the Jesus-was-a-Rapist Theological Research Foundation),
   then many forms of advertising of that domain name would be illegal
   in the many countries that have blasphemy laws that apply to the
   Christian religion.

   [DNS-STRUCT] suggests that the above situation is what was originally
   intended for the gTLDs.  In particular, Postel says "The registration
   of a domain name does not have any Trademark status.".  It is perhaps
   unfortunate that this part of that document has been ignored; it is
   also arguable that Postel's suggestion that "the registration
   authority shall have no role or responsibility" in domain name
   disputes hasn't been taken seriously enough, or perhaps was not a
   sufficiently strong statement.  This is why we need the stricter
   rules described in section 4.4.5 to rule out any possibility of
   dispute.

4.4.7 Registration Eligibility Issues

   As explained in section 2, there is a need for ordinary end-user
   organisations to acquire persistent domain names.  Consequently, any
   organisation that can give reasonable justification for needing a
   persistent domain name must be able to get one.  Particularly with
   the use of domain names as general-purpose persistent identifiers,
   this qualification is likely to be met by almost every organisation;
   it may be preferable, therefore, not to impose any such requirement,
   and to assign a persistent domain name to any organisation that
   requests one.

   This raises the question of whether an organisation should be limited
   to a single name.  Because of the capability to arbitrarily create
   and delegate subdomains, an organisation has no technical need for
   more than one persistent domain name to be assigned to it and under
   its complete control.  Restricting organisations to a single domain
   each would make the job of managing the "tech" domain much smaller:
   the enormous size of the current gTLDs is largely attributable to
   many organisations registering huge numbers of domain names each.



Main                       expires April 2002                  [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   Because the "tech" domain would be intended for technical uses of the
   DNS that require persistent names, there is not the same aesthetic
   pressure that leads to such a flat use of the gTLD namespaces.
   Enforcing the limitation also makes "tech" domain names more
   effective as identifiers, but there would always be occasional
   failures in enforcement, so the name-to-identity mapping would be
   technically many-to-one in any case.

   Although it is necessary that any organisation be able to acquire a
   persistent domain name, it is not necessary that all such
   registrations be immediately under the "tech" domain.  It would be
   possible for there to be a handful of domains directly under "tech"
   and to make end-user name allocations from within those subdomains.
   There are several possible justifications for such hierarchical
   allocation: for example, to qualify an organisation's domain name
   with some indicator of its industry or geographical area, or to
   divide namespace management duties among several organisations.
   However, if considering such a scheme, the lessons from "com", "net"
   and "org" should be borne in mind: some organisations will try to
   acquire names in as many namespaces as possible, leading to pointless
   duplication.  Interaction with any single-name-per-entity policy
   should also be considered.

4.4.8 Selection of Domain Names

   One of the major name allocation issues that needs to be decided
   before name registrations can commence is how to decide what name to
   allocate to a particular entity that wants a "tech" domain.  In
   particular, should there be some attempt to make domain names
   resemble organisations' common names even if the organisation wishes
   for a different name?

   Interestingly, IANA is already managing a namespace that assigns
   persistent character string labels to organisations.  [MIME-REG]
   defines the "vnd." tree for MIME media subtypes.  One of the forms of
   a "vnd." subtype name has an "IANA-approved designation" of the
   responsible organisation immediately following the "vnd.".  It may be
   convenient not only to adopt this standard for determining the name
   to allocate in the "tech" domain, but also to unify these two
   namespaces.  Unification would force stricter rules on the names used
   for MIME subtypes: it would require that the names there be limited
   to hostname label syntax (which all current assignments match).

5 Security Considerations

   The need for stable domain names described in section 2 is very
   security-relevant; the present situation of unstable domain names
   opens up various security problems.  Anywhere that a message of any



Main                       expires April 2002                  [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   kind refers to a domain name, such that the recipient of the message
   needs to do a DNS lookup on that name, then any change in the
   assignment of that domain name will change the effective meaning of
   the message without changing the verifiable raw data of the message.
   There is a broad class of object substitution attacks that are made
   possible by the capability to modify a domain name delegation through
   legal procedures.

   DNSSEC makes it possible to cryptographically verify a name-to-data
   mapping within the DNS, but by following the chain of
   cryptographically-authenticated delegations to the name of interest,
   one acquires data that is only as trustworthy as all of those
   delegations.  One view of the resolution process is that the DNSSEC
   verifier must trust all of the ancestor zones to maintain the
   delegation that it expects.  In this sense, a UDRP zone is inherently
   untrustable, because by explicit policy it fails to consistently
   maintain delegations.

   Domain names are already being used to identify organisations, for
   example to identify the owners of cryptographic keys.  The fact that
   domain names are not reliably persistent identifiers leads to some
   potentially serious problems of misidentification.  More
   conceptually, in the case of key certificates, it leads to questions
   of whether a key is being associated with a particular domain name or
   with a particular organisation.

6 IANA Considerations

   Because this memo does not call for the immediate creation of any new
   domain, there are no resulting name assignments for IANA to register
   and no new namespaces for IANA to manage.

   Documents creating the new domains suggested in this memo would have
   to specify management considerations for those new domains in
   considerable detail.  Section 4.3 raises questions concerning the
   management of an OID mapping domain, and sections 4.4.3 to 4.4.8
   discuss issues concerning the management of the proposed "tech"
   domain.

7 References

   [ARPA-MGMT]  G. Huston, "Management Guidelines & Operational
                Requirements for the Address and Routing Parameter Area
                Domain ("arpa")", BCP 52, RFC 3172, September 2001.

   [DNS-IP6AA]  M. Crawford, C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to Support IPv6
                Address Aggregation and Renumbering", RFC 2874, July
                2000.



Main                       expires April 2002                  [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      Plea for a Sane Top-Level Domain        October 2001


   [DNS-SEC]    D. Eastlake, "Domain Name System Security Extensions",
                RFC 2535, March 1999.

   [DNS-STRUCT] J. Postel, "Domain Name System Structure and
                Delegation", RFC 1591, March 1994.

   [IP6-ARPA]   R. Bush, "Delegation of IP6.ARPA", BCP 49, RFC 3152,
                August 2001.

   [ISSN-URN]   S. Rozenfeld, "Using The ISSN (International Serial
                Standard Number) as URN (Uniform Resource Names) within
                an ISSN-URN Namespace", RFC 3044, January 2001.

   [MIME-REG]   N. Freed, J. Klensin & J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet
                Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration
                Procedures", BCP 13, RFC 2048, November 1996.

   [NAPTR]      M. Mealling, R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer
                (NAPTR) DNS Resource Record", RFC 2915, September 2000.

   [OSI-GEN]    ISO, IEC, ITU, "Information Technology - Open Systems
                Interconnection - Systems Management Overview -
                Procedures for the Operation of OSI Registration
                Authorities: General Procedures", ISO/IEC 9834-1:1993,
                1993.

   [UDRP]       ICANN, "Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy",
                24 October 1999.  http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-
                policy-24oct99.htm

   [UNIQ-ROOT]  IAB, "IAB Technical Comment on the Unique DNS Root", RFC
                2826, May 2000.

8 Author's Address

   Andrew Main
   Black Ops Ltd
   36 Cannon Hill Road
   Coventry
   CV4 7DE
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 7887 945779
   EMail: zefram@fysh.org







Main                       expires April 2002                  [Page 14]

