
 
 
 
 
Network Working Group                                    Richard Ejzak 
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     Lucent Technologies 
                                                     February 15, 2005 
                                     
 
      Private Header (P-Header) Extension to the Session Initiation 
             Protocol (SIP) for Authorization of Early Media 
                  <draft-ejzak-sipping-p-em-auth-00.txt> 
                                      
    
Status of this memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as  
   Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This document is a submission of the IETF AVT WG.  Comments should 
   be directed to the AVT WG mailing list, avt@ietf.org. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a private Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
   header (P-header) to be used by the European Telecommunications 
   Standards Institute (ETSI) Telecommunications and Internet converged 
   Services and Protocols for Advanced Networks (TISPAN) for the 
   purpose of authorizing early media flows in Third Generation  
   Partnership Project (3GPP) IP Multimedia Subsystems (IMS). This 
   header is useful in any SIP network that is interconnected with 
   other SIP networks and needs to control the flow of media in the 
   early dialog state. 
     
    
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 1] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
1. Introduction....................................................2 
2. Applicability Statement.........................................3 
3. Conventions and Acronyms........................................3 
4. Background on early media authorization.........................4 
  4.1. Backward early media ......................................4 
  4.2. Forward early media .......................................5 
5. Applicability of RFC 3959 and RFC 3960..........................6 
6. Overview of Operation...........................................6 
7. The P-Early-Media header........................................7 
  7.1. Procedures at the User Agent Server........................8 
  7.2. Procedures at the proxy....................................8 
  7.3. Procedures at the User Agent Client........................8 
8. Formal syntax...................................................8 
9. Security Considerations.........................................9 
10. Acknowledgements...............................................9 
11. References.....................................................9 
  11.1. Normative References......................................9 
  11.2. Informative References...................................10 
12. Authors' Addresses............................................10 
13. IPR Notice....................................................10 
14. Copyright Notice..............................................11 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   This document defines the use of the P-Early-Media header for use 
   within SIP [1] provisional responses in certain SIP networks to 
   authorize the cut-through of backward and/or forward early media. 
   The P-Early-Media header is intended for use in a SIP network, such 
   as a 3GPP IMS, that prohibits the exchange of early media between 
   end users, that includes several Public Switched Telephone Network 
   (PSTN) gateways with which an end user may exchange certain early 
   media, that is interconnected with other SIP networks that have 
   unknown, untrusted or different policies regarding early media, and 
   that has the capability to "gate" (enable/disable) the flow of early 
   media to/from user equipment. 
    
   Within an isolated SIP network it is possible to gate early media 
   associated with all endpoints within the network to enforce a 
   desired early media policy among network endpoints.  However, when a 
   SIP network is interconnected with other SIP networks, only the 
   boundary node connected to the external network can determine which 
   early media policy to apply to a session established between 
   endpoints on different sides of the boundary.  The P-Early-Media 
   header provides a means for this boundary node to communicate this 
   early media policy decision to other nodes within the network. 
    
    
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 2] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
2. Applicability Statement 
    
   The use of this extension is only applicable inside a 'Trust Domain' 
   as defined in RFC 3325 [9].  Nodes in such a Trust Domain are 
   explicitly trusted by its users and end-systems to authorize early 
   media requests only when allowed by early media policy within the 
   Trust Domain.   
    
   This document does NOT offer a general early media authorization 
   model suitable for inter-domain use or use in the Internet at large.  
   Furthermore, since the early media requests are not 
   cryptographically certified, they are subject to forgery, replay, 
   and falsification in any architecture that does not meet the 
   requirements of the Trust Domain. 
    
   An early media request also lacks an indication of who specifically 
   is making or modifying the request, and so it must be assumed that 
   the Trust Domain is making the request.  Therefore, the information 
   is only meaningful when securely received from a node known to be a 
   member of the Trust Domain. 
    
   Despite these limitations, there are sufficiently useful specialized 
   deployments that meet the assumptions described above, and can 
   accept the limitations that result, to warrant publication of this 
   mechanism.  An example deployment would be a closed network that 
   emulates a traditional circuit switched telephone network. 
    
    
    
3. Conventions and Acronyms 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [1]. 
    
   The following acronyms are used in this document: 
    
      3GPP   - the Third Generation Partnership Project 
      ABNF   - Augmented Backus-Naur Form 
      DTMF   - Dual Tone Multi-Frequency 
      ETSI   - European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
      IMS    - Internet Protocol Multimedia Subsystem 
      MIME   - Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions 
      PSTN   - Public Switched Telephone Network 
      SDP    - Session Description Protocol 
      SIP    - Session Initiation Protocol 
      TISPAN - Telecommunications and Internet converged Services and 
               Protocols for Advanced Networks 
      UA     - User Agent 
      UAC    - User Agent Client 
      UAS    - User Agent Server 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 3] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
    
    
4. Background on early media authorization 
    
   PSTN networks typically provide call progress information as 
   backward early media from the terminating switch towards the calling 
   party.  In a SIP network, backward early media flows from the User 
   Agent Server (UAS) towards the User Agent Client (UAC).  PSTN 
   networks also use forward early media from the calling party towards 
   the terminating switch under some circumstances for applications 
   such as digit collection for secondary dialing. In a SIP network, 
   forward early media flows from the UAC towards the UAS.   
    
   PSTN networks typically allow backward and/or forward early media 
   since they are used for the purpose of progressing the call to the 
   answer state and do not involve the exchange of data between 
   endpoints. On the other hand, a SIP network may have a policy to 
   prohibit backward early media from SIP user equipment and to 
   prohibit forward media towards SIP user equipment, either of which 
   may contain user data. A SIP network containing both PSTN gateways 
   and SIP end devices can maintain such an early media policy by 
   gating off any early media with a SIP end device acting as UAS, 
   gating on early media with a SIP end device acting as UAC, and 
   appropriately gating early media at each PSTN gateway.  
   Unfortunately, a SIP network interconnected with another SIP network 
   may have no means of assuring that the interconnected network is 
   implementing a compatible early media policy. 
    
   Without this extension, a SIP network interconnected with other SIP 
   networks provides no mechanism for an originating SIP endpoint 
   within the network, be it a PSTN gateway or SIP user equipment, from 
   identifying if the terminating SIP endpoint, which may be located 
   outside the network, is a SIP endpoint (such as a PSTN gateway) that 
   is authorized to either send backward early media or to receive 
   forward early media. 
    
    
4.1. Backward early media  
    
   Backward early media in the PSTN typically comprises call progress 
   information such as ringing, or announcements regarding special 
   handling such as forwarding.  It may also include requests for 
   further information, such as a credit card number to be entered as 
   forward early media in the form of Dual Tone Multi-Frequency (DTMF) 
   tones or speech. Backward early media of this type provides 
   information to the calling party strictly for the purpose of 
   progressing the call and involves no exchange of data between end 
   users.  The usual PSTN charging policy assumes that no data is 
   exchanged between users until the call has been answered. 
    

 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 4] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   A terminating SIP User Agent (UA) outside of the SIP network, on the 
   other hand, may provide any user data in a backward early media 
   stream.  Thus if the network implements the usual early media 
   policy, the network equipment gating the backward early media flow 
   for the originating UA must distinguish between authorized early 
   media from a terminating SIP endpoint such as a PSTN gateway, and 
   unauthorized early media from another SIP device outside of the 
   network.  Given the assumption of a transitive trust relationship 
   between SIP servers in the network, this can be accomplished by 
   including some information in a backward SIP message that identifies 
   the presence of authorized backward early media.  Since it is 
   necessary to verify that this indication comes from a trusted 
   source, it is necessary for each server on the path back to the 
   originating UA be able to verify the trust relationship with the 
   previous server and to remove such an indication when it cannot do 
   so.  A server on the boundary to an untrusted SIP network can assure 
   that no indication of authorized backward early media passes from an 
   external UAS to a UAC within the network.  Thus the use of a private 
   header that can be modified by SIP proxies is to be preferred over 
   the use of a Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) attachment 
   that cannot be modified in this way.   
    
    
4.2. Forward early media  
    
   Forward early media is less common than backward early media in the 
   PSTN.  It is typically used to collect secondary dialed digits, to 
   collect credit card numbers, or to collect other DTMF or speech 
   responses for the purpose of further directing the call.  Forward 
   early media in the PSTN is always directed toward a network server 
   for the purpose of progressing a call and involves no exchange of 
   data between end users.  The usual PSTN charging policy assumes that 
   no data is exchanged between users until the call has been answered. 
    
   A terminating SIP UA outside of the SIP network, on the other hand, 
   may receive any user data in a forward early media stream, thus if 
   the network implements the usual early media policy, the network 
   equipment gating the forward early media flow for the originating UA 
   must distinguish between a terminating endpoint such as a PSTN 
   gateway that is authorized to receive forward early media, and 
   another SIP device outside of the network that is not authorized to 
   receive forward early media containing user data.  Given the 
   assumption of a transitive trust relationship between SIP servers in 
   the network, this can be accomplished by including some information 
   in a backward SIP message that identifies that the terminating side 
   is authorized to receive forward early media.  Since it is necessary 
   to verify that this indication comes from a trusted source, it is 
   necessary for each server on the path back to the originating UA be 
   able to verify the trust relationship with the previous server and 
   to remove such an indication when it cannot do so.  A server on the 
   boundary to an untrusted SIP network can assure that no indication 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 5] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   of forward early media authorization passes from an external UAS to 
   a UAC within the network.  Thus the use of a private header that can 
   be modified by SIP proxies is to be preferred over the use of a MIME 
   attachment that cannot be modified in this way. 
    
    
5. Applicability of RFC 3959 and RFC 3960 
    
   The private header extension defined in this document is applicable 
   to the gateway model defined in RFC 3960 [7], since the PSTN gateway 
   is the primary requestor of early media in an IMS.  For the same 
   reason, neither the application server model of RFC 3960, nor the 
   early session disposition type defined in RFC 3959 [6] is 
   applicable. 
    
   The gateway model of RFC 3960 [7] allows for individual networks to 
   create local policy with respect to the handling of early media, but 
   does not address the case where a network is interconnected with 
   other networks with unknown, untrusted or different early media 
   policies.  Without the kind of information in the P-Early-Media 
   header, it is not possible for the network to determine whether cut-
   through of early media could lead to the transfer of data between 
   end-users during session establishment. 
    
   Thus the private header extension in this document is a natural 
   extension of the gateway model of RFC 3960 [7] that is applicable 
   within a transitive trust domain. 
    
    
6. Overview of Operation 
    
   We define a new P-Early-Media header field for the purpose of 
   requesting and authorizing requests for backward and/or forward 
   early media.  A UAS requesting backward and/or forward early media 
   will include the P-Early-Media header in a 18X provisional response 
   to an incoming INVITE request, including a direction parameter that 
   identifies whether the early media request is for backward media, 
   forward media, both or neither.  The UAS may change its request for 
   early media by including a modified P-Early-Media header in a 
   subsequent 18X provisional response to the INVITE request. 
    
   The UAS may be a PSTN gateway providing in-band call progress 
   information in the backward direction, or a network server 
   requesting the input of a digit string as DTMF in the forward 
   direction. 
    
   As members of the Trust Domain, each proxy in the network forwarding 
   the 18X response has the responsibility for assuring that the early 
   media request comes from an authorized source.  If a P-Early-Media 
   header arrives from either an untrusted source, a source not allowed 
   to send backward early media, or a source not allowed to receive 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 6] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   forward early media, then the proxy may remove the P-Early-Media 
   header or alter the direction parameter of the P-Early-Media header 
   before forwarding the 18X response, based on local policy.  A proxy 
   will typically authorize an early media request from a PSTN gateway, 
   and disallow an early media request from user equipment or from an 
   untrusted network.  
    
   If the proxy also performs gating of early media, then it uses the 
   direction parameter of the P-Early-Media header to gate on/off 
   backward and/or forward early media flow between the UAs. 
    
   If the UAC is a PSTN gateway, then the UAC uses the direction 
   parameter of the P-Early-Media header in the 18X provisional 
   response to perform early media gating or cut-through and to decide 
   whether or not to render backward early media in preference to 
   generating ringback based on the receipt of a 180 Ringing response. 
    
   If the UAC is associated with user equipment, then the network will 
   have assigned a proxy the task of performing early media gating, so 
   that the direction parameter of the P-Early-Media header received at 
   such a UAC does not police the early media flow, but does provide 
   additional information that the UAC may use to render media. 
    
    
    
7. The P-Early-Media header 
    
   The P-Early-Media header MAY be included in any 18X provisional 
   response to the INVITE request for the purpose of requesting the 
   authorization of early media.  The P-Early-Media header includes a 
   single parameter "direction" that has one of the following values: 
   "sendrecv", "sendonly", "recvonly", or "inactive", following the 
   convention used for Session Description Protocol (SDP) [10] stream 
   directionality.  The value sendrecv indicates a request for 
   authorization of early media both from the UAS towards the UAC and 
   from the UAC towards the UAS (both backward and forward early 
   media).  The value sendonly indicates a request for authorization of 
   early media from the UAS towards the UAC (backward early media), and 
   not in the other direction.  The value recvonly indicates a request 
   for authorization of early media from the UAC towards the UAS 
   (forward early media), and not in the other direction.  The value 
   inactive indicates either a request that no early media be 
   authorized or a request for revocation of authorization of 
   previously authorized early media.  In networks using the P-Early-
   Media header, the default behavior in the absence of the header is 
   either to request that no early media be authorized (in the absence 
   of any previous early media authorization request) or to leave 
   unchanged any previous early media authorization within the session. 
    


 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 7] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   The P-Early-Media header is optional in any 18X provisional response 
   to the INVITE request, and may be freely altered or deleted by any 
   proxy. 
    
7.1. Procedures at the User Agent Server 
    
   A User Agent Server that is requesting authorization to send or 
   receive early media MAY insert a P-Early-Media header with 
   appropriate direction value in any 18X provisional response to the 
   INVITE request.  A User Agent Server MAY request changes in early 
   media authorization by inserting a P-Early-Media header with 
   appropriate direction value in any subsequent 18X provisional 
   response to the INVITE request.   
    
    
7.2. Procedures at the proxy 
    
   To authorize or deny early media authorization requests, a proxy MAY 
   modify or remove a P-Early-Media header in any 18X provisional 
   response to an INVITE request, depending on the trust relationship 
   with the server sending or forwarding the 18X response.  In 
   addition, if the proxy controls the gating of early media in both 
   directions for the User Agent Client, it SHALL use the contents of 
   the P-Early-Media header to gate the early media according to the 
   definition of the direction parameter defined in clause 7.   
    
    
7.3. Procedures at the User Agent Client 
    
   A User Agent Client receiving a P-Early-Media header in a 18X 
   provisional response to an INVITE request MAY use the direction 
   parameter of the header to gate or cut-through early media, and to 
   decide whether to render early media from the UAS to the UAC in 
   preference to any locally generated ringback triggered by a 180 
   Ringing response.  If a proxy is providing the early media gating 
   function for the User Agent Client, then the gateway model of RFC 
   3960 [7] for rendering of early media is applicable. 
    
   The User Agent Client associated with a PSTN gateway in an IMS does 
   not have a proxy configured to perform early media gating, so it 
   needs to perform early media gating on its own.  A User Agent Client 
   without a proxy in the network performing early media gating that 
   receives a P-Early-Media header in a 18x provisional response to an 
   INVITE request SHOULD perform gating or cut-through of early media 
   according to the direction parameter of the header.  Such a User 
   Agent Client MAY also use the direction parameter to decide whether 
   to render early media from the UAS to the UAC in preference to any 
   locally generated ringback triggered by a 180 Ringing response. 
    
    
8. Formal syntax 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 8] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
    
   This syntax of the P-Early-Media header is described below in ABNF 
   according to RFC 4234 [8], as an extention to the ABNF for SIP in 
   RFC 3261 [1]. 
    
      P-Early-Media = "P-Early-Media" HCOLON em-direction 
      em-direction  = "sendrecv" / "sendonly" / "recvonly" / "inactive" 
    
    
9. Security Considerations 
    
   There are no confidentiality concerns associated with the P-Early-
   Media header.  It is desirable to maintain the integrity of the 
   direction parameter in the header across each hop between servers to 
   avoid the potential for unauthorized use of early media.  It is 
   assumed that the P-Early-Media header is used within the context of 
   the 3GPP IMS trust domain or a similar trust domain, consisting of a 
   collection of SIP servers maintaining pairwise security 
   associations.  In an IMS it is only necessary to police the use of 
   the P-Early-Media header at the boundary to user equipment served by 
   the network and at the boundary to peer networks.  It is assumed 
   that boundary servers in the IMS will have local policy for the 
   treatment of the P-Early-Media header as it is sent to or received 
   from any possible server external to the network.  Since boundary 
   servers are free to modify or remove any P-Early-Media header in SIP 
   messages forwarded across the boundary, the integrity of the P-
   Early-Media header can be verified to the extent that the 
   connections to external servers are secured.  The authenticity of 
   the P-Early-Media header can only be assured to the extent that the 
   external servers are trusted to police the authenticity of the 
   header. 
    
    
10. Acknowledgements 
    
   The author would like to thank Miguel Garcia-Martin, Jan Holm, 
   Sebastien Garcin, Akira Kurokawa, Erick Sasaki, James Calme, and 
   Greg Tevonian for their significant contributions made throughout 
   the writing and reviewing of this document.  
    
    
11. References 
    
11.1. Normative References 
    
   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP: 
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
   [2]  3GPP “TS 23.228: IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2 
        (Release 7)”, 3GPP 23.228, September 2005, 
        ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/Specs/archive/23-series/23.228/. 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                         [Page 9] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   [3]  3GPP “TS 24.229: IP Multimedia Call Control Protocol based on 
        SIP and SDP; Stage 3 (Release 7)”, 3GPP 24.229, September 2005, 
        ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/Specs/archive/24-series/24.229/. 
   [4]  3GPP “TS 32.200: Telecommunication Management; Charging 
        management; Charging principles (Release 7)”, 3GPP 32.200, 
        September 2005, ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/Specs/archive/32-
        series/32.200/. 
   [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
   [6]  Camarillo, G., “The Early Session Disposition Type for the 
        Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)”, RFC 3959, December 2004. 
   [7]  Camarillo, G., “Early Media and Ringing Tone Generation in the 
        Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)”, RFC 3960, December 2004. 
   [8]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005. 
   [9]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J. and Watson, M., ”Private Extensions 
        to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity 
        within Trusted Networks”, RFC 3325, November 2002. 
   [10] Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description 
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998. 
11.2. Informative References 
    
   [11] Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model with 
        Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, June 2002. 
   [12] Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V. Jacobson, 
        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", STD 64, 
        RFC 3550, July 2003. 
   [13] Schulzrinne, H. and S. Casner, "RTP Profile for Audio and Video 
        Conferences with Minimal Control", STD 65, RFC 3551, July 2003. 
    
   ETSI documents can be downloaded from the ETSI web server, 
   http://www.etsi.org/".  Any 3GPP document can be downloaded from the 
   3GPP webserver, "http://www.3gpp.org/", see specifications.   
    
    
12. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Richard Ejzak 
   Lucent Technologies 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL 60566, USA 
    
   Phone:   +1 630 979 7036 
   EMail: ejzak@lucent.com 
    
    
13. IPR Notice 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
 
 
 
Ejzak                                                        [Page 10] 
INTERNET-DRAFT          P-Early-Media-Auth Header    February 15, 2005 
 
 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
14. Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).   
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   This Internet-Draft expires in August 2006. 
    
    
RFC Editor Considerations 
    
   - The RFC editor is requested to replace all occurances of XXXX 
     with the RFC number this document receives.  








 
 
 
Ejzak                                                        [Page 11] 