

CIDRD Working Group                           Y. Rekhter
INTERNET DRAFT                             cisco Systems
                                                    T.Li
                                           cisco Systems
                                           November 1995


Implications of  Various Address Allocation Policies for Internet Routing
          <draft-ietf-cidrd-addr-ownership-04.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum
   of six months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced,
   or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is not
   appropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as a ``working draft'' or
   ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in
   the internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil,
   nnsc.nsf.net, nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or
   munnari.oz.au to learn the current status of any Internet
   Draft.



1 Abstract



   IP unicast address allocation and management are
   essential operational functions for the Public Internet.
   The exact policies for IP unicast address allocation and
   management continue to be the subject of many
   discussions.  Such discussions cannot be pursued in a
   vacuum - the participants must understand the technical
   issues and implications associated with various address
   allocation and management policies.

   The purpose of this document is to articulate certain
   relevant fundamental technical issues that must be
   considered in formulating unicast address allocation and
   management policies for the Public Internet.  The major
   focus of this document is on two possible policies,
   "address ownership" and "address lending," and the
   technical implications of these policies for the Public



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   Internet.


2 On the intrinsic value of IP addresses



   Syntactically, the set of IPv4 unicast addresses is the
   (finite) set of integers in the range 0x00000000 -
   0xdfffffff. IP addresses are used for Network Layer (IP)
   routing.  An IP address is the sole piece of information
   about the node injected into the routing system.

   The notable semantics of an IP unicast address is its
   ability to interact with the Public Internet routing
   service and thereby exchange data with the remainder of
   the Internet.   In other words, for the Public Internet,
   it is the reachability of an IP address that gives it an
   intrinsic value - without reachability the address is
   worthless.

   The above implies that in the Public Internet it is the
   service environment (the Internet) and its continued
   operation, including its routing system, which gives an
   IP address its intrinsic value, rather than the inverse.
   Consequently, if the Public Internet routing system
   ceases to be operational, the service disappears, and the
   addresses cease to have any functional value in the
   Internet.  At this point, for the Public Internet, all
   address allocation and management policies, including
   existing policies, are rendered meaningless.



3 Hierarchical routing and its implication on address
allocation


   Hierarchical routing [Kleinrock 77] is a mechanism that
   improves the scaling properties of a routing system.  It
   is the only proven mechanism for scaling routing to the
   current size of the Internet.

   Hierarchical routing works by taking a set of addresses
   and generating a single routing advertisement (route) for
   the entire set.  Further, if addresses are assigned
   correctly, this can be done recursively: multiple
   advertisements (routes) can be combined into a single
   advertisement (route).  By exercising this recursion, the
   amount of information necessary to provide routing can be
   decreased substantially.

   A common example of hierarchical routing is the phone
   network (and more precisely, the North American Numbering



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   Plan), where country codes, area codes, exchanges, and
   finally subscriber lines are different levels in the
   hierarchy.  In the phone network, a switch need not keep
   detailed routing information about every possible
   subscriber in a distant area code.  Instead, the switch
   knows one routing entry for the entire area code.

   Notice that the effect on scaling is dramatic.  If we
   look at the space complexity of the different schemes,
   the switch that knows about every subscriber in the world
   needs O(n) space for n worldwide subscribers.  Now
   consider the case of hierarchical routing.  We can break
   n down into the number of subscribers in the local area
   (l), the other exchanges in the area code (e), the other
   area codes in the local country code (a) and other
   country codes (c).  Using this notation, hierarchical
   routing has space complexity O(l + e + a + c).  Notice
   that each of these factors is much, much less than n, and
   grows very slowly, if at all.  This implies that a phone
   switch can be built today that has some hope of not
   running out of space when it is deployed.

   The fundamental property of hierarchical routing that
   makes this scalability possible is the ability to form
   abstractions: here, the ability to group subscribers into
   exchanges, area codes and country codes.  Further, such
   abstractions must provide useful information for the
   ability to do routing.  Some abstractions, such as the
   group of users with green phones, are not useful when it
   comes time to route a call.

   Since the information that the routing system really
   needs is the location of the address within the topology,
   for hierarchical routing, the useful abstraction must
   capture the topological location of an address within the
   network.  In principle this could be accomplished in one
   of two ways.  Either (a) constrain the topology (and
   allowed topology changes) to match address assignment.
   Or, (b) avoid constraints on the topology (and topology
   changes), but require that as the topology changes, an
   entity's address change as well. The process of changing
   an entity's address is known as "renumbering."


4 Scaling the Internet routing system


   The enormous growth of the Public Internet places a heavy
   load on the Internet routing system.  The growth rate has
   doubled the size of the routing table roughly every nine
   months.  Computer technology doubles roughly every 24
   months.  Even if we could double the capacities of the
   routers in the Internet every 24 months, inevitably the
   size of the routing tables is going to exceed the limit



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   of the routers.  Therefore, to preserve uninterrupted
   continuous growth of the Public Internet, deploying
   mechanisms that contain the growth rate of the routing
   information is essential.

   Lacking mechanisms to contain the growth rate of the
   routing information, the growth of the Internet would
   have to be either limited or frozen, or the Internet
   routing system would become overloaded.  The result of
   overloading routing is that the routing subsystem will
   fail: either equipment (routers) could not maintain
   enough routes to insure global connectivity, or providers
   will simply exclude certain routes to insure that other
   routes provide connectivity to particular sites.  This
   document assumes that neither of the outcomes mentioned
   in this paragraph is acceptable.

   Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) [RFC1518, RFC1519]
   has been deployed since late 1992 in the Public Internet
   as the primary mechanism to contain the growth rate of
   the routing information - without CIDR the Internet
   routing system would have already collapsed.  For
   example, in October 1995, within AlterNet (one of the
   major Internet Service Providers) there were 3194 routes.
   Thanks to aggregation, AlterNet advertised only 799
   routes to the rest of the Internet - a saving of 2395
   routes (75%) [Partan 95]. In October 1995 the IRR
   contained 61,430 unique prefixes listed, not counting
   prefixes marked as withdrawn (or 65,191 prefixes with
   prefixes marked as withdrawn).  That is roughly a lower
   bound since many prefixes are not registered in the IRR.
   CIDR aggregation resulted in less than 30,000 routes in
   the default-free part of the Internet routing system
   [Villamizar 95].

   CIDR is an example of the application of hierarchical
   routing in the Public Internet, where subnets,
   subscribers, and finally  providers are some possible
   levels in the hierarchy. For example, a router within a
   site need not keep detailed routing information about
   every possible host in that site.  Instead, the router
   maintains routing information on a per subnet basis.
   Likewise, a router within a provider need not keep
   detailed routing information about individual subnets
   within its subscribers. Instead, the router could
   maintain routing information on a per subscriber basis.
   Moreover, a router within a provider need not keep
   detailed routing information about stub (single home)
   subscribers of other providers by maintaining routing
   information on a per provider basis.

   Because of pre-CIDR address allocation, many routes in
   the Internet are not suitable for hierarchical
   aggregation. Moreover, unconnected sites with pre-CIDR



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   address allocations exist.  If these sites connect to the
   Internet at some point in the future, the routes to these
   sites are unlikely to be suitable for hierarchical
   aggregation.

   The topology of the Public Internet, taken as a whole, is
   not strictly hierarchical, although most parts are.
   Hierarchical routing requires that aggregation boundaries
   for the addressing information be formed along some
   hierarchy.  As a result, many exceptions will be injected
   into the routing system in the future, besides those
   exceptions that currently exist.  Each exception added to
   the routing system deters the scalability of the routing
   system.  The exact number of exceptions that can be
   tolerated is dependent on the technology used to support
   routing.  Unbridled growth in the number of such
   exceptions will cause the routing system to collapse.


4 Address allocation and management policies



   IP address allocation and management policy is a complex,
   multifaceted issue. It covers a broad range of issues,
   such as who formulates the policies, who executes the
   policies, what is the role of various registries, what is
   the role of various organizations (e.g., ISOC, IAB, IESG,
   IETF, IEPG, various government bodies, etc.), the
   participation of end users in requesting addresses, and
   so on.

   Address allocation and management and the scalability of
   the routing system are interrelated - only certain
   address allocation and management policies yield scalable
   routing.  The Internet routing system is subject to both
   technological and fundamental constraints. These
   constraints restrict the choices of address allocation
   policies that are practical.


4.1 The "address ownership" allocation policy and its
implications on the Public Internet



   "Address ownership" is one possible address allocation
   and management policy. The "address ownership" policy
   means that part of the address space, once allocated to
   an organization, remains allocated to the organization as
   long as that organization wants it.  Further, that
   portion of the address space would not be allocated to
   any other organization.  Often, such addresses are called
   "portable."



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   While it has never been explicitly stated that various
   Internet Registries use the "address ownership"
   allocation policy, it has always been assumed (and
   practiced).

   To understand the implications of the "address ownership"
   policy ("portable" addresses) on the scalability of the
   Internet routing system, one must observe that:

      (a) by definition, address ownership assumes that
      addresses, once assigned, do not change owners, i.e.,
      the same addresses remain at the same organization no
      matter how radically the organization might change its
      connectivity to the Public Internet, and that
      renumbering does not take place;

      (b) by definition, hierarchical routing assumes that
      addresses reflect the network topology as much as
      possible.


   Therefore, the only way to satisfy both address ownership
   and hierarchical routing for everyone is to assume that
   the topology (or at least certain pieces of it) will be
   permanently fixed.  Given the distributed, decentralized,
   largely unregulated, and global (international) nature of
   the Internet, constraining the Internet topology (or even
   certain parts of it) may have broad technical, social,
   economical, and political implications.  To date, little
   is known of what these implications are; even less is
   known whether these implications would be acceptable
   (feasible) in practice.  Therefore, at least for now, we
   have to support an Internet with an unconstrained
   topology (and unconstrained topological changes).

   Since the Internet does not constrain its topology (or
   allowed topology changes), we can either have address
   ownership for everyone or a routable Internet, but not
   both.  If we have address ownership ("portable"
   addresses) for everyone, then the routing overhead will
   lead to a breakdown of the routing system resulting in a
   fragmented (partitioned) Internet. Alternately, we can
   have a routable Internet, but without address ownership
   ("portable" addresses) for everyone.


4.2 The "address lending" allocation policy and its
implications on the Public Internet


   Recently, especially since the arrival of CIDR,
   subscribers and providers have followed a model in which
   address space is not owned (not portable), but is bound
   to the topology. This model suggests an address



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 6]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   allocation and management policy that differs from the
   "address ownership" policy. The following describes a
   policy, called "address lending," that provides a better
   match (as compared to the "address ownership" policy) to
   the model.

   An "address lending" policy means that an organization
   gets its addresses on a "loan" basis.  For the length of
   the loan, the lender cannot lend the addresses to any
   other borrower.  Assignments and allocations based on the
   "address lending" policy should explicitly include the
   conditions of the loan.  Such conditions must include
   that allocations are returned if the borrower is no
   longer contractually bound to the lender, and the lender
   can no longer provide aggregation for the allocation.  If
   a loan ends, the organization can no longer use the
   borrowed addresses, and therefore must get new addresses
   and renumber with new addresses.  The "address lending"
   policy does not constrain how the new addresses could be
   acquired.

   This document expects that the "address lending" policy
   would be used primarily by Internet Registries associated
   with providers; however, this document does not preclude
   the use of the "address lending" policy by an Internet
   Registry that is not associated with a provider.

   This document expects that when the "address lending"
   policy is used by an Internet Registry associated with a
   provider, the provider is responsible for arranging
   aggregation of these addresses to a degree that is
   sufficient to achieve Internet-wide IP connectivity.

   This document expects that when the "address lending"
   policy is used by an Internet Registry associated with a
   provider, the terms and conditions of the loan would be
   coupled to the service agreement between the provider and
   the subscribers. That is, if the subscriber moves to
   another provider, the loan would be canceled.

   To reduce disruptions when a subscriber changes its
   providers, this document strongly recommends that the
   terms and conditions of the loan should include a grace
   period provision. This provision would allow a subscriber
   that disconnects from its provider a certain grace period
   after the disconnection.  During this grace period, the
   borrower (the subscriber) may continue to use the
   addresses obtained under the loan.  This document
   recommends a grace period of at least 30 days. Further,
   to contain the routing information overhead, this
   document suggests that a grace period be no longer than
   six months.

   To understand the scalability implications of the



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 7]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   "address lending" policy, observe that if a subscriber
   borrows its addresses from its provider's block, then the
   provider can advertise a single address prefix. This
   reduces the routing information that needs to be carried
   by the Internet routing system (for more information, see
   Section 5.3.1 of RFC1518). As the subscriber changes its
   provider, the loan from the old provider would be
   returned, and the loan from the new provider would be
   established. As a result, the subscriber would renumber
   to the new addresses. Once the subscriber renumber into
   the new provider's existing blocks,no new routes need to
   be introduced into routing.

   Therefore, the "address lending" policy, if applied
   appropriately, is consistent with the constraints on
   address allocation policies imposed by hierarchical
   routing, and thus promotes a scalable routing system.
   Thus, the "address lending" policy, if applied
   appropriately, could play an important role in enabling
   the continuous uninterrupted growth of the Internet.

   To be able to scale routing in other parts of the
   hierarchy, the "lending" policy may also be applied
   hierarchically, so that addresses may in turn be lent to
   other organizations.  The implication here is that the
   end of a single loan may have effects on organization
   that have recursively borrowed part of the address space
   from the main allocation.  In this case, the exact
   effects are difficult to determine a priori.  For
   example, a borrowed prefix may represent a sufficient
   degree of aggregation within a lower level of the
   hierarchy and may subsequently be aggregated, thus not
   affecting higher levels of the routing hierarchy.


4.3 In the absence of an explicit "address lending" policy


   Organizations connecting to the Internet should be aware
   that even if their current provider, and the provider
   they switch to in the future would not require
   renumbering, renumbering may still be needed to achieve
   Internet-wide IP connectivity.  For example, an
   organization may now receive Internet service from some
   provider and allocate its addresses out of the CIDR block
   associated with the provider.  Later the organization may
   switch to another provider.  The previous provider may
   still be willing to allow that organization to retain
   part of the provider's CIDR block, and accept a more
   specific prefix for that organization from the new
   provider. Likewise, the new provider may be willing to
   accept that organization without renumbering and
   advertise the more specific prefix (that covers
   destinations within the organization) to the rest of the



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 8]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   Internet.  However, if one or more other providers exist,
   that are unwilling or unable to accept the longer prefix
   advertised by the new provider, then the organization
   would not have IP connectivity to part of the Internet.
   In the future, this may become a large portion, and
   perhaps even most of the Internet.

   The above shows that the absence of an explicit "address
   lending" policy from a current provider in no way insures
   that renumbering will not be required in the future when
   changing providers.  Organizations should be aware of
   this fact should they encounter a provider making claims
   to the contrary.


5 Recommendations


   Observe that the goal of hierarchical routing is not to
   reduce the total amount of routing information to the
   theoretical minimum, but just to contain the routing
   information within the limits of technology,
   price/performance, and human factors.  Therefore, a
   single prefix that provides reachability to a
   sufficiently large fraction of the total number
   destinations could be maintained throughout the default-
   free part of the Internet routing system. Therefore,
   using the "address ownership" policy when allocating such
   prefixes is a reasonable choice.  Within such prefixes,
   this document suggests the use of the "address lending"
   policy.

   For all other organizations that expect Internet-wide IP
   connectivity, the reachability information they inject
   into the Internet routing system should be subject to
   hierarchical aggregation.  For such organizations,
   allocating addresses based on the "address ownership"
   policy makes hierarchical aggregation difficult, if not
   impossible.  This, in turn, has a very detrimental effect
   on the Internet routing system. To prevent the collapse
   of the Internet routing system, for such organizations,
   this document recommends using the "address lending"
   policy.  Consequently, when such an organization first
   connects to the Public Internet or changes its
   topological attachment to the Public Internet, the
   organization eventually needs to renumber.  Renumbering
   allows the organization to withdraw any exceptional
   prefixes that the organization would otherwise inject
   into the Internet routing system. This applies to the
   case where the organization takes its addresses out of
   its direct provider's block and the organization changes
   its direct provider. This may also apply to the case
   where the organization takes its addresses out of its
   indirect provider's block, and the organization changes



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 9]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   its indirect provider.

   Carrying routing information has a cost associated with
   it. This cost, at some point, may be passed back in full
   to the organizations that inject the routing information.
   Aggregation of addressing information (via CIDR) could
   reduce the cost, as it allows an increase in the number
   of destinations covered by a single route. Organizations
   whose addresses are allocated based on the "address
   ownership" policy (and thus may not be suitable for
   aggregation) should be prepared to  absorb the cost
   completely on their own.


   Observe that neither the "address ownership," nor the
   "address lending" policy, by itself, is sufficient to
   guarantee Internet-wide IP connectivity.  Therefore, we
   recommend that sites with addresses allocated based on
   either policy should consult their providers about the
   reachability scope that could be achieved with these
   addresses, and associated costs that result from using
   these addresses.

   If an organization doesn't require Internet-wide IP
   connectivity, then address allocation for the
   organization could be done based on the "address
   ownership" policy.  Here, the organization may still
   maintain limited IP connectivity (e.g., with all the
   subscribers of its direct provider) by limiting the
   distribution scope of its routing information to its
   direct provider.  Connectivity to the rest of the
   Internet can be handled by mediating gateways (e.g.,
   application layer gateways, Network Address Translators
   (NATs)). Note that use of mediating gateways eliminates
   the need for renumbering, and avoids burdening the
   Internet routing system with non-aggregatable addressing
   information.

   Both renumbering (due to the "address lending" policy),
   and non-aggregated routing information (due to the
   "address ownership" policy), and the use of mediating
   gateways result in some costs.  Therefore, an
   organization needs to analyze its own connectivity
   requirements carefully and compare the tradeoffs
   associated with addresses acquired via either policy vs.
   having connectivity via mediating gateways (possibly
   augmented by limited IP connectivity) using addresses
   acquired via "address ownership."  To reduce the cost of
   renumbering, organizations should be strongly encouraged
   to deploy tools that simplify renumbering (e.g., Dynamic
   Host Configuration Protocol [RFC 1541]). Use of the DNS
   should be strongly encouraged.





Expiration Date May 1996                                       [Page 10]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


6 Summary


   Any address allocation and management policy for IP
   addresses used for Internet connectivity must take into
   account its impact on the scalability of the Public
   Internet routing system.  Among all of the possible
   address allocation and management policies only the ones
   that yield a scalable routing system are feasible.  All
   other policies are self-destructive in nature, as they
   lead to a collapse of the Internet routing system, and
   therefore to the fragmentation (partitioning) of the
   Public Internet.


   Within the context of the current Public Internet,
   address allocation and management policies that assume
   unrestricted address ownership have an extremely negative
   impact on the scalability of the Internet routing system.
   Such policies are almost certain to exhaust the
   scalability of the Internet routing system well before we
   approach the exhaustion of the IPv4 address space and
   before we can make effective use the IPv6 address space.
   Given the Internet's growth rate and current technology
   or any foreseeable technology,  the notion that everyone
   can own address space and receive Internet-wide routing
   services, despite where they connect to the Internet, is
   technically infeasible.  Therefore, this document makes
   two recommendations.  First, the "address lending" policy
   should be formally added to the set of address allocation
   policies in the Public Internet. Second, this policy
   should be used to deliver routing services to
   organizations that do not provide a sufficient degree of
   routing information aggregation.



   Since the current IPv6 address allocation architecture is
   based on CIDR, recommendations presented in this document
   apply to IPv6 address allocation and management policies
   as well.


7 Security Considerations



   Security issues are not discussed in this document.









Expiration Date May 1996                                       [Page 11]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


8 Acknowledgments



   This document borrows heavily from various postings on
   various mailing lists. Special thanks to Noel Chiappa,
   Dennis Ferguson, Eric Fleischman, Geoff Huston, and Jon
   Postel whose postings were used in this document.

   Many thanks to Scott Bradner, Randy Bush, Brian
   Carpenter, Noel Chiappa, David Conrad, John Curran, Sean
   Doran, Robert Elz, Dorian Kim, Thomas Narten, Andrew
   Partan, Dave Piscitello, Simon Poole, Curtis Villamizar,
   and Nicolas Williams for their review, comments, and
   contributions to this document.

   Finally, we like to thank all the members of the CIDR
   Working Group for their review and comments.


9 References




   [Kleinrock 77] Kleinrock, L., Farouk, K., "Hierarchical
   Routing for Large Networks," Computer Networks 1 (1977),
   North-Holland Publishing Company.

   [Partan 95] Partan, A., private communications, October
   1995.

   [RFC 1541] Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration
   Protocol".

   [RFC 1519] V. Fuller, T. Li, J. Yu, K. Varadhan,
   "Classless Inter- Domain Routing (CIDR): an Address
   Assignment and Aggregation Strategy".

   [RFC 1518] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, "An Architecture for IP
   Address Allocation with CIDR".

   [Villamizar 95] Villamizar, C., private communications,
   October 1995.



10 Authors' Addresses



   Yakov Rekhter
   cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Dr.



Expiration Date May 1996                                       [Page 12]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   San Jose, CA 95134
   Phone: (914) 528-0090
   email: yakov@cisco.com

   Tony Li
   cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134
   Phone: (408) 526-8186
   email: tli@cisco.com















































Expiration Date May 1996                                       [Page 13]


