


Network Working Group                                           K. Drage
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Expires: January 8, 2009                                    July 7, 2008


Suggested process changes for handling new SIP headers and SIP responses
                 draft-drage-rai-sip-header-process-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009.



















Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


Abstract

   RFC 3427 currently defines the process for defining and registering
   new SIP header fields.  This document proposes that prefixs to header
   field names should be discontinued, and that an additional category
   of experimental header field should be created.  This document also
   relaxes the requirement that response codes are defined by standards
   track RFCs, also allowing them to be defined by experimental RFCs.











































Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


1.  Introduction

   RFC 3427 [RFC3427] defines the process for defining and registering
   new SIP header fields.  RFC 3427 identifies two types of header
   fields.  The first category is that of a "full" header.  These are
   defined by a standards track RFC by the SIP working group.  The
   second category is the "preliminary", "private" or "proprietary"
   header.  These are normally defined by an informational RFC
   (frequently AD sponsored), and carry the prefix "P-".

   RFC 3427 [RFC3427] is currently being revised due to changes in the
   structure of the IETF WG and areas, and the revision exists as
   draft-peterson-rai-rfc3427bis [rfc3427bis].

   A previous chartered item in the SIP WG pertaining to the definition
   of end-to-middle security draft-ietf-sip-e2m-sec [sip-e2m-sec] was
   unable to proceed through IESG as the contents were not yet regarded
   as fit for standards track, but this document could have
   appropriately proceeded as experimental.  However the document
   defined new headers and new response codes, both of which required a
   standards track RFC for conformance with the provisions of RFC 3427
   [RFC3427].  At the time there seemed to be widespread agreement that
   this was an inappropriate restriction, and draft-ietf-sip-e2m-sec
   [sip-e2m-sec] had consensus in the SIP WG to proceed as experimental.

   This also raises the issue that once a new header is approved, and
   presumably implementations exist to that header, then there might
   need to be change of category of that header, e.g. "private" to
   standards track or "experimental" to standards track.  Currently such
   a change would mean that the header name itself would change, and
   therefore all current implementations would become invalid.  There is
   no technical requirement that the header name should have such a
   prefix, except to distinguish the header as one of a special class.
   All SIP headers still require an IANA registration, and the IANA
   registration itself can be used to appropriately distinguish the
   class.

   This document proposes that the rules regarding header fields and
   their registration are amended to allow such cases to be dealt with.












Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


2.  Proposals

2.1.  Experimental headers

   It is proposed to create a new class of "experimental" header.  The
   process to be followed for these is identical to those for "full"
   headers, with the exception that such headers are defined by an RFC
   with the designation of "experimental", see RFC 2026 [RFC2026].

   As a result of this proposed change, this essentially covers the
   category of "preliminary" covered by the original "P-" header
   designation, and therefore these headers should only be described as
   "private" or "proprietary".

2.2.  Removal of prefixes

   In order to allow the flexibility to change the categorisation of
   headers, it is proposed to remove the requirement for a prefix.
   Therefore new "private" or "proprietary" headers no longer need
   comment with "P-" and the new category created above will not have
   the prefix "X-".

   Determination of which category a header is classed as will be
   represented by a new column in the IANA registration.

2.3.  Definition of response codes

   This document proposes to relax the requirement that response codes
   are defined by standards track RFCs; the document proposes that
   response codes can also be defined by experimental RFCs.





















Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


3.  Detailed changes to "Change process for the Session Initiation
    Protocol (SIP)"

   Changes in this section are detailed against
   draft-peterson-rai-rfc3427bis [rfc3427bis].  Changes to the IANA
   registry are defined in the IANA considerations section of this
   document.

   References throughout the document to "P-" header should be changed
   to "private or proprietary header", unless otherwise amended
   differently in this section.  Any mention of headers at this point
   should not include the word "preliminary", as this function is now
   taken by the experimental headers

   In Section 2.1, 2nd paragraph, modify as follows:

   Documents that must be handled by the SIP working group include new
   SIP methods, new SIP option tags, new response codes and new
   standards track SIP headers.  With the exception of "Private" or
   "Proprietary" headers described in Section 4.1, "Experimental"
   headers described in Section 4.2, and response codes, all SIP
   extensions must be standards track and must be developed in the IETF
   based upon requirements provided by the SIPPING Working Group.
   Response codes must be defined by either a standards track RFC or an
   experimental RFC and developed by the SIP Working Group.

   In Section 4, 3rd paragraph, extend as follows:

   In keeping with the IETF tradition of "running code and rough
   consensus", it is valid to allow for the development of SIP
   extensions that are either not ready for standards track, but might
   be understood for that role after some running code, or are private
   or proprietary in nature, because a characteristic motivating them is
   usage that is known not to fit the Internet architecture for SIP.
   Two mechanisms for such headers are provided: the first is for
   "Private", or "Proprietary" headers; the second is for "Experimental"
   headers.

   In Section 4.1, remove the following text: "Any implementation of a
   "P-" header (meaning "not specified by a standards-track RFC issued
   through the SIP Working Group") MUST include a "P-" prefix on the
   header, as in "P-Headername"."

   Create a new Section 4.2 as with the title "Indicating an
   Experimental Header" with the following contents:

   Experimental SIP Headers can be registered if all of the following
   conditions are met:



Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


   1.  The document is progressed by the SIP WG and submitted as an
       experimental RFC.

   2.  The proposed extension MUST NOT define SIP option tags, response
       codes, or methods.

   3.  The function of the proposed header MUST NOT overlap with current
       or planned chartered extensions.

   4.  The proposed header MUST NOT undermine SIP security in any sense.
       The Internet Draft proposing the new header MUST address security
       issues in detail as if it were a Standards Track document.  Note
       that, if the intended application scenario makes certain
       assumptions regarding security, the security considerations only
       need to meet the intended application scenario rather than the
       general Internet case.  In any case, security issues need to be
       discussed for arbitrary usage scenarios (including the general
       Internet case).

   5.  The registration process for proposed headers is "RFC Required"
       per RFC2434bis.

   6.  An applicability statement in the Experimental RFC MUST clearly
       document the useful scope of the proposal, and explain its
       limitations and why it is not suitable for the general use of SIP
       in the Internet.

   Renumber existing Section 4.2 as Section 4.3, and existing Section
   4.3 as Section 4.4.






















Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


4.  Security considerations

   There are no security considerations relating to this document.
















































Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


5.  IANA considerations

   Section 6 of draft-peterson-rai-rfc3427bis [rfc3427bis] is revised as
   follows:

   RFC 3261 [3] directs the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
   to establish a registry for SIP method names, a registry for SIP
   option tags, and a registry for SIP response codes, and to amend the
   practices used for the existing registry for SIP headers.
   Reiterating the guidance of RFC3261, method names, option tags and
   SIP response codes require a Standards Action for inclusion in the
   IANA registry, and entries go into these registries only through
   RFC2434bis Standards Action, with the following exceptions:

   1.  Proprietary or private headers, as stated previously
       registrations require RFC2434bis IETF Review.  The IESG
       announcement of approval authorizes IANA to make the
       registration.

   2.  Experimental headers, as stated previously registrations require
       creation of an experimental RFC.  The IESG announcement of
       approval authorizes IANA to make the registration.

   3.  For response codes, as stated previously registrations require
       either an RFC2434bis Standards Action or creation of an
       experimental RFC.  The IESG announcement of approval authorizes
       IANA to make the registration.

   This document requires that a new column is added to the SIP Header
   Fields registry with the heading of "Type".  Entries in this column
   can take one of three values: "full", "private", or "experimental".
   All existing headers with the first two characters of "P-" should
   have an entry "private" included in this column".  All other existing
   headers should have an entry "full" included in this column.  Future
   RFCs defining SIP headers MUST include in the IANA considerations
   section details of the appropriate entry to place in this column,
   i.e.  Private or Proprietary headers should include "private in this
   column, and "Experimental" headers should include "experimental" in
   this column.  Headers defined by standards track RFCs should include
   "full" in this column.

   Each RFC shall include an IANA Considerations section which directs
   IANA to create appropriate registrations.  Registration shall be done
   at the time the IESG announces its approval of the draft containing
   the registration requests.

   Standard headers and messages MUST NOT begin with the leading
   characters "P-".  This is to preclude confusion with previous



Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


   registrations of proprietary or private headers.

   Short forms of headers MUST only be assigned to standards track
   headers.  In other words, private, proprietary or experimental
   headers MUST NOT have short forms.

   Similarly, RFC 3265 [6] directs the IANA to establish a registry for
   SIP event packages and SIP event template packages.  For event
   template packages, registrations must follow the RFC2434bis processes
   for Standards Action.  For ordinary event packages, as stated
   previously registrations require RFC2434bis IETF Review.  In either
   case, the IESG announcement of approval authorizes IANA to make the
   registration.






































Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


6.  References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", October 1996.

   [RFC3427]  Mankin, A., "Change Process for the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", December 2002.

   [rfc3427bis]
              Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Change Process for the
              Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). Work in progress",
              February 2008.

   [sip-e2m-sec]
              Ono, K. and S. Tachimoto, "End-to-middle Security in the
              Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). Work in progress",
              February 2008.


































Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


Author's Address

   Keith Drage
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Quadrant, StoneHill Green, Westlea
   Swindon, Wilts
   UK

   Email: drage@alcatel-lucent.com










































Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       SIP header and response process           July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Drage                    Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 12]


