
IETF Mobile IP Working Group                          Charles E. Perkins
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     Nokia Research Center
                                                              5 Apr 2003


         Preconfigured Binding Management Keys for Mobile IPv6
               <draft-perkins-mobileip-precfg-kbm-00.txt>


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note
   that other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents, valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   A mobile node and a correspondent node may preconfigure a Binding
   Management Key for authorizing Binding Updates.






















Perkins                   Expires 5 Oct 2003                    [Page i]

INTERNET-DRAFT               Preconfigured Kbm                5 Apr 2003


1. Preconfiguring a Binding Management Key (Kbm)

   A mobile node and a correspondent node may preconfigure a Binding
   Management Key (Kbm) for authorizing binding management messages,
   especially Binding Update and Binding Acknowledgement messages.  The
   key MUST be the same length as that configured using inputs from
   Mobile IPv6 [1] return routability.

   When a Binding Update is to be authenticated using such a
   preconfigured binding key (Kbm), the Binding Authorization Data
   suboption MUST be present.  The Nonce Indices option SHOULD NOT
   be present.  If it is present, the nonce indices supplied MAY be
   ignored and are not included as part of the calculation for the
   authentication data, which is to be carried exactly as specified
   in [1].


2. Security Considerations

   A correspondent node and a mobile node MAY use a preconfigured
   binding management key (Kbm) to manage the authentication
   requirements for binding cache management messages.  Such keys must
   be handled carefully to avoid inadvertent exposure to the threats
   outlined in [2].

   A mobile node MUST use a different binding management key (Kbm)
   for each node in its Binding Update List.  This ensures that the
   sender of a Binding Update can always be uniquely determined.  This
   is necessary, as this authorization method does not provide any
   guarantee that the given care-of address is legitimate.  For the same
   reason, this method SHOULD only be applied between nodes that are
   under the same administration.  The return routability procedure is
   RECOMMENDED for all general use and MUST be the default, unless the
   user explicitly overrides this by entering a key for a particular
   peer.

   Replay protection for the Binding Authorization Data option
   authentication mechanism is provided by the Sequence Number field
   of the Binding Update.  This method of providing replay protection
   fails when the Binding Update sequence numbers cycle through the
   16 bit counter (i.e., not more than 65,536 distinct uses of Kbm),
   or if the sequence numbers are not protected against reboots.  If
   the mobile node were to move every hour, 24 hours a day, every day
   of the year, this would require changing keys every 7 years.  Even
   if the mobile node were to move every minute, this would provide
   protection for over a month.  Given typical mobility patterns, there
   is little danger of replay problems; nodes for which problems might
   arise are expected to use methods other than manual configuration for
   Kbm anyway.  When the sequence number field rolls over, the parties
   SHOULD configure another value for Kbm.




Perkins                   Expires 5 Oct 2003                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT               Preconfigured Kbm                5 Apr 2003


3. IANA Considerations

   No new protocol numbers are required.


4. Acknowledgement

   Thanks are due to everyone who reviewed the discussion of issue #146.


References

   [1] D. Johnson and C. Perkins.  Mobility support in IPv6 (work in
       progress).  Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force,
       November 2002.

   [2] Tuomas Aura and Jari Arkko.  MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses (work
       in progress).  Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force,
       February 2002.



































Perkins                   Expires 5 Oct 2003                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT               Preconfigured Kbm                5 Apr 2003


Author's Address

   Questions about this document can also be directed to the author:


     Charles E. Perkins
     Nokia Research Center
     313 Fairchild Drive
     Mountain View, CA 94043
     USA

     Phone:  +1 650 625-2986
     Fax:  +1 650 625-2502
     E-mail:  charliep@iprg.nokia.com








































Perkins                   Expires 5 Oct 2003                    [Page 3]
