<REM>                               	        Vivekananda Katakam
Internet-Draft					May 8, 2020
Intended Status: Informational                           Expires: 31 October 2020
                 REM Remote Electron Microscopy
                     draft-katakam-rem-00
           Compute Resources for Remote Electron Microscopy		   Abstract
This RFC document envisages the need and necessity in utilizing or
extending the compute resource technologies in such as networking(NW),
remote computing(RC),cloud computing(CC),distributed computing(DC),
Machine Learning(ML) and other related fields of AI to the biological
field of electron microscopy(EC) for use in rapid and timely
identification or diagnosis of virological/bacterial elements in
clinical samples in the current world scenario, within the given
time frame irrespective of the place of origin and with having
geographical presence.Electron microscopy (EM) is a pioneering methodology used in
identification and diagnosing of viral and microbiological elements.
It is able to identify in morphological form the tiniest of the
viruses in minimum amount of time by clinical scientists.Status of This Memo
This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet EngineeringTask Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute workingdocuments as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts isat http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.	Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Draftsas reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."	Copyright Notice	Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document authors. All rights reserved.	This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's LegalProvisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date ofpublication of this document. Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text as describedin Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are providedwithout warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.
Problem Statement
In the current world scenario, rapid diagnosis and effective
identification of clinical samples, especially in identification of 
virological elements, has become a challenge due to various factors 
such as lack of equipment, instruments, infrastructure, expertise,
scientific know-how, experienced staff along with other factors 
such as time factor, cost factor, diagnostic reports being error 
prone and above all lack of such facilities in almost all developing 
countries.
Expected Solution
In the proposed solution, we have local screening center fully 
connected remotely using networking and remote computing technologies
with the remote center. The remote screening center (RSC) is fully 
equipped with Electron microscopy and expert staff who will be able 
to view and analyze the images of the clinical samples remotely and
provide the diagnostic results to the local screening center (LSC) 
within the given time frame. The remote screening center may be 
optionally having advanced compute facilities such as distributed
computing (DC), Machine Learning (ML) Image Recognition (IR) and
other related fields of AI. In this scenario, one or more local
screening centers can be connected to one or more Remote Screeningcenters depending on the usage.
Terminology
EM - Electron Microscopy, AI - Artificial Intelligence,
ML - Machine Learning, DC - Distributed computing,
RC - Remote Computing, LC - Local screening Centers,
RSC - Remote screening Centers,Image Recognition(IR),Networking (NW)
ReferencesInformative References
1.J Schramlova, Dagmar Hulínska and Simona Arientova: The Role of
Electron Microscopy in the Rapid Diagnosis of Viral Infections-Review
2.Cynthia S. Goldsmith, Sara E. Miller - Modern Uses of Electron
Microscopy for Detection of Viruses

Author's Address
Vivekananda Katakam
Plot No. 14, SRNagar,
Hyderabad-500038
India
Email : vivek1717@gmail.com
Cell : +91 9885696770
