


CCAMP working Group                                           W. Imajuku
Internet-Draft                                                       NTT
Proposed Status: Standards Track                             　 T. Otani
Expires: April 23, 2007                                　 KDDI R&D Labs.
                             　　                                Y. Sone
                                                             Y.Sameshima
                                                                     NTT
                                                         October 23 2006


               Requirements for Inter-Domain LSP Recovery
           draft-imajuku-ccamp-inter-domain-recovery-req-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes

   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 23, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The Generalized MPLS(GMPLS) suite of protocols h
as been defined
   the protection and restoration mechanisms of Label Switched
   Paths (LSPs) to realize the highly resilient and reliable networks.

   The objective of this document is to extract additional requirements
   for the signaling mechanisms in order to extend the applicability of
   the protection and restoration mechanisms for inter-domain LSPs.

Imajuku, et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 1]

 

draft-imajuku-ccamp-inter-domain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Contributors   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Document Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Conventions used in this document. . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Note to Recovery Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  End-to-End Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  MPLS Fast Re-Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Segment Recovery   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Recovery Schemes for inter-domain LSP  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Inter-domain End-to-End Recovery   . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Per-Domain Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Inter-domain Link Failure Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Domain Border Node Failure Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.5.  Comments on Described Recovery   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Problem Statements and Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Per-domain Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Inter-domain Link Failure Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Domain Border Node Failure Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1
   6.  Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     8.1.  Normative references   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     8.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10.  Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15


1.  Contributors

   Tomonori Takeda
   NTT Network Service System Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585
   Japan
   E-mail: takeda.tomonori@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Eiji Oki
   NTT Network Service System Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585
   Japan
   E-mail: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Kenichi Ogaki 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara Fujimino 
   Saitama, 356-8502
   Japan

Imajuku, et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 2]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-reco
very-req-01.txt          October 2006


   Email:  ogaki@kddilabs.jp

   Shuichi Okamoto 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara Fujimino 
   Saitama, 356-8502
   Japan
   Email:  okamoto@jgn2.jp

   Atsushi Taniguchi
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan
   E-mail: taniguchi.astushi@lab.ntt.co.jp


2.  Introduction

   CCAMP WG has so far proposed two kinds of GMPLS based recovery
   mechanisms, end-to-end recovery [e2e-recovery] and segment recovery
   [seg-recovery]. These proposals can provide a promising solution to
   enhancing the resiliency and the reliability of networks and they 
   represent a key motivation toward deploying GMPLS controlled networks.

   Recently, activities in many international R&E test-beds require the
   standardization of inter-domain GMPLS frameworks, and these
   opportunities for experimentation are expected to provide a promising

   indication to the deployment of future commercialized inter-domain
   GMPLS networks as observed in the historical evolution of the Internet.
   In addition, initiation of the standardization process in the L1-VPN
   framework [L1VPN-FW] requires the inter-domain GMPLS signaling
   architecture for a special case of multi-domain networks.

   The objective of this document is to extract additional requirements
   for the signaling mechanisms in order to extend the applicability of
   the protection and restoration mechanisms for inter-domain TE Label
   Switched Paths (LSPs).

2.1 Document Scope

   In particular, this document focuses on the GMPLS signaling mechanism
   to simplify the problems mentioned above, although a mixed strategy of
   routing and signaling is essential. Alternatively, this version of the
   document extracts the requirements for GMPLS signaling functionality
   for not only the end-to-end recovery strategy, but also seg
ment
   recovery. 

   Therefore, those who wish to consider routing extensions applicable
   to an inter-domain framework should refer to other documents such as
   [RFC4105], [RFC4216], [RFC PCE-Arch], [brpc], and [GMPLS-AS]. Note

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 3]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   that there is a comprehensive study on inter-domain TE LSP recovery
   considering both existing GMPLS routing and signaling [id-recov-anl].

   The scope of this document does not include a nested domain
   conforming to [inter-domain-frwk]. 

2.2 Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

2.3 Terminology

   Terminology frequently used in this docume
nt conforms to the
   definitions in [RFC4427], [inter-domain-frwk], [inter-domain-rsvp],
   and so on. However, terminology concerning MPLS Fast Reroute
   (MPLS FRR) defined in [RFC4090] is updated to GMPLS terminology for
   segment recovery in [seg-recovery]. 

   Branch node: The head-end node of a recovery LSP 

   Domain: A domain is considered to be any collection of network
     elements within a common sphere of address management or path
     computational responsibility.

   Domain border node: A Label Switching Router at the domain boundary. 
     Specifically, a domain border node is the border of an AS.
     The node terminates an inter-domain link connected to a peer AS
     border node. 

   ERO: Explicit Route Object

   FA: Forwarding Adjacency

   FA-LSP: Forwarding Adjacency LSP

   Inter-domain TE LSP: An LSP that is established across multiple
     domains. 

   LSP: Label Switched Path. Note that the term LSP and TE LSP will
     be used interchangeably.

   LSP segment: Label Switched Path segment stitched to inter-domain
     LSPs See [LSP-stitch].

   Merge node: The tail-end of a re
covery LSP 

   NHOP recovery LSP: Next-Hop recovery LSP. A backup LSP that bypasses

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 4]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


     a single link of the working LSP. 

   NNHOP recovery LSP: Next-Next-Hop recovery Tunnel. A backup LSP that
     bypasses a single node of the working LSP. 

   Recovery LSP: See [RFC4427]. The recovery LSP transports normal user
     traffic when the working LSP fails. The recovery LSP may transport
     user traffic even when the working LSP is transporting normal user
     traffic, e.g., 1+1 protection. In such a scenario, the recovery LSP
     is sometimes referred to as a protection LSP. 

   RRO - Record Route Object

   TE: Traffic Engineering

   TE-link: Traffic Engineering link

   Working LSP: See [RFC4427]. A working LSP transports normal user
     traffic.

   One main issue in this do
cument focuses on the signaling method for
   inter-domain TE-LSPs. Therefore, the reader should be particularly
   familiar with the terminology defined in [inter-domain-frwk]. 

   Contiguous TE LSP: This is a single end-to-end TE LSP that is setup
     across multiple domains using RSVP-TE signaling procedures described
     in [RFC3473]. No additional TE LSPs are required to signal a
     contiguous TE LSP and the same RSVP-TE information for the TE LSP
     is maintained along the entire LSP path. 

   Nested TE LSP: Nesting one or more TE LSPs into another TE LSP is
     described in [RFC4206]. This technique can also be used to nest one
     or more inter-domain TE LSPs into an intra-domain FA-LSP. While
     similar to stitching in the control plane, in the data plane,
     nesting allows for one or more inter-domain LSPs to be transported
     over a single intra-domain FA-LSP using the label stacking
     construct.

   Stitched TE LSP: 
The concept of LSP stitching as well as the required
      signaling procedures are described in [LSP-stitch]. This technique
      can be used to stitch an inter-domain TE LSP to an intra-domain LSP
      segment. An inter-domain stitched TE LSP is a TE LSP comprising
      different TE LSP segments within each domain that are "stitched"
      together in the data plane so that an end-to-end LSP is achieved
      in the data plane. In the control plane, however, different LSP
      segments are signaled as distinct RSVP sessions, which are
      independent from the RSVP session for the inter-domain LSP.




Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 5]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


3.  Note to Recovery Schemes

3.1.  End-to-End Recovery 

   The end-to-end recovery scheme is described in [e2e-recovery]. This
   scheme achieves end-to-end protection and restoration. 
This document
   extends the Protection Object [RFC3471] and defines how to control
   the S/P/N/O bit in this object. 

   LSP Flags assign the recovery type such as 1+1/1:1 protection, 1:n
   protection, Re-routing without Extra-Traffic (pre-planed rerouting),
   and Full re-routing. 

   Link Flags assign the desired link protection type used for TE-LSP.
   The nested or stitched inter-domain TE LSP assigns the recovery type
   of the FA-LSP or LSP segment by using these flags.  

3.2.  MPLS Fast Reroute (MPLS FRR)

   MPLS Fast Reroute (MPLS FRR) provides a form of segment recovery
   for packet MPLS-TE networks. Two methods of MPLS FRR are defined 
   in [RFC4090]. The one-to-one backup method creates detour LSPs for
   each protected LSP at each potential point of local repair.
   The facility backup method creates a bypass tunnel to protect a
   potential failure point which is shared by multiple LSPs and uses
   label stacking.

   Neither approach supports the full set of recovery types supported
   by the End-to-End recovery. Additionally, the facility backup method
   is not applicable to most non-PSC (pack
et) switching technologies.

3.3.  Segment Recovery

   The segment recovery scheme is described in [seg-recovery]. The basic
   concept of the segment recovery is compatible with the MPLS FRR. This
   scheme achieves protection and restoration over a portion of the
   end-to-end TE LSP even for non-PSC switching technologies. In each
   portion of the segment recovery, the usage of the S/P/N/O bit and LSP
   flags is the same as that in the end-to-end recovery. 

   The segment recovery scheme provides both dynamic and static
   assignment of branch and merge nodes to create recovery LSPs. The
   non-zero value of the Segment Recovery Flag in the Protection Object
   indicates the dynamic assignment of the branch and merge nodes. On the
   other hand, an upstream node can identify the branch and merge nodes
   of the recovery LSPs by using the Secondary ERO (SERO). 

   In addition, the segment recovery scheme further extends a new control
    b
it, i.e., I/R bit, in the Protection Object.


Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 6]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   The I bit indicates that the desired segment recovery type indicated
   in the LSP Segment Recovery Flag is already in place for the
   associated LSP.

   The R bit indicates that a failure to establish the indicated
   protection should result in a failure of the LSP being protected. 

   Considering the confidentiality of the routing information within
   domains, segment recovery for inter-domain TE LSPs dynamically assigns
   branch and merge nodes of the recovery LSPs. In many cases, the branch
   and merge nodes of the recovery LSPs coincide with the domain border
   nodes. 

   Here, note that segment recovery does not mean the recovery of an LSP
   segment.


4.  Recovery Schemes for inter-domain TE LSPs

   This section categorize
s the recovery schemes for inter-domain TE LSPs
   considering failure scenarios. The failure scenarios for inter-domain
   TE LSPs are categorized as follows. The first one is a node or link
   failure within a domain. The second one is a failure of a domain
   boundary link, and the last one is a failure of a domain boundary node.
   This document considers four recovery schemes. 

   (1) Inter-domain end-to-end recovery
     End-to-end recovery performed irrespective of the failure scenario. 

   (2) Per-domain recovery
     Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios within a domain
     except for the failure of a domain border node. 

   (3) Inter-domain link failure recovery
     Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios at domain boundary
     links.

   (4) Domain border node failure recovery 
     Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios at domain boundary
     nodes.

   Here, the term "sub-path recovery" is u
sed so as not to limit the
   recovery scheme such as segment recovery. This section explains the
   recovery schemes based on the figure below. For the purpose of
   consistency, this figure is taken from [inter-domain-rsvp].






Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 7]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


      :<----- AS-1 ----->:<------ AS-2 ------->:<--- AS-3 ---->:
      :                  :                     :               :
  CE1-----R0----X1-ASBR1-----ASBR4--R3---ASBR7----ASBR9-----R6 :
      :   | |   |   |    :  /  |  / |   / |    :     |      |  :
      :   | |   +-ASBR2----/ ASBR5  |  /  |    :     |      |  :
      :   | |       |    :     |    | /   |    :     |      |  :
      : R1--R2----ASBR3------ASBR6--R4---ASBR8----ASBR10----R7---CE2
      :                  :                     :               :
      :  <================ Inter-AS TE LSP ================>   :

4.1 Inter-Domain End-to-End Recovery

   Inter-domain LSPs can be protected using end-to-end recovery
   irrespective of the failure scenario. In this recov
ery mode, the
   working and protection LSPs are created based on the results of diverse
   path route computation. In this example, working and protection LSPs,
   R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7 and R0-R2-ASBR3-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-
   ASBR10-R7, respectively, are created. The diversity may be nodal, SRLG,
   or AS diverse. The path computation strategy may be a per-domain hop
   calculation with the subsequent use of a stand-alone Path Computation 
   Elements (PCEs) or per-domain hop calculation [per-domain-calc] with
   the cooperation of multiple PCEs located in each domain.

   The important point within the scope of this document is the Link
   Flags in the Protection Object. The Link Flag values except 0x01
   (Extra Traffic) or 0x02 (Unprotected) result in the assignment of
   per-domain recovery in each domain.

4.2 Per-Domain Recovery

   This document defines the recovery scheme for the node and/or link
   failure within a domain as 
"per-domain recovery." In this example, a
   working LSP, R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7, is created and
   recovery LSPs in AS1, AS2, and AS3, R0-R2-ASBR3- ASBR2-ASBR1, 
   ASBR4-ASBR5-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-ASBR7, and ASBR9-ASBR10-R7, respectively,
   can be created. The per-domain recovery can employ mainly two kinds
   of techniques corresponding to the signaling methods in each domain. 

   If the domain employs the contiguous signaling method, the domain
   boundary nodes perform segment recovery. Namely, the domain boundary
   nodes may act as branch/merge nodes that terminate the recovery LSPs
   in each domain. For this case, the Protection Object of the inter-domain
   LSP contains the non-zero Segment Recovery Flags. The non-zero value of
   the segment recovery flag represents the dynamic identification of the
   branch and merge nodes on a per-domain basis. Thus, the branch or merge
    nodes are selected based on the local policy in each
 domain.

   On the contrary, the upstream node of the inter-domain LSPs may assign
   the recovery type by using the Protection Sub-Object in the SERO.
   In such a case, the processing of the SERO in the domain boundary node

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 8]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   becomes the issue, if the network operator of the domain has a local
   policy that conflicts with the Segment Recovery Flags in the Protection
   Sub-Object in the SERO.

   If the domain employs the Nesting or Stitching LSP method, and the
   Link Type Flag in the Protection Object of the inter-domain LSPs
   assigns a value except 0x01 (Extra Traffic) or 0x02 (Unprotected),
   the domain boundary node may perform end-to-end recovery for the
   FA-LSP or the LSP segment which accommodates the inter-domain LSP.
   The selection of the FA-LSP and the LSP segment is perf
ormed based
   on the local policy with the consideration of the Link Type Flag.

   Although there is a minor issue resulting from the discrepancy of the
   defined value between the Link Flag and LSP Flag in the selection
   process of the LSP Flag value of the FA-LSP from the Link Flag value
   of the inter-domain LSP, it is obvious that each domain is required to
   select higher reliability class of FA-LSPs to accommodate the inter-
   domain LSPs. 

   Similarly, the LSP Flags in the Protection Object of the FA-LSP or
   segment LSP are dynamically set to a higher value than the Link Type
   Flag in the Protection Object of the inter-domain LSP, if the FA-LSP
   or LSP segment are dynamically created following the arrival of the
   PATH message of the inter-domain LSP. 

   The advantage of “Nesting and Stitching” from the signaling aspect is
   the ease in achieving control confidentiality for the inter-domain
   TE LSP, since the switching operation of inter-domain TE LSP can be
   achieved by controlling the FA-LSP or LSP segment.


4.3 Inter-Domain Link Failure Recovery

   This document define
s the recovery scheme for the link failure between
   a pair of domain boundary nodes as "inter-domain link failure recovery."
   In this example, a working LSP, R0-X1- ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7,
   is created and recovery LSPs between AS1 and AS2, and between AS2 and
   AS3, ASBR1-ASBR2-ASBR4 and ASBR7-ASBR8-ASBR10-ASBR9, respectively, can
   be created. In addition, the creation of a NHOP recovery LSP may be
   required if there are multiple links between pairs of domain border
   nodes. Inter-domain link recovery can employ all three signaling schemes
   as discussed in Section 4.2. However, the advantage of the stitching LSP
   described in the previous section diminishes in this case.

4.4 Domain Border Node Failure Recovery

   This document defines the recovery scheme for the nodal failure of
   domain boundary nodes as "Domain border node recovery." In this
   example, a working LSP, R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7- ASBR9-R6-R7,
   is crea
ted and recovery LSPs between AS1 and AS2, and between AS2 and

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 9]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   AS3, X1-ASBR1-ASBR2-ASBR3-ASBR6-ASBR5-R3 and R3-ASBR8-ASBR10-R7,
   respectively, can be created. Inter-domain link recovery can employ
   all three signaling schemes as discussed in Section 4.2. Likewise,
   as in the previous section, the advantage of the stitching LSP
   diminishes in this case.

4.5 Comments on Described Recovery

   The recovery of the domain border link failure recovery and the domain
   border node failure recovery may be degenerated as the result of a
   topological constraint around the pair of border nodes. There is no
   guarantee that a separate route of the recovery LSPs will be
   established for the domain border link failure recovery and the domain
   border node failure recovery LSPs.


5.  Pro
blem Statements and Requirements

5.1 Problem Statements and Requirements for Per-Domain Recovery

   Problem statements:
   The signaling method is basically selected on a domain-to-domain basis
   following the policy of LSP and its management architecture in each
   domain. It seems trivial, but a difference in the LSP architecture
   results in a difference in the functional design and database in the
   network management system in each domain. Therefore, the inter-domain
   TE LSP should secure the independency of the signaling method.

   The selection of contiguous, nesting, and stitching is determined by
   the domain border node at the upstream side of each domain. The
   discussion regarding the setting scheme of the signaling method is
   outside the scope of this document. However, there is one
   consideration in the case that per-domain recovery is performed. 

   As described in Section 4.2, the creation of a recovery LSP in each

   domain is performed following the Segment Recovery Flag or Link Flag
   in the Protection Object of the inter-domain TE LSPs. Here, one
   problem arises when the inter-domain TE LSP traverses domains
   employing the contiguous and the nesting/stitching signaling methods.
   For example, if both Segment Recovery Flags and Link Flags select 0x10
   (1+1 Bi-directional Protection/Dedicated 1+1), some domains may try to
   create four LSPs (two pairs of LSP segments with 1+1 Bi-directional
   Protection) against the intension of an operator who tries to create
   an inter-domain TE LSP.

   Requirements:
   The extension of a control bit can be a solution to this problem,
   and this extension will indicate the selection of one flag out of
   Segment Recovery Flags and Link Flags. This indication enables
   successful selection of the proper recovery type for the inter-domain

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 10]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   LSP without any constraint in selecting the signaling method in each
   domain.

5.2 Problem Stateme
nts and Requirements for Inter-Domain Link
 Failure Recovery

   Problem statements:
   The probability of link failure becomes trivial when a pair of border
   nodes is co-located in the same housing space or building as in many
   cases. In such a case, it is useful to secure arbitrariness in
   establishing the recovery LSPs for the inter-domain links because it
   will help to avoid excess consumption of network resources within
   both domains.

   In addition, the introduction of a new procedure helps to reduce the
   amount of required network resources. For example, let us consider
   the case of network AS1, AS2, and AS3 comprising Lambda Switch
   Capable (LSC) and the inter-domain links such as link ASBR7-ASBR9 and
   link ASBR8-ASBR10 as bundled TE links. In such a case, a lambda
   inter-domain TE LSP can be recovered within each bundled domain
   border TE link for the scenario of a one-component link failure,
   if these TE links co
ntain shared back-up component links. The
   introduction of such a recovery technique greatly reduces the
   complexity of network design issues for network operators. 

   Requirements:
   For the first problem statement, a possible solution is the addition
   of a new control bit in the Protection Object which indicates the
   necessity of the inter-domain link failure recovery similar to the
   R bit defined in Section [seg-recovery]. 

   For the second problem statement, Sub-Network Connection Protection
   (SNCP) can be a solution. However, the introduction of the SNCP into
   GMPLS signaling mechanism provides a more generic solution to achieve
   SNCP switchover. The GMPLS based solution can achieve equivalent
   operation to the SNCP even if the domain border nodes have different
   switching capabilities.

5.3 Problem Statements and Requirements for Domain Border Node Failure
 Recovery

   Problem statements:
   The problem that aris
es in the domain border node failure recovery
   is similar to the first problem statement of the inter-domain link
   failure recovery. It is useful to secure arbitrariness in establishing
   the recovery LSPs for the domain border node failure recovery because
   it will help to avoid excess consumption of network resources within
   both domains.

   The second problem pertains to the functionality of the I bit which

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 11]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   aids in the understanding of the status of whether the recovery LSP
   is in-place or not at the downstream side of the inter-domain TE LSPs.
   However, the use of the I bit cannot provide sufficient information
   to the downstream side of the inter-domain TE LSPs regarding whether
   or not the recovery LSP for the domain border node failure is in-place.
   Let us consider 
the case of working inter-domain TE LSP, R0-R1-R2-
   ASBR3-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-ASBR10-R7, and the recovery LSP for a node or
   link failure within AS1, R0-X1-ASBR2-ASBR3, based on the segment
   recovery procedure. The in-place bit is set for the working inter-
   domain TE LSP. This may result in no action; nevertheless, R1 or R2 is
   required to create a NNHOP recovery LSP for ASBR3 and/or ASBR4 failure
   scenarios. 

   Requirements:
   For the first problem statement, a possible solution is the same as
   that described in Section 5.2.

   For the second problem statement, a possible solution is the addition
   of a new control bit in the Protection Object which indicates the
   necessity of the inter-domain link failure recovery similar to the I
   bit defined in Section [seg-recovery]. The I bit to understand the
   status of the recovery LSPs for the border node failure is necessary
   in order to discriminate the status of the I bit representing the
   status of the recovery LSPs for the per-domain failure recovery. 

   The above requirements do not require further extension to the GMPLS
   signaling mechanism su
ch as ERO/RRO processing.


6.	Security considerations

   TBD

7.	 IANA considerations

This document requires no further IANA considerations.

8.  References

8.1 Normative References 

   [e2e-recovery]      Lang, J., Rekhter, Y., and Papadimitriou, D.  
                       (Eds.), "RSVP-TE Extensions in support of End-to- 
                       End Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
                       (GMPLS)-based Recovery", 
                       draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-e2e-signaling, 
                       work in progress. 
   
   [seg-recovery]      Berger, L., Bryskin, I., Papadimitriou, D., and 
                       Farrel, A., "GMPLS Based Segment Recovery", 

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 12]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


                       draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-segment-recovery, work in 
            
           progress. 
   
   [L1VPN-FW]          Takeda, T., Editor "Framework and Requirements  
                       for Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks", draft- 
                       ietf-l1vpn-framework, work in progress. 
   
   [inter-domain-fw]   Farrel, A., et al., "A Framework for Inter-Domain 
                       MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp- 
                       inter-domain-framework, work in progress. 
    
   [inter-domain-rsvp] Ayyangar, A., Vasseur, JP. "Inter-domain MPLS  
                       Traffic Engineering - RSVP extensions", draft- 
                       ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te, work in 
                       progress. 

   [RFC4427]           Mannie, E., Ed. and D. Papadimitriou, Ed.,  
                       "Recovery (Protection and Restoration)  
                       Terminology for Generalized Multi-Protocol Label  
                       Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4427, March 2006
. 

   [RFC4090]           Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute 
                       Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,  
                       May 2005. 
    
   [RFC3473]           Berger, L., et al, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                       Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource 
                       ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
                       Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4206]           Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched  
                       Paths (LSP) Hierarchy with Generalized Multi- 
                       Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Traffic  
                       Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005. 

   [RFC3471]           Berger, L., et al, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                       Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional
                       Description", RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [per-domain-calc] 
  Vasseur, J. P., Ayyanger, A., Zhang, R., "A Per-
                       domain path computation method for establishing
                       Inter-domain Traffic Engineering (TE) Label
                       Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 3471, January 2003.

8.2 Informative References 
    
   [RFC2119]           Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to
                       Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
                       March 1997 


Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 13]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   [LSP-stitch]        Ayyangar, A., and Vasseur, JP., "LSP Stitching  
                       with Generalized MPLS TE", draft-ietf-ccamp-lsp- 
                       stitching, work in progress.
    
   [RFC4105]           Le Roux, J.-L. , Vasseur, J.-P., and J. Boyle, 
                       "Requirements for Inter-Area MPLS Traffic  
                       Engineering", RFC 4105, June 2005. 
    
   [RFC4216]           Zhang, R., and Vasseur, J.-P., "MPLS Inter- 
                       Autonomous System
 (AS) Traffic Engineering (TE)  
                       Requirements", RFC 4216, November 2005 

   [PCE-Arch]          A. Farrel, JP. Vasseur and J. Ash, "Path  
                       Computation Element (PCE) Architecture", draft- 
                       ietf-pce-architecture, work in progress. 

   [brpc]              Vasseur, JP., Zhang, R., and Bitar, N., "A  
                       Backward Recursive PCE-based Computation (BRPC)  
                       procedure to compute shortest inter-domain  
                       Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path", draft- 
                       vasseur-ccamp-brpc, work in progress. 

   [GMPLS-AS]          Otani, T., Kumaki, K., and Okamoto, S.,
                       "GMPLS Inter-AS Traffic Engineering Requirements",
                       draft-otani-ccamp-interas-GMPLS-TE,
                       work in progress.
   
   [id-recov-anl]      Takeda, T., Ikejiri, Y., Farrel, A., and Vasseur,

                       J. P., "Analysis of Inter-domain Label Switched
                       Path (LSP) Recovery", draft-takeda-ccamp-inter-
                       domain-recovery-analysis, work in progress.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Dr. Tatsuzo Koga, representative of
   NICT Tsukuba RC for the support of this study.

11. Authors' Addresses

   Wataru Imajuku
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan

   Phone: +81 46 859 4315
   Email: imajuku.wataru@lab.ntt.co. jp

   Tomohiro Otani 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino, Saitama, 356-8502

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 14]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   Japan
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   2-5-5 Azuma, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0031
   Japan

   E
mail:  otani@kddilabs.jp

   Yoshiaki Sone
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan

  Phone: +81 46 859 2456
   Email: sone.yoshiaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Yasunori Sameshima
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   2-5-5 Azuma, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0031
   Japan

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in R
FC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                    [Page 15]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-01.txt          October 2006


   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK 
FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.
































Imajuku et al.        Expires April 23, 2007                  [Page 16]

