


IETF Next Steps in Signaling                                      S. Lee
Working Group                                                    J. Bang
Internet-Draft                                                    B. Lee
Expires: April 19, 2004                                      SAMSUNG AIT
                                                                S. Jeong
                                                                    HUFS
                                                        October 20, 2003



                   Mobility Functions in the QoS-NSLP
                  draft-lee-nsis-mobility-nslp-00.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2004.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   The NSIS working group is standardizing a signaling protocol suite
   with QoS signaling as the first use case. The overall signaling
   protocol suite is decomposed into a generic lower layer with separate
   upper layers for signaling applications. The upper layer protocol,
   called NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol (NSLP), has an end-to-end scope
   and contains application specific functionality. One of the important
   features of an NSLP is mobility support. This document identifies
   desired mobility functions in an NSLP for QoS signaling (QoS-NSLP) in
   the network.




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Route Change and Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Make-before-Break vs. Break-before-Make  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Mobility Event Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Localized Path Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Route Change and Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Support for Reservation Modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Interaction with Mobility Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  QoS Re-establishment Mechanisms in Mobile Scenarios  . . . . . 13
   9.1 Fast QoS Re-establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.2 Fast Release of Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.3 Confirmation/Error Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix. A QoS Pre-establishment Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 22































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



1. Introduction


   The lower layer in the NSIS protocol suite, the NSIS Transport Layer
   Protocol (NTLP) is intended to provide a generally useful transport
   service for such signaling messages. The actual signaling messages
   are in general originated within upper layer signaling applications,
   each having its own NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol (NSLP), and the
   role of the NTLP is primarily just to move these messages around the
   network to the appropriate nodes. The general description of the NSIS
   protocol suite, including its two-layer architecture, can be found in
   [2].


   One of the important features of an NSLP (in particular, an NSLP with
   QoS support) is mobility support. This document describes desired
   mobility functions in an NSLP for QoS signaling (hereafter
   'QoS-NSLP') considering the mobility requirements for future
   signaling protocols. The main objective of the QoS-NSLP is to provide
   resource reservation. In this draft, only mobility-related protocol
   mechanisms of the QoS-NSLP are described, and the mobility
   functionality of the QoS-NSLP is called mQoS-NSLP.


   In high mobility environments, frequent handovers may result in a
   significant degradation of QoS performance if the wireless access
   network is unable to provide enhanced solutions for prompt QoS
   re-establishments. Therefore, one of the key features that should be
   supported in mQoS-NSLP is fast QoS re-establishment. The mQoS-NSLP
   should also support resource reservation in both sender- and
   receiver-oriented modes where a mobile node (MN) could be the sender
   or receiver. Based on these considerations, this document describes
   desired mobility functions for the mQoS-NSLP, including
   make-before-break, mobility event detection, localized path repair,
   state management, interaction with mobility protocols and so on.


1.1 Terminology


   AR: Access Router


   CAR: Candidate Access Router


   CARD: Candidate Access Router Discovery


   CCND: Candidate Crossover Node Discovery


   CN: Correspondent Node


   CT: Context Transfer






Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   MN: Mobile Node


   mQoS-NSLP: Mobility Functionality of QoS-NSLP


   NE: NSIS Entity


   NSLP: NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol


   NTLP: NSIS Transport Layer Protocol


   OAR: Old Access Router









































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



2. Route Change and Mobility


   Although the route change caused by the mobility event may be
   considered similar to standard route changes, the main difference is
   that the flow identifier does not change after the standard route
   change while the mobility may cause the change of the flow
   identifier. Therefore, the flow identifier should be updated along
   the entire chain of NSIS entities that are involved with the session
   that has been impacted by the mobility event. To update the flow
   identifier in an end-to-end manner, the crossover node which is the
   merging point of the old and new paths may decide to forward a state
   update message further towards the destination.


   The NTLP should detect any route change caused by the mobility event
   at transport level and triggers the mQoS-NSLP, and then the mQoS-NSLP
   should initiate necessary state creation (i.e., QoS re-establishment)
   along the new path and the update or removal of associated states, at
   signaling application level. Note that QoS re-establishment due to
   the standard route change may not need any state update along the
   entire signaling path since the flow identifier does not change
   (e.g., the IP address of endpoint does not change). The details about
   the route change detection procedure can be found in [21].






























Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



3. Make-before-Break vs. Break-before-Make


   The act of transferring support of an MN from one AR to another is
   called handover. In other words, handover occurs when a flow has to
   be handed off from one AR to another as the MN moves. There are two
   possibilities for handling handover in terms of resource reservation:
   Make-before-Break and Break-before-Make.


   With Make-before-Break approach, resource reservation is set up along
   the new path including a new AR before releasing the resource along
   the old path. With Break-before-Make approach, current resource
   reservation is torn down before resource reservation is set up on the
   new path.


   Compared to the Break-before-Make approach, the Make-before-Break
   provides less QoS service disruption. In this case, however, it is
   necessary to provide QoS re-establishment in a very fast manner.
   Pre-reservation of resources or multi-homing support could be helpful
   for immediate QoS re-establishment after handover. In this draft,
   Make-before-Break approach is assumed to be used.
































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



4. Mobility Event Detection


   Most of the existing approaches for signaling protocols consider only
   the actions which have to be taken after a handover occurs. Some
   newly proposed protocols use various ideas to speed up the QoS
   re-establishment and handle the specific mobility related events,
   e.g., the change of the IP address of an MN. However, most of the
   protocols do not introduce mechanisms for the preparation of a
   handover.


   To prepare immediate handover (i.e., for fast QoS re-establishment),
   the ?«MOBILITY?? object can be used by the mQoS-NSLP [15]. The
   ?«MOBILITY?? object contains the detailed information about the
   mobility event which should be used for a particular treatment by
   associated NSIS entities. The signaling messages can contain the
   MOBILITY object as an explicit indicator of any mobility event. The
   MOBILITY object may consist of one or more 32-bit words with a one
   word header.


   When an MN detects a handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the MN may set the
   MOBILITY object in the refresh message and sends it to the current
   AR. The mQoS-NSLP of the AR may also set the MOBILITY object after
   receiving the movement information generated by a mobility protocol
   (e.g., 'RtSolPr' message in FMIPv6 [14]) within the MN.


   The MOBILITY object will be delivered to involved NSIS entities along
   the current signaling path to inform of the mobility event. The
   mobility event will eventually cause a route change as the MN moves
   to the new AR.























Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



5. Localized Path Repair


   Usually, QoS-related information is generated by an MN or CN, and
   sent to a peer representing the opposite terminating point of the
   path. The paths in a mobility supporting access network usually
   change only partially. Therefore, the mQoS-NSLP should support
   localized path repair to avoid end-to-end signaling message exchanges
   which may incur a long delay. In other words, the mQoS-NSLP needs to
   limit the scope of signaling information to a section of the
   signaling path. This is referred to as localized signaling.


   The localized QoS signaling can be initiated by the NSIS-aware
   merging point of the old and new paths, which is sometimes called
   crossover node. After the crossover node is determined by the NTLP
   [21], the mQoS-NSLP should be notified of the crossover determination
   to re-install reservation states along the new path and to remove old
   reservation states along the old path.


   If the Old AR is the last node due to handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the
   NE in the old AR may trigger an error message to indicate that no
   more mQoS-NSLP messages will be forwarded to the last node (e.g., the
   MN). However, the states along the old path must not be deleted
   before re-establishing the state along the new path although the
   error message is initiated.




























Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



6. Route Change and Mobility


   The soft state similar to RSVP may need to be maintained to manage
   the reservation state at the NEs in the crossover node, routers, and
   MNs. On receiving a resource reservation message, an NE (specifically
   the mQoS-NSLP) sets up state for fast reservation. This state is
   deleted unless it is refreshed by a new resource reservation message
   before the refresh timer expires.


   It may be necessary to set the refresh timer value in a wireless
   network to a smaller value than that in the core (wired) network [6].
   The main objective of adjustment of the refresh timer value is to
   minimize the unnecessary waste of resources. To do this, NEs can
   appropriately set the refresh interval suitable for their own
   environments in a peer-to-peer manner. Setting the timer value of the
   access network differently from that of the backbone network can be
   done by manual configuration or some adaptive technique.


   An example of adaptive technique may be to use the 'Refresh' object
   by defining the 'M' bit for mobility and the 'PRE' bit for fast
   re-establishment. In mobile and wireless networks, it may be
   desirable that the mQoS-NSLP can set its refresh timer value (by
   setting the M bit to 1) appropriately depending on the part of the
   network (e.g., an access network or backbone network). On receiving
   the MOBILITY object during handover, the mQoS-NSLP of candidate NEs
   which are supposedly involved in the QoS signaling application sets
   the 'RFE' bit of outgoing mQoS-NSLP messages (Refresh object) for
   fast QoS re-establishment. For instance, pre-reservation state may be
   maintained for a short period of time. To do this, the mQoS-NSLP of
   the involved NEs may set the 'PRE' bit to 1, and a pre-reservation
   state may be temporarily maintained to avoid the excessive waste of
   resources until the handover is completed. After handover, the PRE
   bit is reset to 'null' to reduce the overhead due to frequent
   transmission of refresh messages, and 'M' bit is kept to be '1' (see
   Section 9.1 and Appendix A for more details)[15].

















Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



7. Support for Reservation Modes


   The mQoS-NSLP should be able to support resource reservation in both
   sender- and receiver-oriented modes where the MN could be the sender
   or receiver. With the sender-initiated approach, the MN (as a sender)
   can initiate a reservation setup for its outgoing flows as soon as it
   has moved toward another AR. With the receiver-initiated approach,
   the MN (as a sender) somehow has to inform the receiver of its
   handover, thus allowing the receiver to initiate a reservation for
   the flows. This delayed signaling problem in the receiver-initiated
   approach can be solved in a way similar to the fast re-establishment
   using the CT as described in Section 9.1.


   In addition to the unidirectional reservation above, the mQoS-NSLP
   should also support bidirectional reservation setup. With this
   bidirectional reservation setup, the state for bidirectional data
   flows is setup. In the basic case, bidirectional QoS signaling can
   simply use a separate instance of the same signaling mechanism in
   each direction. The bidirectional data flows have the same end
   points, but the path in the two directions does not need to be the
   same. In this case, there are a few merging points that downstream
   state of reservation and upstream state of reservation meet.
   Therefore, a crossover node for downstream reservation may be
   different from that for upstream reservation when the MN reaches a
   new attachment point of the network, i.e., a new AR. As a matter of
   course, the Session ID in the downstream reservation must be
   different from that of the upstream reservation. If the routes (i.e.,
   upstream and downstream paths) are symmetric, a single signaling
   message can be used to set up reservation in both directions. If the
   routes are asymmetric, a signaling message from the originator (e.g.,
   MN or CN) should trigger an independent signaling message from the
   responder. The correlation of the signaling for the two flow
   directions is carried out in the mQoS-NSLP. The NTLP would simply be
   enabled to bundle the messages together.


















Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



8. Interaction with Mobility Protocols


   As mentioned in Section 4, the mQoS-NSLP of an NE may be able to
   interwork with mobility protocols using the movement detection. The
   movement of an MN should be detected first by the NTLP of an MN or
   AR. The mQoS-NSLP is then triggered by the NTLP to act appropriately.
   The mQoS-NSLP may set the MOBILITY object of an outgoing QoS-NSLP
   message for fast QoS state re-establishment. This MOBILITY object can
   be used to find a crossover node or set the 'Refresh' object for
   changing the timer value.


   Seamless Mobility protocols Such as CARD and CT can be used to fast
   re-establish the mQoS-NSLP state after handover (or during handover).
   For fast re-establishment, the possible interaction scenarios with
   the seamless mobility protocols are as follows. When a handover is
   initiated, the current AR receiving the movement detection
   information from an MN may be able to use the CARD mechanism to find
   an appropriate access router (an NSIS aware node) before the handover
   is completed, and as a result a few candidate access routers (CARs)
   may be found. In this process, the AR should be able to recognize
   whether the CARs are NSIS-aware node after sending the 'capability
   reply' message (of CARD). The mQoS-NSLP of the AR may need to be
   interaction with the CT protocol to transfer the mQoS-NSLP state
   information for mQoS-NSLP state establishment to the newly discovered
   NSIS-aware candidate ARs. After receiving the context, NTLPs of the
   candidate ARs may be able to begin to trigger a candidate crossover
   node discovery mechanism using the mQoS-NSLP state information [21].


   The crossover node discovery can be initiated during handover (i.e.,
   before the handover is completed), for instance, for fast QoS
   re-establishment or pre-reservation. However, in this case, an
   efficient mechanism is needed to find a candidate crossover node.
   CARD and CR mechanisms can be used for this purpose. A candidate
   crossover node can be found easily since the candidate crossover node
   discovery is basically the same as the normal crossover node
   discovery. In response to the peer discovery request message, the
   candidate crossover node sends an acknowledgement message to its peer
   node.


   In some cases, however, it may not be possible to use mobility
   related protocols such as CT and CARD. In this case, the MN can
   initiate the crossover node discovery only after it arrives at a new
   AR. To expedite the discovery process, it may be useful to transmit
   the peer discovery message (by the NTLP) and the binding update
   message at the same time.


   To immediately re-establish the mQoS-NSLP state after handover, the
   mQoS-NSLP should interwork with handover information (e.g., Binding




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   Update message in MIPv6).  For instance, on receiving the handover
   information, mQoS-NSLP can set the 'M' bit of 'Refresh' bits to
   appropriately adjust the refresh timer for an access network and
   quickly trigger the peer discovery of NTLP.
















































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



9. QoS Re-establishment Mechanisms in Mobile Scenarios


   A route change due to mobility may cause the obsolete paths of
   mQoS-NSLP and may also cause the service disruption due to
   re-establishment of the mQoS-NSLP state. Therefore, it is required to
   immediately re-establish the same state of the mQoS-NSLP and
   afterwards to delete the obsolete paths quickly after handover [1].
   The subsequent sections describe QoS re-establishment mechanisms in
   mobile scenarios in further detail.


9.1 Fast QoS Re-establishment


   This section considers two possible mechanisms to quickly
   re-establish reservation of resources along the new path after
   handover: Pre-establishment and Fast re-establishment [15].


   The pre-establishment approach is used to reserve resources in areas
   which the MN may visit to support seamless QoS services. Although the
   NSIS requirement draft describes only QoS re-establishment after
   handover [1], the pre-establishment is a desirable feature to
   guarantee the seamless QoS services. On the other hand, the fast
   re-establishment approach is used to quickly set up reservation of
   resources along the new path to minimize the disruption of QoS
   services after handover.


   To carry out the pre-establishment mechanism, NEs may interwork with
   seamless mobility protocols (e.g., CARD and CT) as mentioned in
   Section 8 and use the CCND to localize the pre-establishment. The
   refresh timer value may also be optimized to avoid unnecessary
   pre-reservation (see Appendix A for further details).


   If pre-establishment is not used (or if pre-establishment of the
   mQoS-NSLP fails due to the lack of available resources or the failure
   of NEs along the new path), the NEs are responsible for fast
   re-establishing the mQoS-NSLP state after handover. The key ideas of
   the fast re-establishment are to transfer the mQoS-NSLP state to
   candidate NEs between a CCN and CARs by the CT before handover and to
   localize the re-establishment after handover.


   With the context transfer approach described above, the candidate NEs
   try to distribute the information of mQoS-NSLP state or continuously
   maintain the state until the pre-establishment succeeds before the
   completion of handover. The candidates can learn the mQoS-NSLP state
   from the By-the-CT approach in this way.


   For example, if the MN acts as a sender in the sender-initiated
   approach, the CAR may be used to establish the mQoS-NSLP state by
   sending a reservation message where the 'PRE' bit is set or to




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   transfer the context related to the mQoS-NSLP state toward the CCN
   during the handover. In this way, the candidate NEs between CAR and
   CCN can recognize the state information.


   It is also possible that the MN may initiate a reservation message
   after handover. In this case, the associated NEs can establish the
   mQoS-NSLP states more quickly since the mQoS-NSLP only needs to
   update  the changed information (e.g., refresh timer value, flow ID,
   and so on)[17].


   If the MN acts as a receiver, the CCN also uses the same process
   toward the CARs as the MN as a sender. If the CCN fails to transfer
   the states, the crossover node triggers a reservation message where
   the 'M' bit is set to establish the mQoS-NSLP state after receiving
   the handover information (e.g., a BU message).


   In order to fast re-establish the mQoS-NSLP states in the
   receiver-initiated approach, a path state should be established
   first. If the MN acts as a receiver, the mQoS-NSLP of the CCN needs
   to first establish the path state toward the CAR using in a
   peer-to-peer manner, and afterwards the MN can quickly reserve the
   resources by only sending a reservation message to the crossover node
   as soon as a path setup message is received after handover.


   If the MN acts as a sender, the CAR pre-establishes the path state up
   to the CCN. After handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the MN sends a path
   setup message where the 'M' bit is set toward the crossover node but
   the NEs on the new path only update changed information (e.g.,
   refresh timer value, flow ID, mQoS-NSLP SPEC, and so on). As a
   result, the mQoS-NSLP state can be re-established quickly.


   If the CARD and the CT are not able to interwork with NTLP/mQoS-NSLP
   nor operate correctly, the re-establishment of the mQoS-NSLP state
   should be localized to minimize the disruption of QOS services. In
   this case, the mQoS-NSLP states are only re-established by the same
   method that the existing sender-initiated and receiver-initiated
   approaches operate without pre-establishment after handover. In this
   case, mQoS-NSLP messages should be transmitted simultaneously with
   Handover information (e.g., Biding Update message in MIPv6) even if
   NTLP and mQoS-NSLP do not have any interaction with mobility
   protocols as described in Section 8.


9.2 Fast Release of Resources


   As in RSVP, reservation states may be explicitly torn down when a
   flow terminates or when the admission control rejects a reservation.
   In addition, it is needed to release the previously reserved
   resources along the old path immediately after establishing the state




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 14]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   of QoS NSLP along new paths due to handover. To release the
   previously reserved resources along the old path after handover, a
   crossover node first needs to receive a teardown message (or a
   reservation message) from the MN which arrived at a new AR. On
   receiving the teardown message, NSLP on the crossover node
   immediately updates reservation states of the old session and
   simultaneously transmits a reservation a Reserve message toward the
   old AR to delete the state of the mQoS-NSLP along the old paths.


9.3 Confirmation/Error Handling


   As in RSVP, the MN can send a request for confirmation for its
   reservation request. In this case, the request for confirmation is
   included in the resource reservation messages.


   If any reservation fails, a reservation error message will be
   delivered to the MN. The reservation error message may contain enough
   information so that the MN can decide its future direction.


   If the Old AR is the last node after handover, the mQoS-NSLP of NE in
   the old AR may trigger an error message that indicates that no more
   NSLP messages are forwarded the last node. However, the states along
   the old paths must not be deleted before establishing the state along
   the new paths due to this error message.




























Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 15]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



10. Security Considerations


   The mQoS-NSLP relies on the security mechanisms described in [4].
   Securing the mQoS-NSLP is provided by CMS which allows resource
   objects and related objects defined in this document to be
   encapsulated and protected by CMS. Therefore, no separate
   specification within the mQoS-NSLP is necessary to describe the
   format of these objects. This allows some flexibility in including
   protected objects to link the authorization step of different
   protocols and to transport local information within domains. The
   functionality described in [19] and [20] can be provided without
   substantial protocol modification/extensions.








































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 16]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



11. Conclusion


   This document described the mobility functionality of the QoS-NSLP,
   including make-before-break, localized path repair, state management,
   unidirectional and bidirectional reservation support, interaction
   with mobility protocols, and so on.














































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 17]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



Appendix. QoS Pre-establishment Procedures


   The pre-establishment mechanism may consist of three general
   operations for seamless handover [9] [10] and two main operations for
   QoS re-establishment: Movement Detection, Candidate Access Router
   Discovery (CARD), Context Transfer (CT), Candidate Crossover Node
   Discovery (CCND), and reservation setup.


   As mentioned in Section 4, a handover initiator (e.g., an MN or an
   AR) notifies the NE within the AR of the mobility event. In this
   case, the mQoS-NSLP of the NE constitutes the MOBILITY object, and
   should not delete the existing state along the old path even if the
   error message indicating the 'Can-Not-Be-Forwarded-to-the-LAST-NODE'
   is issued (see Section 5). After receiving the handover initiation
   information, the mQoS-NSLP/NTLP in the AR transfers its state
   information (such as the session identifier, flow identifiers,
   MOBILITY object, security-related information, and so on) to
   NSIS-aware CARs through interworking with CARD and CT as mentioned
   Section 8. After receiving the context, the NTLP in the candidate AR
   begins to trigger the CCND mechanism [21] based on the NTLP/mQoS-NSLP
   state information to localize pre-establishment.


   Before pre-establishment, the mQoS-NSLP of candidate ARs and a CCN
   need to reset the soft state refresh timer to the optimized value by
   the 'PRE' bit to utilize the resource efficiently. For example, if
   the refresh timer value in the pre-establishment phase is set to a
   little higher value than the estimated handover latency, the MN can
   received seamless QoS Services by the pre-reserved resources, and
   resources which are pre-reserved but unused will be automatically
   released after timeout. After handover is completed, the mQoS-NSLP
   should restore the original refresh timer value in order to avoid
   frequent transmission of refresh messages (as mentioned in Section
   6).


   If the sender-initiated approach is used for pre-reservation and an
   MN acts as a sender (or a receiver), the CARs (or the CCN(s)) reserve
   resources in advance by sending a reservation message toward the
   CCN(s) (or the CARs). On the other hand, if the receiver-initiated
   approach is used and an MN is a sender (or receiver), the opposite
   operation is performed. To distinguish pre-establishment signaling
   messages from re-establishment signaling messages, the 'PRE' bit of
   the 'Refresh' object may be also used. Finally, mQoS-NSLP states
   between CCN and CAR will be pre-established, and the MN arriving at a
   new AR can receive QoS service immediately.








Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 18]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



References


   [1]   Brunner, M., "Requirements for Signaling Protocols",
         draft-ietf-nsis-req-09 (work in progress), August 2003.


   [2]   Hancock, R., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework",
         draft-ietf-nsis-fw-04 (work in progress), September 2003.


   [3]   Chaskar, H., "Requirements of a Quality of Service (QoS)
         Solution for Mobile IP", RFC 3583, September 2003.


   [4]   Schulzrinne, H., "CASP - Cross-Application Signaling Protocol",
         draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-01 (work in progress), March 2003.


   [5]   Schulzrinne, H., "A Quality-of-Service Resource Allocation
         Client for CASP", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-qos-01 (work in
         progress), March 2003.


   [6]   McDonald, A., "A Quality of Service NSLP for NSIS",
         draft-mcdonald-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), June 2003.


   [7]   Bosch, S., "NSLP for Quality-of-Service signaling",
         draft-ietf-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), September 2003.


   [8]   Schulzrinne, H., "GIMPS: General Internet Messaging Protocol
         for Signaling", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-ntlp-00 (work in
         progress), June 2003.


   [9]   Loughney, J., "Context Transfer Protocol",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-ctp-04 (work in progress), October 2003.


   [10]  Liebsch, M., "Candidate Access Router Discovery",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-card-protocol-04 (work in progress),
         September 2003.


   [11]  Tschofenig, H. and D. Kroeselberg, "Security Threats for NSIS",
         draft-ietf-nsis-threats-02 (work in progress), July 2003.


   [12]  Buchli, M., "A Network Service Layer Protocol for QoS
         signaling", draft-buchli-nsis-nslp-00 (work in progress), June
         2003.


   [13]  Fu, X., "Mobility Support in NSIS", draft-fu-nsis-mobility-00
         (work in progress), June 2003.


   [14]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-08 (work in progress), October
         2003.




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 19]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   [15]  Lee, S., "QoS Signaling for IP-based Radio Access Networks",
         draft-lee-nsis-signaling-ran-00 (work in progress), June 2003.


   [16]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. Jamin,
         "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
         Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.


   [17]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F. and S.
         Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions", RFC
         2961, April 2001.


   [18]  Westberg, L., "A Proposal for RSVPv2",
         draft-westberg-proposal-for-rsvpv2-01 (work in progress),
         November 2002.


   [19]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B. and H. Shieh, "Framework for Session
         Set-up with Media Authorization", RFC 3521, April 2003.


   [20]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B., Kosinski, B. and H. Shieh, "Session
         Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, April 2003.


   [21]  Jeong, S., "Mobility Functions in the NTLP",
         draft-jeong-nsis-mobility-ntlp-00 (work in progress), October
         2003.


Authors' Addresses


   Sung-Hyuck Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: starsu.lee@samsung.com



   Jongho Bang
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: jh0278.bang@samsung.com






Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 20]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   Byoung-Joon Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9626
   EMail: bj33.lee@samsung.com



   Seong-Ho Jeong
   Hankuk University of FS
   89 Wangsan Mohyun
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-791
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 330 4642
   EMail: shjeong@hufs.ac.kr

































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 21]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION




Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 22]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgement


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.












































Lee, et al.              Expires April 19, 2004                [Page 23]



IETF Next Steps in Signaling                                      S. Lee
Working Group                                                SAMSUNG AIT
Internet-Draft                                                  S. Jeong
Expires: April 26, 2004                                             HUFS
                                                                 J. Bang
                                                                  BJ Lee
                                                             SAMSUNG AIT
                                                        October 27, 2003



                   Mobility Functions in the QoS-NSLP
                  draft-lee-nsis-mobility-nslp-01.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2004.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   The NSIS working group is standardizing a signaling protocol suite
   with QoS signaling as the first use case. The overall signaling
   protocol suite is decomposed into a generic lower layer with separate
   upper layers for signaling applications. The upper layer protocol,
   called NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol (NSLP), has an end-to-end scope
   and contains application specific functionality. One of the important
   features of an NSLP is mobility support. This document identifies
   desired mobility functions in an NSLP for QoS signaling (QoS-NSLP) in




Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   the network.


Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Route Change and Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Make-before-Break vs. Break-before-Make  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Actions Triggered by a Mobility Event  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Localized Path Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  State management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Support for Reservation Modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Interactions with Mobility Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  QoS Re-establishment Mechanisms in Mobile Scenarios  . . . . . 13
   9.1 Fast QoS Re-establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.2 Fast Release of Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.3 Confirmation/Error Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix A. QoS Pre-establishment Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 22





























Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



1. Introduction


   The general description of the NSIS protocol suite, including its
   two-layer architecture, can be found in [2]. The lower layer in the
   NSIS protocol suite, the NSIS Transport Layer Protocol (NTLP) is
   intended to provide a generally useful transport service for such
   signaling messages. The actual signaling messages are in general
   originated within upper layer signaling applications, each having its
   own NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol (NSLP).


   One of the important features of an NSLP (in particular, NSLP for QoS
   support) is mobility support. This document identifies desired
   mobility functions in the QoS-NSLP  [7] whose main objective is
   provide resource reservation according to the mobility requirements
   for future signaling protocols. The mobility functions in this
   document refer to the functions which are used to support mobility in
   NSIS signaling. In this document, only mobility-related protocol
   mechanisms of the QoS-NSLP are discussed, and the mobility
   functionality of the QoS-NSLP is called mQoS-NSLP.


   In high mobility environments, frequent handovers may result in a
   significant degradation of QoS performance if the wireless access
   network is unable to provide enhanced solutions for prompt QoS
   re-establishment. Therefore, one of the key features that should be
   supported in mQoS-NSLP is fast QoS re-establishment. The mQoS-NSLP
   should also support resource reservation in both sender- and
   receiver-oriented modes where a mobile node (MN) may act as a sender
   or receiver. Based on these considerations, this document discusses
   desired mobility functions for the mQoS-NSLP, including
   make-before-break, mobility event detection, localized path repair,
   state management, interaction with mobility protocols, and so on.


1.1 Terminology


   AR: Access Router


   CAR: Candidate Access Router


   CARD: Candidate Access Router Discovery


   CCND: Candidate Crossover Node Discovery


   CN: Correspondent Node


   CRN: Crossover Node







Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   CT: Context Transfer


   MN: Mobile Node


   mQoS-NSLP: Mobility Functionality of QoS-NSLP


   NE: NSIS Entity


   NSLP: NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol


   NTLP: NSIS Transport Layer Protocol


   NAR: New Access Router


   OAR: Old Access Router





































Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



2. Route Change and Mobility


   Although the route change caused by a mobility event may be
   considered similar to standard route changes, the main difference is
   that the flow identifier may not change after the normal route change
   (e.g., due to link or node failure) while the mobility may cause the
   change of the flow identifier. Therefore, the flow identifier should
   be updated along the entire chain of NSIS entities that are involved
   with the session that has been impacted by the mobility event. To
   update the flow identifier in an end-to-end manner, the crossover
   node (CRN) which is the merging point of the old and new paths may
   decide to forward a state update message further towards the
   destination.


   The NTLP should detect any route change caused by the mobility event
   at transport level and triggers the mQoS-NSLP, and then the mQoS-NSLP
   should initiate necessary state creation (i.e., QoS re-establishment)
   along the new path and the update or removal of associated states, at
   signaling application level. Note that QoS re-establishment due to
   the standard route change may not need any state update along the
   entire signaling path since the flow identifier does not change
   (e.g., the IP address of endpoint does not change). The details about
   the route change detection procedure can be found in [24].





























Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



3. Make-before-Break vs. Break-before-Make


   The act of transferring support of an MN from one AR to another is
   called handover. In other words, handover occurs when a flow has to
   be handed off from one AR to another as the MN moves. There are two
   possibilities for handling handover in terms of resource reservation:
   Make-before-Break and Break-before-Make.


   With the Make-before-Break approach, resource reservation is set up
   along the new path including a new AR before releasing the resource
   along the old path. On the other hand, with the Break-before-Make
   approach, current resource reservation is torn down before resource
   reservation is re-setup on the new path.


   Compared to the Break-before-Make approach, the Make-before-Break
   provides less QoS service disruption. In this case, however, it is
   necessary to support QoS re-establishment in a very fast manner.
   Pre-reservation of resources or multi-homing support could be helpful
   for immediate QoS re-establishment after handover is initiated. In
   the Make-before-Break approach which is assumed to be used in this
   document, the mQoS-NSLP of the CRN will play a significant role in
   QoS re-establishment because the CRN will be the appropriate node to
   initiate a new reservation state installation.





























Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



4. Actions Triggered by a Mobility Event


   In this section, we identify possible actions triggered by a mobility
   event. After a mobility event such as a handover is detected by the
   NTLP (e.g., using the Fast MIPv6 protocol), the mQoS-NSLP may need to
   initiate necessary actions such as immediate QoS re-establishment on
   the new path and release of resources on the old path.


   To support seamless handover (i.e., immediate QoS re-establishment),
   the MOBILITY object may be defined in the mQoS-NSLP message [15]. The
   MOBILITY object  may contain various mobility-related fields such as
   the handover_init field and 'REFRESH' field. This handover_init field
   may be used to notify of handover initiation or any other mobility
   events, and therefore determine the appropriate time at which QoS
   re-establishment can be initiated by an NSIS node (e.g., the CRN).
   The REFRESH field can be used to explicitly notify of the change of
   state for fast state re-establishment (see Section 6). In other
   words, the MOBILITY object may act as an explicit indicator of a
   mobility event for fast QoS re-establishment. In addition, the CRN
   can regonize that the QoS re-establishment should be made on the
   local segment (e.g., MN-to-NAR) of the signaling path when receiving
   the MOBILITY object. The MOBILITY object may consist of one or more
   32-bit words with a one word header as in RSVP [16]. The MOBILITY
   object may also be defined in the NTLP in a similar way. In this
   case, there should be some relationship between the MOBILITY objects
   of the NTLP and the NSLP.


   When an MN detects a handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the MN may set the
   MOBILITY object in the mQoS-NSLP signaling message and send it to the
   current AR, or the mQoS-NSLP of the AR may set the MOBILITY object
   after receiving the movement information generated by a mobility
   protocol (e.g., 'RtSolPr' message in FMIPv6 [14]).


   The MOBILITY object will be delivered to involved NSIS entities along
   the current signaling path to inform of the mobility event. The
   MOBILITY object will eventually cause the interaction with the
   seamless mobility protocols (e.g., CARD and CT), furthermore it can
   be used to appropriately adjust the value of refresh timer to
   minimize the waste of resources (see Sections 6 and 9).













Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



5. Localized Path Repair


   In general, the mQoS-NSLP related information is generated by an MN
   or CN, and sent to the opposite terminating point of the path.
   However, the paths in a mobility supporting access network usually
   change only partially. Therefore, the mQoS-NSLP should support
   localized path repair to avoid end-to-end signaling message exchanges
   which may incur a long delay. In other words, the mQoS-NSLP needs to
   limit the scope of signaling information to a local section of the
   signaling path. This is referred to as localized signaling in this
   document.


   The localized QoS signaling can be initiated by the NSIS-aware
   merging point of the old and new paths, which is sometimes called
   crossover node (CRN). After the CRN is determined by the NTLP (see
   Section 4 in [24]), the mQoS-NSLP should be notified of the CRN
   determination to quickly re-install reservation states along the new
   path and to remove old reservation states on the obsolete path to
   avoid double reservation and to increase resource utilization.


   In the localized path repair scenarios, the CRN may play the role of
   an NI, NF, or NR. For example, if an MN is receiver, the CRN may need
   to act as an NI to initiate QoS re-establishment on the new path and
   remove the old states on the obsolete path. if an MN is sender, the
   CRN may need to act as an NR to respond to the signaling initiation
   message from the MN and act as an NI to remove the old states on the
   obsolete path. Therefore, there may need to be some transitions
   between the operation modes of the CRN depending on the situation.


   If the old AR is the last node due to handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the
   old AR may trigger an error message to indicate that mQoS-NSLP
   messages can not be forwarded any further. The error message may
   cause the removal of the old states. However, in the case, the states
   along the old path must not be deleted before re-establishing the
   states along the new path although the error message is initiated.

















Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



6. State management


   The soft state similar to RSVP may need to be maintained to manage
   the reservation state at the NEs in the CRN, routers, and MNs. On
   receiving a resource reservation message, an NE (specifically the
   mQoS-NSLP) sets up state for fast reservation. This state is deleted
   unless it is refreshed by a new resource reservation message before
   the refresh timer expires.


   It may be necessary to set the refresh timer value in a wireless
   network to a smaller value than that in the core (wired) network [6].
   The main objective of adjustment of the refresh timer value is to
   minimize the unnecessary waste of resources. To do this, the
   mQoS-NSLP of NEs may appropriately set the refresh interval
   considering network environments in a peer-to-peer manner. Setting
   the timer value of the access network differently from that of the
   backbone network can be done by manual configuration or some adaptive
   techniques.


   An example of such adaptive techniques may be to use the 'REFESH'
   field of the MOBILITY object where the 'M' bit is defined to indicate
   the type of network (e.g., the mobility-supporting access network)
   and the 'PRE' bit is defined for fast QoS re-establishment. In mobile
   and wireless networks, it may be desirable that the mQoS-NSLP can set
   its refresh timer value (by setting the M bit to '1') appropriately
   depending on the part of the network (e.g., an access network or
   backbone network). Upon receiving the MOBILITY object during
   handover, the mQoS-NSLP of candidate NEs which are supposedly
   involved in the QoS signaling application sets the 'PRE' bit of
   outgoing mQoS-NSLP messages for fast QoS re-establishment. For
   instance, pre-reservation state may need to be maintained for a short
   period of time. To do this, the mQoS-NSLP of the involved NEs may set
   the 'PRE' bit to 1, and a pre-reservation state may be temporarily
   maintained to avoid the waste of resources until the handover is
   completed. After handover, the PRE bit is reset to 'null' to reduce
   the overhead due to frequent transmission of refresh messages, and
   'M' bit is kept to be '1' (see Section 9.1 and Appendix A for more
   details)[15].














Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



7. Support for Reservation Modes


   The mQoS-NSLP should be able to support resource reservation in both
   sender- and receiver-oriented modes where the MN could be the sender
   or receiver. With the sender-initiated approach, the MN (as a sender)
   can initiate a reservation setup for its outgoing flows as soon as it
   has moved to a new AR. With the receiver-initiated approach, the MN
   (as a sender) somehow has to inform the receiver of its handover,
   thus allowing the receiver to initiate a reservation for the flows.
   This delayed signaling problem in the receiver-initiated approach can
   be solved in a way similar to the fast re-establishment using the
   Candidate Access Router Discovery [10] and Context Transfer [9] as
   described in Section 9.1.


   In addition to the unidirectional reservation above, the mQoS-NSLP
   should also support bidirectional reservation setup. With this
   bidirectional reservation setup, the state for bidirectional data
   flows is setup. In the basic case, bidirectional QoS signaling can
   simply use a separate instance of the same signaling mechanism in
   each direction. Although the bidirectional data flows have the same
   end points, the path in the two directions does not need to be the
   same. In this case, there are a few merging points that the
   downstream state of reservation and the upstream state of reservation
   meet. Therefore, the CRN for the downstream reservation may be
   different from that for the upstream reservation when the MN reaches
   a new attachment point of the network. As a matter of course, the
   Session ID in the downstream reservation must be different from that
   of the upstream reservation. If the routes (i.e., upstream and
   downstream paths) are symmetric, a single signaling message can be
   used to set up reservation in both directions. If the routes are
   asymmetric, a signaling message from the originator (e.g., MN or CN)
   should trigger an independent signaling message from the responder.
   The correlation of the signaling for the two flow directions is
   carried out in the mQoS-NSLP.


















Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



8. Interactions with Mobility Protocols


   As mentioned in Section 4, the mQoS-NSLP of an NE may be able to
   interwork with mobility protocols using the movement detection. The
   movement of an MN should be detected first by the NTLP of an MN or
   AR. The mQoS-NSLP is then triggered by the NTLP to act appropriately.
   The mQoS-NSLP may set the MOBILITY object of an outgoing QoS-NSLP
   message for fast QoS state re-establishment. This MOBILITY object can
   be used to find a CRN or set the 'REFRESH' field for changing the
   value of refresh timer.


   Although NSIS is focused on Path-coupled signaling, interactions with
   path-decoupled signaling protocols such as seamless mobility
   protocols (e.g., CARD and CT) may be needed to fast re-establish the
   mQoS-NSLP state or check resource avability on the new path after
   handover (or during handover). For fast re-establishment, the
   possible interaction scenarios with the seamless mobility protocols
   are as follows. When a handover is initiated, the current AR
   receiving the movement detection information (e.g., 'RtSolPr' message
   in FMIPv6 [14]) from an MN may interact with the CARD mechanism to
   find an appropriate access router (an NSIS aware node) before the
   handover is completed (or, a few candidate access routers (CARs) may
   be found). In this process, the NTLP of the current AR should be able
   to recognize whether the CAR is an NSIS-aware node after sending the
   'capability reply' message (of CARD). The mQoS-NSLP of the AR may
   need to be interaction with the CT protocol to transfer the mQoS-NSLP
   state information to the newly discovered NSIS-aware candidate AR.
   After receiving the context, the NTLP of the candidate AR may be able
   to begin to trigger a candidate crossover node discovery (CCND)
   mechanism using the mQoS-NSLP state information [24].


   The CRN discovery can be initiated during handover (i.e., before the
   handover is completed), for instance, for fast QoS re-establishment
   or pre-reservation. However, in this case, an efficient mechanism is
   needed to find a candidate crossover node. CARD and CT mechanisms can
   be used for this purpose. A candidate crossover node can be found
   easily since the candidate crossover node discovery is basically the
   same as the normal crossover node discovery [24]. In response to a
   peer discovery request message, the candidate crossover node sends an
   acknowledgement message to its peer node.


   In some cases, however, it may not be possible to use mobility
   related protocols such as CT and CARD. In this case, the MN can
   initiate the crossover node discovery only after it arrives at a new
   AR. To expedite the discovery process, it may be useful to transmit
   the peer discovery message (by the NTLP) and the first binding update
   message at the same time.





Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   To immediately re-establish the mQoS-NSLP state after handover, the
   mQoS-NSLP may need to monitor handover information (e.g., Binding
   Update messages in MIPv6).  For instance, on receiving the handover
   information, mQoS-NSLP can set the 'M' bit of 'REFRESH' field to
   appropriately adjust the value of refresh timer suitable for an
   access network and quickly trigger the peer discovery of NTLP.














































Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



9. QoS Re-establishment Mechanisms in Mobile Scenarios


   A route change due to mobility may cause the obsolete paths of
   mQoS-NSLP and may also cause the service disruption due to
   re-establishment of the mQoS-NSLP state. Therefore, it is required to
   immediately re-establish the same state of the mQoS-NSLP on the new
   path and afterwards to delete the obsolete paths quickly after
   handover [1]. The following subsequent sections discuss QoS
   re-establishment mechanisms in mobile scenarios in further detail.


9.1 Fast QoS Re-establishment


   This section considers two possible mechanisms to quickly
   re-establish reservation of resources along the new path after
   handover: Pre-establishment and Fast re-establishment [15].


   The pre-establishment approach can be used to reserve resources in
   areas which the MN may visit to support seamless QoS services.
   Although the NSIS requirement draft describes only QoS
   re-establishment after handover [1], the pre-establishment is a
   desirable feature to guarantee the seamless QoS services. On the
   other hand, the fast re-establishment approach can be used to quickly
   set up reservation of resources along the new path to minimize the
   disruption of QoS services after handover.


   To carry out the pre-establishment mechanism, NEs may interwork with
   seamless mobility protocols (e.g., CARD and CT) as mentioned in
   Section 8 and use the CCND to localize the pre-establishment. The
   refresh timer value may also be optimized to avoid unnecessary
   pre-reservation (see Appendix A for further details).


   If pre-establishment is not used (or if pre-establishment of the
   mQoS-NSLP fails due to the lack of available resources or the failure
   of NEs along the new path), the NEs are responsible for fast
   re-establishing the mQoS-NSLP state after handover. The key idea of
   the fast re-establishment is to transfer the mQoS-NSLP state to
   candidate NEs between the CCN and the CAR by the CT before handover
   and to localize the re-establishment after handover.


   With the context transfer approach described above, the candidate NEs
   try to distribute the information of mQoS-NSLP state among themselves
   or continuously maintain the state until the pre-establishment
   succeeds before the completion of handover. In this way, the
   candidate NEs can learn the mQoS-NSLP state through interactions with
   the seamboby protocols.


   For example, if the MN acts as a sender in the sender-initiated
   approach, the CAR may be used to establish the mQoS-NSLP state by




Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   sending a reservation message where the 'PRE' bit is set or to
   transfer the context related to the mQoS-NSLP state toward the CCN
   during the handover. In this way, the candidate NEs between CAR and
   CCN can recognize the state information and check the avability of
   resources on the new path.


   It is also possible that the MN may initiate a reservation message
   after handover. In this case, the associated NEs can establish the
   mQoS-NSLP states more quickly since the mQoS-NSLP only needs to
   update the changed information (e.g., refresh timer value, flow ID,
   and so on)[17].


   If the MN acts as a receiver, the CCN may also use the same process
   toward the CARs as the MN as a sender. If the CCN fails to transfer
   the states, the CRN generates a reservation message where the 'M' bit
   is set to establish the mQoS-NSLP state after receiving the handover
   information (e.g., the first BU message).


   In order to fast re-establish the mQoS-NSLP states in the
   receiver-initiated approach, a Path state may need to be established
   first. If the MN acts as a receiver, the mQoS-NSLP of the CCN may
   need to first establish the path state toward the CAR using in a
   peer-to-peer manner, and afterwards the MN can quickly reserve the
   resources by only sending a reservation message to the CRN as soon as
   a path setup message is received by the MN after handover.


   If the MN acts as a sender in the receiver-initiated approach, the
   CAR pre-establishes the path state up to the CCN. After handover, the
   mQoS-NSLP of the MN sends a path setup message where the 'M' bit is
   set toward the CRN but the NEs on the new path only update changed
   information (e.g., refresh timer value, flow ID, mQoS-NSLP states,
   and so on). As a result, the mQoS-NSLP state can be re-established
   quickly.


   If the CARD and the CT are not able to interwork with NTLP/mQoS-NSLP
   nor operate correctly, the re-establishment of the mQoS-NSLP state
   should be still localized to minimize the disruption of QOS services.
   In this case, the mQoS-NSLP states are only re-established by the
   same method that the existing sender-initiated and receiver-initiated
   approaches operate without pre-establishment after handover. In this
   case, mQoS-NSLP messages should be transmitted simultaneously with
   Handover information (e.g., the first Biding Update message in MIPv6)
   even if the NTLP and the mQoS-NSLP do not have any interactions with
   mobility protocols as described in Section 8.


9.2 Fast Release of Resources


   As in RSVP, reservation states may be explicitly torn down by the




Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 14]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   mQoS-NSLP when a flow terminates or when the admission control
   rejects a reservation. In addition, it may be needed to release the
   previously reserved resources along the old path immediately after
   establishing the state of mQoS-NSLP along new paths due to handover.
   To release the previously reserved resources along the old path after
   handover, a CRN first needs to receive a teardown message (or a
   reservation message) from the MN which has arrived at a new AR. On
   receiving the teardown message, mQoS-NSLP of the CRN immediately
   updates reservation states of the old session and simultaneously
   transmits a reservation message toward the old AR to delete the state
   of the mQoS-NSLP along the old path.


9.3 Confirmation/Error Handling


   As in RSVP, the MN can send a request for confirmation for its
   reservation request. In this case, the request for confirmation is
   included in the resource reservation message.


   If any reservation fails, a reservation error message will be
   delivered to the MN. The reservation error message may contain enough
   information so that the MN can decide its future direction.


   If the Old AR is the last node after handover, the mQoS-NSLP of the
   old AR may trigger an error message that indicates that NSLP messages
   can not be forwarded any further. However, the states along the old
   path must not be deleted before establishing the state along the new
   path due to this error message.

























Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 15]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



10. Security Considerations


   The mQoS-NSLP relies on the security mechanisms described in [4].
   Securing the mQoS-NSLP is provided by CMS which allows resource
   objects and related objects defined in this document to be
   encapsulated and protected by CMS. Therefore, no separate
   specification within the mQoS-NSLP is necessary to describe the
   format of these objects. This allows some flexibility in including
   protected objects to link the authorization step of different
   protocols and to transport local information within domains. The
   functionality described in [19] and [20] can be provided without
   substantial protocol modification/extensions.








































Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 16]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



11. Summary


   This document identified the mobility functionality of the QoS-NSLP,
   including make-before-break, localized path repair, state management,
   unidirectional and bidirectional reservation support, interactions
   with mobility protocols, and so on.














































Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 17]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



Appendix A. QoS Pre-establishment Procedures


   The pre-establishment mechanism may consist of three general
   operations for seamless handover [9] [10] and two main operations for
   QoS re-establishment: Movement Detection, Candidate Access Router
   Discovery (CARD), Context Transfer (CT), Candidate Crossover Node
   Discovery (CCND), and reservation setup.


   As mentioned in Section 4, a handover initiator (e.g., an MN or an
   AR) notifies the NE within the AR of the mobility event. In this
   case, the mQoS-NSLP of the NE constitutes the MOBILITY object, and
   should not delete the existing state along the old path even if the
   error message indicating the 'Can-Not-Be-Forwarded-to-the-LAST-NODE'
   is issued (see Section 5). After receiving the handover initiation
   information, the mQoS-NSLP/NTLP in the AR transfers its state
   information (such as the session identifier, flow identifiers,
   MOBILITY object, security-related information, and so on) to
   NSIS-aware CARs through interworking with CARD and CT as mentioned
   Section 8. After receiving the context, the NTLP in the candidate AR
   begins to trigger the CCND mechanism [21] based on the NTLP/mQoS-NSLP
   state information to localize pre-establishment.


   Before pre-establishment, the mQoS-NSLP of candidate ARs and a CCN
   need to reset the soft state refresh timer to the optimized value by
   the 'PRE' bit to utilize the resource efficiently. For example, if
   the refresh timer value in the pre-establishment phase is set to a
   little higher value than the estimated handover latency, the MN can
   received seamless QoS Services by the pre-reserved resources, and
   resources which are pre-reserved but unused will be automatically
   released after timeout. After handover is completed, the mQoS-NSLP
   should restore the original refresh timer value in order to avoid
   frequent transmission of refresh messages (as mentioned in Section
   6).


   If the sender-initiated approach is used for pre-reservation and an
   MN acts as a sender (or a receiver), the CARs (or the CCN(s)) reserve
   resources in advance by sending a reservation message toward the
   CCN(s) (or the CARs). On the other hand, if the receiver-initiated
   approach is used and an MN is a sender (or receiver), the opposite
   operation is performed. To distinguish pre-establishment signaling
   messages from re-establishment signaling messages, the 'PRE' bit of
   the 'Refresh' object may be also used. Finally, mQoS-NSLP states
   between CCN and CAR will be pre-established, and the MN arriving at a
   new AR can receive QoS service immediately.








Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 18]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



References


   [1]   Brunner, M., "Requirements for Signaling Protocols",
         draft-ietf-nsis-req-09 (work in progress), August 2003.


   [2]   Hancock, R., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework",
         draft-ietf-nsis-fw-04 (work in progress), September 2003.


   [3]   Chaskar, H., "Requirements of a Quality of Service (QoS)
         Solution for Mobile IP", RFC 3583, September 2003.


   [4]   Schulzrinne, H., "CASP - Cross-Application Signaling Protocol",
         draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-01 (work in progress), March 2003.


   [5]   Schulzrinne, H., "A Quality-of-Service Resource Allocation
         Client for CASP", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-qos-01 (work in
         progress), March 2003.


   [6]   McDonald, A., "A Quality of Service NSLP for NSIS",
         draft-mcdonald-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), June 2003.


   [7]   Bosch, S., "NSLP for Quality-of-Service signaling",
         draft-ietf-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in progress), September 2003.


   [8]   Schulzrinne, H., "GIMPS: General Internet Messaging Protocol
         for Signaling", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-ntlp-00 (work in
         progress), June 2003.


   [9]   Loughney, J., "Context Transfer Protocol",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-ctp-04 (work in progress), October 2003.


   [10]  Liebsch, M., "Candidate Access Router Discovery",
         draft-ietf-seamoby-card-protocol-04 (work in progress),
         September 2003.


   [11]  Tschofenig, H. and D. Kroeselberg, "Security Threats for NSIS",
         draft-ietf-nsis-threats-02 (work in progress), July 2003.


   [12]  Buchli, M., "A Network Service Layer Protocol for QoS
         signaling", draft-buchli-nsis-nslp-00 (work in progress), June
         2003.


   [13]  Fu, X., "Mobility Issues in Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS)",
         draft-fu-nsis-mobility-01 (work in progress), October 2003.


   [14]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-08 (work in progress), October
         2003.




Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 19]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   [15]  Lee, S., "QoS Signaling for IP-based Radio Access Networks",
         draft-lee-nsis-signaling-ran-00 (work in progress), June 2003.


   [16]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. Jamin,
         "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
         Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.


   [17]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F. and S.
         Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions", RFC
         2961, April 2001.


   [18]  Westberg, L., "A Proposal for RSVPv2",
         draft-westberg-proposal-for-rsvpv2-01 (work in progress),
         November 2002.


   [19]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B. and H. Shieh, "Framework for Session
         Set-up with Media Authorization", RFC 3521, April 2003.


   [20]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B., Kosinski, B. and H. Shieh, "Session
         Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, April 2003.


   [21]  Shen, C., "Several Framework Issues Regarding NSIS and
         Mobility", draft-shen-nsis-mobility-fw-00 (work in progress),
         July 2002.


   [22]  Chaskar, H. and C. Westphal, "QoS Signaling Framework for
         Mobile IP", draft-westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip-00 (work in
         progress), June 2002.


   [23]  Schulzrinne, H., "GIMPS: General Internet Messaging Protocol
         for Signaling", draft-ietf-nsis-ntlp-00 (work in progress),
         October 2003.


   [24]  Jeong, S., "Mobility Functions in the NTLP",
         draft-jeong-nsis-mobility-ntlp-01 (work in progress), October
         2003.



Authors' Addresses


   Sung-Hyuck Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: starsu.lee@samsung.com







Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 20]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   Seong-Ho Jeong
   Hankuk University of FS
   89 Wangsan Mohyun
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-791
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 330 4642
   EMail: shjeong@hufs.ac.kr



   Jongho Bang
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9585
   EMail: jh0278.bang@samsung.com



   Byoung-Joon (BJ) Lee
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology
   i-Networking Lab.
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do  449-712
   KOREA


   Phone: +82 31 280 9626
   EMail: bj33.lee@samsung.com






















Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 21]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION




Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 22]
Internet-Draft                 mQoS-NSLP                    October 2003



   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgement


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.












































Lee, et al.              Expires April 26, 2004                [Page 23]