



INTERNET-DRAFT                                               J. Reynolds
draft-rfc-editor-author-lists-00.txt                           R. Braden
Category: Informational                                       RFC Editor
Expires: November 2002                                        8 May 2002


                 RFC Editor Guidelines on Author Lists

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
              http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
              http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo presents a new set of guidelines to govern lists of
   authors on RFC documents.  It is intended to counteract a recent
   tendency towards author list inflation.













RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Guidelines on RFC Author Lists           8 May 2002


1. INTRODUCTION

   Over the past few years, there has been a tendency toward inflation
   of the author lists on RFCs, contrary to the traditional culture of
   the IETF and to long-standing RFC editorial policies.  This memo
   summarizes guidelines that have been formulated by the RFC Editor and
   the IESG to limit future author list inflation.

2. BACKGROUND

   2.1 Historical RFC Policy

      During the 30 year history of the RFC series, long lists of
      authors on a single RFC have been rare.  In general, the front
      page header of an RFC has listed only the person (or the few
      people) who wrote the document.  When there were more than a few
      contributors to developing the specification, some RFCs listed
      important contributors in an Acknowledgment section; the single
      person who had been tasked with integrating the results into a
      single document was listed as "Editor" (see RFC 1122 for an
      example).  One of the reasons for limiting the author list is
      practical: the long-existing RFC formatting conventions do not
      comfortably handle large author lists.  We now discuss the
      philosophical reasons.

   2.2 The IETF Culture

      Most standards bodies publish anonymous standards, whereas the
      IETF attaches the names of the responsible authors to its
      technical specifications.  This relates directly to the IETF's
      tradition of individual rather than corporate representation
      (which in turn arose from the academic research origins of the
      Internet technology).  The person(s) who actually write an RFC
      take responsiblity for it, even if the specifification recorded in
      the RFC originated in a working group of several hundred people.
      At the opposite extreme, some academic communities (e.g., high-
      energy physics) have adopted a very liberal view of authorship,
      resulting in papers listing hundreds of authors.  The IETF
      community does not wish to emulate this approach.

      The selection and ordering of authors on any publication is always
      a sensitive issue.  Those individuals who contributed
      substantially to the content of an RFC naturally wish to be
      recognized.  On the other hand, there are rumors that some
      Internet companies are paying bounties for getting their corporate
      names on RFCs, and in some cases there is reason to believe that
      corporate marketing functions may play a role in author list
      inflation.



RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Guidelines on RFC Author Lists           8 May 2002


      Some see a list of 17 authors on one RFC as motivated by a desire
      for corporate name-dropping, which would be inappropriate in the
      IETF/RFC context.  If there is a desire to demonstrate that many
      companies are interested in this spec, Contributor and/or
      Acknowledgment sections, described below, can accomplish the same
      goal without "author overload."

      To prevent erosion of the IETF's traditional (and highly
      successful) approach to protocol standardization, the guidelines
      in the following section have been crafted.  They are an
      elaboration of rules suggested independently in several different
      recent email discussions of this topic.  These guidelines are
      intended to apply both to working group output and to individual
      submissions.

3. GUIDELINES ON RFC AUTHOR LISTS

   (1)  A small set of author names, with affiliations, may appear on
        the front page header.  These should be the lead author(s) who
        are most responsible for the actual text.  When there are many
        contributors, the best choice will be to list the person or
        (few) persons who acted as document editor(s) (e.g.,"Tom Smith,
        Editor").

        There is no rigid limit on the size of this set, but there is
        likely to be a discussion if the set exceeds five authors, in
        which case the right answer is probably one editor.

        The RFC Editor will hold all the people listed on the front page
        equally responsible for the final form and content of the
        published RFC.  In particular, the "Author's 48 Hours" final
        approval period will require signoff from all listed authors.

   (2)  An RFC may include a Contributors section, listing those
        contributors who deserve significant credit for the document
        contents.  When a long author list is replaced by a single
        Editor in the front page header, the displaced authors can be
        properly and fully acknowledged in the Contributors section.

        The Contributors section may include brief statements about the
        nature of particular contributions ("Sam contributed section 3")
        and it may also include affiliations of listed contributors. It
        may also include contact addresses for some or all of the
        contributors cited; see item (4).







RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Guidelines on RFC Author Lists           8 May 2002


   (3)  An RFC may include an Acknowledgements section, in addition to
        or instead of a Contributors section.  The Acknowledgment
        section may be lengthy, and it may explain scope and nature of
        contributions.  It may also specify affiliations.

   (4)  The Author Address section at the end of the RFC must include
        the authors listed in the front page header.  The purpose of
        this section is to (1) unambiguously define author/contributor
        identity (e.g., the John Smith who works for FooBar Systems) and
        to (2) provide contact information for future readers who have
        questions or comments.

        At the discretion of the author(s), contact addresses may also
        be included in the Contributors section for those contributors
        whose knowledge makes them useful future contacts for
        information about the RFC.

   (5)  The RFC Editor may grant exceptions to these guidelines upon
        specific IESG request or in other exceptional circumstances.

   The optional Contributors section is intended to provide a level of
   recognition greater than an acknowledgment and nearly equal to
   listing on the front page.  The choice of either, both, or none of
   Contributor and Acknowledgment sections in a particular RFC depends
   upon the circumstance.  There is no fixed position for a Contributors
   section or an Acknowledgments section within the body of the RFC.  If
   they appear, they must appear later than the Abstract section and
   earlier than the Author's Address section.

4. TRANSITION

   These guidelines will be published for Last Call.  It is intended
   that they will become applicable to all RFCs after the Yokahama
   meeting.  Until then, the RFC Editor and the IESG will ask for
   voluntary compliance with these guidelines, even on documents that
   have long been in process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   We are grateful for the input from IESG members and from a number of
   individual members of the IETF community who share our concern for
   doing the right thing.

Security Considerations

   There are no security issues in this document.





RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Guidelines on RFC Author Lists           8 May 2002


Authors' Addresses

   Joyce K. Reynolds
   RFC Editor
   4676 Admiralty Way
   Marina del Rey, CA  90292

   EMail: rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org


   Robert Braden
   RFC Editor
   4676 Admiralty Way
   Marina del Rey, CA  90292

   EMail: rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org



































RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Guidelines on RFC Author Lists           8 May 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

Acknowledgement:

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















RFC Editor                   Informational                      [Page 6]

