



Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                         November 11, 2005
Expires: May 15, 2006


                Revision of the Recall Initiation Model
                    draft-klensin-recall-rev-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The procedures for initiating a recall specified in RFC 3777 restrict
   signatories to those who are "nomcom qualified".  Perhaps
   inadvertently, this prohibits members of the IESG and IAB from
   initiating these procedures.  This document suggests that limitation
   was an unanticipated and undesirable side-effect and proposes to
   remove it.

   This document is intended to update RFC 3777.




Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Recall Revision               November 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Rationale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Modification of the Recall Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 6










































Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Recall Revision               November 2005


1.  Introduction and Rationale

   The procedures for initiating a recall specified in [RFC3777]
   restrict signatories to those who are "nomcom qualified".  Perhaps
   inadvertently, this prohibits members of the IESG and IAB from
   initiating these procedures.  This is probably not in the best
   interests of the community: if there is a problem within the IESG or
   IAB, other members of those bodies are likely to be aware of it
   before the general community.  The risks of permitting IESG or IAB
   members abusing process or each other by initiating a recall seem
   minimal: they remain ineligible to be members of the recall committee
   itself and the community would presumably swiftly punish such abuse
   through either the nomcom or the recall process.

   This document suggests that making IAB and IESG members ineligible to
   initiate recalls was an undesirable side-effect and proposes to
   remove it.


2.  Modification of the Recall Process

   The first two paragraphs of Section 7.1 of [RFC3777] are replaced by
   the following:

   1.  At any time, at least 20 members of the IETF community, who are,
   with the exception below, qualified to be voting members of a
   nominating committee, may request by signed petition (email is
   acceptable) to the Internet Society President the recall of any
   sitting IAB or IESG member.

   For the purposes of this section, sitting members of the IESG, IAB,
   or Internet Society Board of Trustees may sign recall petitions.  In
   other words, Section 4.15 of RFC 3777 is not applicable in
   determining who is permitted to sign these petitions.

   All individual and collective qualifications of nominating committee
   eligibility, excepting the one described in the previous paragraph,
   are applicable, including that no more than two signatories may have
   the same primary affiliation.


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA actions,


4.  Security Considerations




Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Recall Revision               November 2005


   This document discusses IETF procedures.  It raises no security
   issues for the Internet.

5.  References

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.











































Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Recall Revision               November 2005


Author's Address

   John C. Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, Suite 322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Email: john-ietf@jck.com











































Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Recall Revision               November 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                   Expires May 15, 2006                  [Page 6]


