



v6ops                                                          M. Byerly
Internet-Draft                                                   M. Hite
Intended status: Informational                                J. Jaeggli
Expires: December 4, 2014                                         Fastly
                                                            June 2, 2014


 Close encounters of the ICMP type 2 kind (near misses with ICMPv6 PTB)
               draft-jaeggli-v6ops-pmtud-ecmp-problem-00

Abstract

   This document calls attention to the problem of delivering ICMPv6
   type 2 "Packet Too Big" (PTB) messages to intended destinations in
   ECMP load balanced, anycast network architectures.  It discusses
   operational mitigations that can address this class of failure.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 4, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Mitigation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Alternatives  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Improvements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Operators of popular Internet services face unique challenges
   associated with scaling their infrastructure.  One approach is to
   utilize equal-cost multi-path (ECMP) routing to perform stateless
   distribution of incoming TCP or UDP sessions to multiple servers or
   middle boxes such as load balancers.  However, distribution of
   traffic in this manner presents a problem when dealing with ICMP
   signaling.  Specifically, an ICMP error is not guaranteed to hash via
   ECMP to the same destination as its corresponding TCP or UDP session.
   A case that is particularly problematic operationally is path MTU
   discovery (PMTUD).

2.  Problem

   A common application for stateless load balancing of TCP or UDP flows
   is to perform an initial subdivision of flows in front of a stateful
   load balancer tier or multiple servers such that the workload is
   divided into manageable chunks.  The division is performed using ECMP
   forwarding and a stateless but sticky algorithm for hashing the flows
   across the available paths.  This is a constrained form of anycast
   distribution where all anycast destinations are equidistant
   topologically from the upstream router responsible for making the
   last next-hop forwarding decision.  In this approach, the hash is
   performed across available protocol headers.  Typically, these
   headers may include flow-label, ingress interface, IP-source, IP-
   destination, protocol, source-port, and destination-port.

   A problem common to the approach of distribution through hashing is
   its impact on path MTU discovery.  An ICMPv6 type 2 PTB message
   generated on the path between a client and an ECMP load balanced
   server will have the anycast address as the destination and will be
   statelessly load balanced to one of the anycast servers.  While the
   ICMPv6 PTB message contains as much of the packet that could not be



Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


   forwarded as possible, the payload headers do not factor into the
   forwarding decision and are ignored.  Because of this, the results of
   the ICMPv6 ECMP hash do not match that of the corresponding TCP or
   UDP ECMP hash.

   An example packet flow and topology follow.


   ptb -> router ecmp -> nexthop L4/L7 load balancer -> destination

     router --> load balancer 1 --->
          \\--> load balancer 2 ---> load-balanced service
           \--> load balancer N --->


                                 Figure 1

   The router ECMP decision is used because it is part of the forwarding
   architecture, can be performed at line rate, and does not depend on
   shared state or coordination across a distributed forwarding
   architecture which may include multiple routers.  The ECMP routing
   decision is deterministic with respect to packets having the same
   computed hash.

   The typical case where ICMPv6 PTB messages are received at the load
   balancer is where the path MTU from the client to the load balancer
   is limited by a tunnel in which the client itself is not aware of.
   In particular, in the case of a TCP connection where TLS is employed,
   the first packet that is likely to exceed a tunnel MTU lower than
   that specified by the MSS on the client and the load balancer/server
   is the TLS ServerHello and certificate.

   Direct experience says that the frequency of PTB messages is small
   compared to total flows.  This says a lot about native vs. tunneled
   IPv6 deployment and the relative maturity of production IPv6
   deployment.  Techniques such as happy-eyeballs may actually
   contribute some amelioration to the IPv6 client experience.  Still,
   the expectation is that PMTUD should work and that unnecessary
   breakage of client traffic should be avoided.

   Some final observations are that it is typically not possible even if
   potentially desirable to be able to independently set the TCP MSS for
   different address families on end-systems.

   The problem as described does also impact IPv4; however, the ability
   to fragment on wire and the relative rarity of sub-1500 byte MTUs
   that are not coupled to changes in client behavior (for example,
   endpoint VPN clients set the tunnel interface MTU accordingly for



Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


   performance reasons) makes the problem sufficiently rare that some
   deployments simply choose to ignore it.

3.  Mitigation

   Mitigation of the described issue involves ensuring that an ICMPv6
   error message is distributed to the same anycast server responsible
   for the flow for which the error is generated.  Mitigation could be
   done by looking into the payload of the ICMPv6 message (to determine
   which TCP flow it was associated with) before making a forwarding
   decision.

   Alternative mitigation is predicated upon distributing the PTB
   message to all anycast servers under the assumption that the one that
   needs it will be able to match it to a flow and the others can update
   their route cache with the new MTU.  Such distribution has
   significant implications for resource consumption and the potential
   for self-inflicted denial-of-service if not carefully employed.
   Fortunately, the number of flows for which this problem occurs is
   relatively small (10 or fewer pps on 1Gb/s or more worth of https
   traffic) and sensible ingress rate limits can protect the anycast
   server tiers with potential fallout only under circumstances of
   deliberate duress.

3.1.  Alternatives

   As an alternative it is assumed to be appropriate to lower the TCP
   MSS to 1220 in order to accommodate 1280 byte MTU.  We consider this
   undesirable as hosts may not be able to independently set TCP MSS by
   address-family, or alternatively that it relies on a middle-box to
   clamp the MSS independently from the end-systems.

3.2.  Implementation

   1.  Filter-based-forwarding matches next-header ICMPv6 type-2 and
       matches a next-hop on a particular subnet directly attached to
       both border routers.  (Filter is policed to reasonable limits, we
       chose 1000pps)

   2.  Filter is applied on input side of all external interfaces

   3.  A proxy located at the next hop forwards ICMPv6 type-2 packets
       received at the next-hop to an Ethernet broadcast address
       (example ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff) on all specified subnets.  This was
       necessitated by the routers inability (in IPv6) to forward the
       same packet to multiple next-hops.





Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


   4.  Anycast servers receive the PTB error and process packet as
       needed

   A simple Python scapy script can be used to perform the ICMPv6 proxy
   reflection.

      #!/usr/bin/python

      from scapy.all import *

      IFACE_OUT = ["p2p1", "p2p2"]

      def icmp6_callback(pkt):
          if pkt.haslayer(IPv6) and (ICMPv6PacketTooBig in pkt) and pkt[Ether].dst != 'ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff':
              del(pkt[Ether].src)
              pkt[Ether].dst = 'ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff'
              pkt.show()
              for iface in IFACE_OUT:
                  sendp(pkt, iface=iface)

      def main():
          sniff(prn=icmp6_callback, filter="icmp6 and (ip6[40+0] == 2)", store=0)

      if __name__ == '__main__':
          main()

   This example script listens on all interfaces for IPv6 PTB errors
   being forwarded using filter-based-forwarding.  It removes the
   existing Ethernet source and rewrites a new Ethernet destination of
   the Ethernet broadcast address.  It then sends the resulting frame
   out the p2p1 and p2p2 interfaces where our anycast servers reside.

4.  Improvements

   There are several ways to imagine that improvements could be made to
   the situation with respect to ECMP load balancing of ICMPv6 PTB.

   1.  Routers with sufficient capacity within the lookup process could
       parse all the way through the L3 or L4 header in the ICMPv6
       payload beginning at bit offset 32 of the ICMP header.  By
       reordering the elements of the hash to match the inward direction
       of the flow, the PTB error could be directed to the same next-hop
       as the incoming packets in the flow.

   2.  The FIB could be programmed with a multicast distribution tree
       that included all of the necessary next-hops.





Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


   3.  Ubiquitous implementation of RFC 4821 [RFC4821] Packetization
       Layer Path MTU Discovery would probably go a long way towards
       reducing dependence on ICMPv6 PTB.

5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Ray Hunter for review.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   The employed mitigation has the potential to greatly amplify the
   impact of a deliberately malicious sending of ICMPv6 PTB messages.
   Sensible ingress rate limiting can reduce the potential for impact;
   however, legitimate traffic may be lost in the process.

   The proxy replication results in devices not associated with the flow
   that generated the PTB being recipients of an ICMPv6 message which
   contains a fragment of a packet.  This could arguably result in
   information disclosure.  Recipient machines should be in a common
   administrative domain.

8.  Informative References

   [RFC4821]  Mathis, M. and J. Heffner, "Packetization Layer Path MTU
              Discovery", RFC 4821, March 2007.

Authors' Addresses

   Matt Byerly
   Fastly
   Kapolei, HI
   US

   Email: mbyerly@zynga.com


   Matt Hite
   Fastly
   Redwood City, CA
   US

   Email: mhite@hotmail.com





Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB                June 2014


   Joel Jaeggli
   Fastly
   Mountain View, CA
   US

   Email: joelja@gmail.com













































Byerly, et al.          Expires December 4, 2014                [Page 7]
