
  Network Working Group                              Kohei Shiomoto (NTT) 
  Internet Draft                          Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
                                      Jean-Louis Le Roux (France Telecom) 
                                               Martin Vigoureux (Alcatel) 
                                                  Deborah Brungard (AT&T) 
                                                                          
  Expires: April 2007                                        October 2006 
      
                Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-region and 
                       multi-layer networks (MRN/MLN) 
                                       
                   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt 
      
      
  Status of this Memo 
      
     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
     have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
     aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
      
     This document may only be posted in an Internet-Draft. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
      
     This Internet-Draft will expire on April 2007. 
      
      
     Copyright Notice 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  
      
  Abstract 
      
     Most of the initial efforts on Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) have been 
     related to environments hosting devices with a single switching 
     capability. The complexity raised by the control of such data 
     planes is similar to that seen in classical IP/MPLS networks. 
      
     By extending MPLS to support multiple switching technologies, GMPLS 
     provides a comprehensive framework for the control of a multi-
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 1] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     layered network of either a single switching technology or multiple 
     switching technologies. In GMPLS, a switching technology domain 
     defines a region, and a network of multiple switching types is 
     referenced in this document as a multi-region network (MRN). When 
     referring in general to a layered network, which may consist of 
     either a single or multiple regions, this document uses the term, 
     Multi-layer Network (MLN). This draft defines a framework for GMPLS 
     based multi-region/multi-layer networks and lists a set of 
     functional requirements. 
      
  Table of Contents 
      
     1. Introduction...................................................2 
     2. Conventions used in this document..............................4 
     3. Positioning....................................................4 
     3.1. Data plane layers and control plane regions..................5 
     3.2. Service layer networks.......................................5 
     3.3. Vertical and Horizontal interaction and integration..........6 
     4. Key concepts of GMPLS-based MLNs and MRNs......................7 
     4.1. Interface Switching Capability...............................7 
     4.2. Multiple Interface Switching Capabilities....................8 
     4.2.1. Networks with multi-switching-type-capable hybrid nodes....8 
     4.3. Integrated Traffic Engineering (TE) and Resource Control.....9 
     4.3.1. Triggered signaling.......................................10 
     4.3.2. FA-LSP....................................................10 
     4.3.3. Virtual network topology (VNT)............................11 
     5. Requirements..................................................11 
     5.1. Handling single-switching and multi-switching-type-capable 
     nodes............................................................11 
     5.2. Advertisement of the available adaptation resource..........12 
     5.3. Scalability.................................................12 
     5.4. Stability...................................................12 
     5.5. Disruption minimization.....................................13 
     5.6. LSP Attribute inheritance...................................13 
     5.7. Computing paths with and without nested signaling...........14 
     5.8. LSP resource utilization....................................15 
     5.8.1. FA-LSP release and setup..................................15 
     5.8.2. Virtual TE-Link...........................................16 
     5.9. Verification of the LSP.....................................17 
     6. Security Considerations.......................................17 
     7. References....................................................17 
     7.1. Normative Reference.........................................17 
     7.2. Informative References......................................18 
     8. Author's Addresses............................................19 
     9. Intellectual Property Considerations..........................20 
     10. Full Copyright Statement.....................................20 
      
  1. Introduction 
      

   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 2] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) extends MPLS to handle multiple switching 
     technologies: packet switching, layer-2 switching, TDM switching, 
     wavelength switching, and fiber switching (see [RFC3945]). The 
     Interface Switching Capability (ISC) concept is introduced for 
     these switching technologies and is designated as follows: PSC 
     (packet switch capable), L2SC (Layer-2 switch capable), TDM (Time 
     Division Multiplex capable), LSC (lambda switch capable), and FSC 
     (fiber switch capable). 
      
     Service providers may operate networks where multiple different 
     switching technologies exist. The representation, in a GMPLS 
     control plane, of a switching technology domain is referred to as a 
     region [RFC4206]. 
      
     A switching type describes the ability of a node to forward data of 
     a particular data plane technology, and uniquely identifies a 
     network region. A layer describes a data plane switching 
     granularity level (e.g. VC4, VC-12). A data plane layer is 
     associated with a region in the control plane (e.g. VC4 associated 
     to TDM, IP associated to PSC). However, more than one data plane 
     layer can be associated to the same region (e.g. both VC4 and VC12 
     are associated to TDM). Thus, a control plane region, identified by 
     its switching type value (e.g. TDM), can itself be sub-divided into 
     smaller granularity based on the bandwidth that defines the "data 
     plane switching layers" e.g. from VC-11 to VC4-256c. The Interface 
     Switching Capability Descriptor (ISCD) [RFC4202], identifying the 
     interface switching capability (ISC), the encoding type and the 
     switching bandwidth granularity, enable the characterization of the 
     associated layers. 
      
     A network comprising nodes with multiple data plane layers of 
     either the same ISC or different ISCs, controlled by a single GMPLS 
     control plane instance is called a Multi-Layer Network (MLN). To 
     differentiate a network supporting LSPs of different switching 
     types from a single region network, a network supporting more than 
     one switching technology is called a Multi-Region Network (MRN).  
      
     MLNs can be categorized according to the distribution of the ISCD 
     values amongst the LSRs: 
     - Each LSR may support just one ISCD, and the set of LSRs may 
     comprised 
     LSRs that support different ISCDs. Such LSRs are known as 
       single-switching-type-capable LSRs.  
     - Each LSR may support more than one ISCD at the same time. Such 
     LSRs are known  
       as multi-switching-type-capable LSRs, and can be further  
       classified as either "simplex" or "hybrid" nodes as defined in  
       Section 4.2. 
     - The MLN may be constructed from any combination of single- 
       switching-type-capable LSRs and multi-switching-type-capable  
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 3] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
       LSRs. 
      
     Since GMPLS provides a comprehensive framework for the control of 
     different switching capabilities, a single GMPLS instance may be 
     used to control the MLN enabling rapid service provisioning and 
     efficient traffic engineering across all switching capabilities. In 
     such networks, TE Links are consolidated into a single Traffic 
     Engineering Database (TED). Since this TED contains the information 
     relative to all the different regions and layers existing in the 
     network, a path across multiple regions or layers can be computed 
     using this TED. Thus optimization of network resources can be 
     achieved across the whole MLN. 
      
     Consider, for example, a MRN consisting of packet-switch capable 
     routers and TDM cross-connects. Assume that a packet LSP is routed 
     between source and destination packet-switch capable routers, and 
     that the LSP can be routed across the PSC-region (i.e. utilizing 
     only resources of the packet region topology). If the performance 
     objective for the LSP is not satisfied, new TE links may be created 
     between the packet-switch capable routers across the TDM-region 
     (for example, VC-12 links) and the LSP can be routed over those TE 
     links. Further, even if the LSP can be successfully established 
     across the PSC-region, TDM hierarchical LSPs across the TDM region 
     between the packet-switch capable routers may be established and 
     used if doing so is necessary to meet the operator's objectives for 
     network resources availability (e.g., link bandwidth, or adaptation 
     ports between regions) across the regions. The same considerations 
     hold when VC4 LSPs are provisioned to provide extra flexibility for 
     the VC12 and/or VC11 layers in an MLN. 
      
     This document describes the requirements to support multi-
     region/multi-layer networks. There is no intention to specify 
     solution-specific elements in this document. The applicability of 
     existing GMPLS protocols and any protocol extensions to the MRN/MLN 
     will be addressed in separate documents [MRN-EVAL].  
      
  2. Conventions used in this document  
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
     "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
     this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
     [RFC2119].  
      
  3. Positioning  
      
     A multi-region network (MRN) is always a multi-layer network (MLN) 
     since the network devices on region boundaries bring together 
     different ISCs. A MLN, however, is not necessarily a MRN since 
     multiple layers could be fully contained within a single region. 

   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 4] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     For example, VC12, VC4, and VC4-4c are different layers of the TDM 
     region. 
      
  3.1. Data plane layers and control plane regions 
      
     A data plane layer is a collection of network resources capable of 
     terminating and/or switching data traffic of a particular format. 
     These resources can be used for establishing LSPs or connectionless 
     traffic delivery. For example, VC-11 and VC4-64c represent two 
     different layers. 
      
     From the control plane viewpoint, an LSP region is defined as a set 
     of one or more data plane layers that share the same type of 
     switching technology, that is, the same switching type. For example, 
     VC-11 and VC-4 layers are part of the same TDM region. The 
     currently defined regions are: PSC, L2SC, TDM, LSC, and FSC regions. 
     Hence, an LSP region is a technology domain (identified by the ISC 
     type) for which data plane resources (i.e. data links) are 
     represented into the control plane as an aggregate of TE 
     information associated with a set of links (i.e. TE links). For 
     example VC-11 and VC4-64c capable TE links are part of the same TDM 
     region. Multiple layers can thus exist in a single region network. 
      
     Note also that the region may produce a distinction within the 
     control plane. Layers of the same region share the same switching 
     technology and, therefore, use the same set of technology-specific 
     signaling objects within the control plane, but layers from 
     different regions may use different technology-specific objects or 
     encodings. This means that there is a control plane discontinuity 
     when crossing a region boundary. 
      
      
       
  3.2. Service layer networks  
      
     A service provider's network may be divided into different service 
     layers. The customer's network is considered from the provider's 
     perspective as the highest service layer. It interfaces to the 
     highest service layer of the service provider's network. 
     Connectivity across the highest service layer of the service 
     provider's network may be provided with support from successively 
     lower service layers. Service layers are realized via a hierarchy 
     of network layers located generally in several regions and commonly 
     arranged according to the switching capabilities of network devices. 
      
     For instance some customers purchase Layer 1 (i.e. transport) 
     services from the service provider, some Layer 2 (e.g. ATM), while 
     others purchase Layer 3 (IP/MPLS) services. The service provider 
     realizes the services by a stack of network layers located within 
     one or more network regions. The network layers are commonly 
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 5] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     arranged according to the switching capabilities of the devices in 
     the networks. Thus, a customer network may be provided on top of 
     the GMPLS-based multi-region/multi-layer network. For example, a 
     Layer 1 service (realized via the network layers of TDM, and/or LSC, 
     and/or FSC regions) may support a Layer 2 network (realized via ATM 
     VP/VC) which may itself support a Layer 3 network (IP/MPLS region). 
     The supported data plane relationship is a data-plane client-server 
     relationship where the lower layer provides a service for the 
     higher layer using the data links realized in the lower layer. 
      
     Services provided by a GMPLS-based multi-region/multi-layer network 
     are referred to as "Multi-region/Multi-layer network services". For 
     example, legacy IP and IP/MPLS networks can be supported on top of 
     multi-region/multi-layer networks. It has to be emphasized that 
     delivery of such diverse services is a strong motivator for the 
     deployment of multi-region/multi-layer networks. 
      
     A customer network may be provided on top of a server GMPLS-based 
     MRN/MLN which is operated by a service provider. For example, a 
     pure IP and/or an IP/MPLS network can be provided on top of GMPLS-
     based packet over optical networks [IW-MIG-FW]. The relationship 
     between the networks is a client/server relationship and, such 
     services are referred to as "MRN/MLN services". In this case, the 
     customer network may form part of the MRN/MLN, or may be partially 
     separated, for example to maintain separate routing information but 
     retain common signaling. 
      
  3.3. Vertical and Horizontal interaction and integration 
      
     Vertical interaction is defined as the collaborative mechanisms 
     within a network element that is capable of supporting more than 
     one layer and of realizing the client/server relationships between 
     them. Protocol exchanges between two network controllers managing 
     different regions or layers are also a vertical interaction. 
     Integration of these interactions as part of the control plane is 
     referred to as vertical integration. Thus, this refers to the 
     collaborative mechanisms within a single control plane instance 
     driving multiple network layers. Such a concept is useful in order 
     to construct a framework that facilitates efficient network 
     resource usage and rapid service provisioning in carrier's networks 
     that are based on multiple layers, switching technologies, or ISCDs.  
      
     Horizontal interaction is defined as the protocol exchange between 
     network controllers that manage transport nodes within a given 
     layer or region (i.e. nodes with the same switching capability). 
     For instance, the control plane interaction between two TDM network 
     elements switching at OC-48 is an example of horizontal interaction. 
     GMPLS protocol operations handle horizontal interactions within the 
     same routing area. The case where the interaction takes place 
     across a domain boundary, such as between two routing areas within 
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 6] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     the same network layer, is currently being evaluated as part of the 
     inter-domain work [Inter-domain], and is referred to as horizontal 
     integration. Thus horizontal integration refers to the 
     collaborative mechanisms between network partitions and/or 
     administrative divisions such as routing areas or autonomous 
     systems.  
      
     This distinction needs further clarification when administrative 
     domains match layer boundaries. Horizontal interaction is extended 
     to cover such cases. For example, the collaborative mechanisms in 
     place between two lambda switching capable areas relate to 
     horizontal integration. On the other hand, the collaborative 
     mechanisms in place in a network that supports IP/MPLS over TDM 
     switching could be described as vertical and horizontal integration 
     in the case where each network belongs to a separate routing area. 
      
  4. Key concepts of GMPLS-based MLNs and MRNs  
      
     A network comprising transport nodes with multiple data plane 
     layers of either the same ISC or different ISCs, controlled by a 
     single GMPLS control plane instance, is called a Multi-Layer 
     Network (MLN). A sub-set of MLNs consists of networks supporting 
     LSPs of different switching technologies (ISCs). A network 
     supporting more than one switching technology is called a Multi-
     Region Network (MRN). 
      
  4.1. Interface Switching Capability 
      
     The Interface Switching Capability (ISC) is introduced in GMPLS to 
     support various kinds of switching technology in a unified way 
     [RFC4202]. An ISC is identified via a switching type. 
      
     A switching type (also referred to as the switching capability 
     type) describes the ability of a node to forward data of a 
     particular data plane technology, and uniquely identifies a network 
     region. The following ISC types (and, hence, regions) are defined: 
     PSC, L2SC, TDM, LSC, and FSC. Each end of a data link (more 
     precisely, each interface connecting a data link to a node) in a 
     GMPLS network is associated with an ISC.  
      
     The ISC value is advertised as a part of the Interface Switching 
     Capability Descriptor (ISCD) attribute (sub-TLV) of a TE link end 
     associated with a particular link interface [RFC4202]. Apart from 
     the ISC, the ISCD contains information, including the encoding type, 
     the bandwidth granularity, and the unreserved bandwidth on each of 
     eight priorities at which LSPs can be established. The ISCD does 
     not "identify" network layers, it uniquely characterizes 
     information associated to one or more network layers. 
      

   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 7] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     TE link end advertisements may contain multiple ISCDs. This can be 
     interpreted as advertising a multi-layer (or multi-switching) TE 
     link end. That is, the TE link end is present in multiple layers. 
   
  4.2. Multiple Interface Switching Capabilities 
      
     In an MLN, network elements may be single-switching or multi-
     switching-type-capable nodes. Single-switching type capable nodes 
     advertise the same ISC value as part of their ISCD sub-TLV(s) to 
     describe the termination capabilities of their TE Link(s). This 
     case is described in [RFC4202].  
      
     Multi-switching-type-capable LSRs are classified as "simplex" or 
     "hybrid" nodes. Simplex and hybrid nodes are categorized according 
     to the way they advertise these multiple ISCs: 
      
     - A simplex node can terminate links with different switching 
     capabilities each of them connected to the node by a single link 
     interface. So, it advertises several TE Links each with a single 
     ISC value as part of its ISCD sub-TLVs. For example, an LSR with 
     PSC and TDM links each of which is connected to the LSR via single 
     interface. 
      
     - A hybrid node can terminate links with different switching 
     capabilities terminating on the same interface. So, it advertises 
     at least one TE Link containing more than one ISCDs with different 
     ISC values. For example, a node comprising of PSC and TDM links, 
     which are interconnected via internal links. The external 
     interfaces connected to the node have both PSC and TDM capability. 
      
     Additionally TE link advertisements issued by a simplex or a hybrid 
     node may need to provide information about the node's internal 
     adaptation capabilities between the switching technologies 
     supported. That is, the node's capability to perform layer border 
     node functions.  
      
      
  4.2.1. Networks with multi-switching-type-capable hybrid nodes 
      
     The network contains at least one hybrid node, zero or more simplex 
     nodes, and a set of single-switching-type-capable nodes. 
       
     Figure 5a shows an example hybrid node. The hybrid node has two 
     switching elements (matrices), which support, for instance, TDM and 
     PSC switching respectively. The node terminates a PSC and a TDM 
     link (Link1 and Link2 respectively). It also has an internal link 
     connecting the two switching elements.  
      
     The two switching elements are internally interconnected in such a 
     way that it is possible to terminate some of the resources of, say, 
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 8] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     Link2 and provide adaptation for PSC traffic received/sent over the 
     PSC interface (#b). This situation is modeled in GMPLS by 
     connecting the local end of Link2 to the TDM switching element via 
     an additional interface realizing the termination/adaptation 
     function. Two ways are possible to set up PSC LSPs. Available 
     resource advertisement e.g. Unreserved and Min/Max LSP Bandwidth 
     should cover both two ways. 
         
                               Network element  
                          .............................  
                          :            --------       :  
                          :           |  PSC   |      :  
              Link1 -------------<->--|#a      |      :  
                          :  +--<->---|#b      |      :  
                          :  |         --------       :  
                TDM       :  |        ----------      :  
                +PSC      :  +--<->--|#c  TDM   |     :  
              Link2 ------------<->--|#d        |     :  
                          :           ----------      :  
                          :............................  
      
                               Figure 5a. Hybrid node.  
         
      
  4.3. Integrated Traffic Engineering (TE) and Resource Control  
      
     In GMPLS-based multi-region/multi-layer networks, TE Links are 
     consolidated into a single Traffic Engineering Database (TED) for 
     use by the single control plane instance. Since this TED contains 
     the information relative to all the layers of all regions in the 
     network, a path across multiple layers (possibly crossing multiple 
     regions) can be computed using the information in this TED. Thus 
     optimization of network resources across the multiple layers of the 
     same region and across multiple regions can be achieved.  
      
     These concepts allow for the operation of one network layer over 
     the topology (that is, TE links) provided by other network layers 
     (for example, the use of a lower layer LSC LSP carrying PSC LSPs). 
     In turn, a greater degree of control and inter-working can be 
     achieved, including (but not limited too):  
     - dynamic establishment of Forwarding Adjacency LSPs (see Section 
     4.3.3)  
     - provisioning of end-to-end LSPs with dynamic triggering of FA 
     LSPs 
      
     Note that in a multi-layer/multi-region network that includes 
     multi-switching-type-capable nodes, an explicit route used to 
     establish an end-to-end LSP can specify nodes that belong to 
     different layers or regions. In this case, a mechanism to control 
     the dynamic creation of FA LSPs may be required. 
   
                            Expires April 2007                  [Page 9] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
      
     There is a full spectrum of options to control how FA LSPs are 
     dynamically established. The process can be subject to the control 
     of a policy, which may be set by a management component, and which 
     may require that the management plane is consulted at the time that 
     the FA LSP is established. Alternatively, the FA LSP can be 
     established at the request of the control plane without any 
     management control.  
      
  4.3.1. Triggered signaling  
      
     When an LSP crosses the boundary from an upper to a lower layer, it 
     may be nested into a lower layer FA LSP that crosses the lower 
     layer. From a signaling perspective, there are two alternatives to 
     establish the lower layer FA LSP: static (pre-provisioned) and 
     dynamic (triggered).  Pre-provisioned FA-LSP will be initiated 
     either by the operator or automatically using features like TE 
     auto-mesh [AUTO-MESH]. If such a lower layer LSP does not already 
     exist, the LSP may be established dynamically. Such a mechanism is 
     referred to as "triggered signaling".  
      
  4.3.2. FA-LSP 
      
     Once an LSP is created across a layer, it can be used as a data 
     link in an upper layer.  
      
     Furthermore, it can be advertised as a TE-link, allowing other 
     nodes to consider the LSP as a TE link for their path computation 
     [RFC4206]. An LSP created either statically or dynamically by one 
     instance of the control plane and advertised as a TE link into the 
     same instance of the control plane is called a Forwarding adjacency 
     LSP (FA-LSP). The TE-link as which the FA-LSP is advertised is 
     called an FA. An FA has the special characteristic of not requiring 
     a routing adjacency (peering) between its end points yet still 
     guaranteeing control plane connectivity between the FA-LSP end 
     points based on a signaling adjacency. A FA is a useful and 
     powerful tool for improving the scalability of GMPLS Traffic 
     Engineering (TE) capable networks since multiple higher layer LSPs 
     may be nested (aggregated) over a single FA-LSP. 
      
     The aggregation of LSPs enables the creation of a vertical (nested) 
     LSP Hierarchy. A set of FA-LSPs across or within a lower layer can 
     be used during path selection by a higher layer LSP. Likewise, the 
     higher layer LSPs may be carried over dynamic data links realized 
     via LSPs (just as they are carried over any "regular" static data 
     links). This process requires the nesting of LSPs through a 
     hierarchical process [RFC4206]. The TED contains a set of LSP 
     advertisements from different layers that are identified by the 
     ISCD contained within the TE link advertisement associated with the 
     LSP [RFC4202].  
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 10] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
      
     If a lower layer LSP is not advertised as an FA, it can still be 
     used to carry higher layer LSPs across the lower layer. For example, 
     if the LSP is set up using triggered signaling, it will be used to 
     carry the higher layer LSP that caused the trigger. Further, the 
     lower layer remains available for use by other higher layer LSPs 
     arriving at the boundary. 
      
       
  4.3.3. Virtual network topology (VNT)  
      
     A set of one or more of lower-layer LSPs provides information for 
     efficient path handling in upper-layer(s) of the MLN, or, in other 
     words, provides a virtual network topology (VNT) to the upper-
     layers. For instance, a set of LSPs, each of which is supported by 
     an LSC LSP, provides a virtual network topology to the layers of a 
     PSC region, assuming that the PSC region is connected to the LSC 
     region. Note that a single lower-layer LSP is a special case of the 
     VNT. The virtual network topology is configured by setting up or 
     tearing down the lower layer LSPs. By using GMPLS signaling and 
     routing protocols, the virtual network topology can be adapted to 
     traffic demands. 
      
     Reconfiguration of the virtual network topology may be triggered by 
     traffic demand changes, topology configuration changes, signaling 
     requests from the upper layer, and network failures. For instance, 
     by reconfiguring the virtual network topology according to the 
     traffic demand between source and destination node pairs, network 
     performance factors, such as maximum link utilization and residual 
     capacity of the network, can be optimized [MAMLTE]. Reconfiguration 
     is performed by computing the new VNT from the traffic demand 
     matrix and optionally from the current VNT. Exact details are 
     outside the scope of this document. However, this method may be 
     tailored according to the service provider's policy regarding 
     network performance and quality of service (delay, loss/disruption, 
     utilization, residual capacity, reliability). 
      
  5.Requirements  
      
  5.1.Handling single-switching and multi-switching-type-capable nodes  
      
     The MRN/MLN can consist of single-switching-type-capable and multi-
     switching-type-capable nodes. The path computation mechanism in the 
     MLN SHOULD be able to compute paths consisting of any combination 
     of such nodes.  
      
     Both single-switching-type-capable and multi-switching-type-capable 
     (simplex or hybrid) nodes could play the role of layer boundary. 
     MRN/MLN Path computation SHOULD handle TE topologies built of any 
     combination of nodes  
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 11] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
      
  5.2. Advertisement of the available adaptation resource  
      
     A hybrid node SHOULD maintain resources and advertise the resource 
     information on its internal links, the links required for vertical 
     (layer) integration. Likewise, path computation elements SHOULD be 
     prepared to use the availability of termination/adaptation 
     resources as a constraint in MRN/MLN path computations to reduce 
     the higher layer LSP setup blocking probability because of the lack 
     of necessary termination/ adaptation resources in the lower 
     layer(s). 
   
     The advertisement of the adaptation capability to terminate LSPs of 
     lower-region and forward traffic in the upper-region is REQUIRED, 
     as it provides critical information when performing multi-region 
     path computation. 
      
     The mechanism SHOULD cover the case where the upper-layer links 
     which are directly connected to upper-layer switching element and 
     the ones which are connected through internal links between upper-
     layer element and lower-layer element coexist (See section 4.2.1). 
      
  5.3. Scalability  
      
     The MRN/MLN relies on a unified traffic engineering and routing 
     model. The TED in each LSR is populated with TE-links from all 
     layers of all regions. This may lead to a huge amount of 
     information that has to be flooded and stored within the network. 
     Furthermore, path computation times, which may be of great 
     importance during restoration, will depend on the size of the TED.  
      
     Thus MRN/MLN routing mechanisms MUST be designed to scale well with 
     an increase of any of the following:  
      - Number of nodes  
      - Number of TE-links (including FA-LSPs)  
      - Number of LSPs  
      - Number of regions and layers 
      - Number of ISCDs per TE-link. 
      
     Further, design of the routing protocols MUST NOT prevent TE 
     information filtering based on ISCDs. Signaling protocol SHOULD be 
     able to operate on partial TE information. 
      
  5.4.Stability  
      
     Path computation is dependent on the network topology and 
     associated link state. The path computation stability of an upper 
     layer may be impaired if the VNT changes frequently and/or if the 
     status and TE parameters (TE metric for instance) of links in the 
     virtual network topology changes frequently.  
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 12] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
      
     In this context, robustness of the VNT is defined as the capability 
     to smooth changes that may occur and avoid their propagation into 
     higher layers. Changes of the VNT may be caused by the creation, 
     deletion, or modification of several LSPs.  
      
     Creation, deletion and modification of LSPs MAY be triggered by 
     adjacent layers or through operational actions to meet traffic 
     demand changes, topology changes, signaling requests from the upper 
     layer, and network failures. Routing robustness SHOULD be traded 
     with adaptability with respect to the change of incoming traffic 
     requests.  
      
     A full mesh of LSPs MAY be created between every pair of border 
     nodes of the higher layer. The merit of a full mesh of PSC TE-LSPs 
     is that it provides stability to the higher layer routing. That is, 
     the TED or forwarding table used in the higher layer of a PSC-LSR 
     is not impacted by routing changes within the lower-layer (e.g., 
     TDM layer). Further, there is always full PSC reachability and 
     immediate access to bandwidth to support LSPs in the higher layer. 
     But it also has significant drawbacks, since it requires the 
     maintenance of n^2 RSVP-TE sessions, which may be quite CPU and 
     memory consuming (scalability impact). Also this may lead to 
     significant bandwidth wastage if LSPs with a certain amount of 
     reserved bandwidth are used. 
     Note that the use of virtual TE-links solves the bandwidth wastage 
     issue, and may reduce the control plane overload. 
      
  5.5.Disruption minimization  
      
     When reconfiguring the VNT according to a change in traffic demand, 
     the upper-layer LSP might be disrupted. Such disruption to the 
     upper layers MUST be minimized.  
      
     When residual resource decreases to a certain level, some lower 
     layer LSPs MAY be released according to local or network policies. 
     There is a trade-off between minimizing the amount of resource 
     reserved in the lower layer and disrupting higher layer traffic 
     (i.e. moving the traffic to other TE-LSPs so that some LSPs can be 
     released). Such traffic disruption MAY be allowed but MUST be under 
     the control of policy that can be configured by the operator. Any 
     repositioning of traffic MUST be as non-disruptive as possible (for 
     example, using make-before-break).  
      
  5.6.LSP Attribute inheritance  
      
     TE-Link parameters SHOULD be inherited from the parameters of the 
     LSP that provides the TE-link, and so from the TE-links in the 
     lower layer that are traversed by the LSP.  
     These include:  
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 13] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     - Interface Switching Capability  
     - TE metric  
     - Maximum LSP bandwidth per priority level  
     - Unreserved bandwidth for all priority levels   
     - Maximum Reservable bandwidth  
     - Protection attribute  
     - Minimum LSP bandwidth (depending on the Switching Capability)  
      
     Inheritance rules MUST be applied based on specific policies. 
     Particular attention should be given to the inheritance of TE 
     metric (which may be other than a strict sum of the metrics of the 
     component TE links at the lower layer) and protection attributes. 
      
  5.7.Computing paths with and without nested signaling  
      
     Path computation MAY take into account LSP region and layer 
     boundaries when computing a path for an LSP. For example, path 
     computation MAY restrict the path taken by an LSP to only the links 
     whose interface switching capability is PSC.  
      
     Interface switching capability is used as a constraint in path 
     computation. For example, a TDM-LSP is routed over the topology 
     composed of TE links of the same TDM layer. In calculating the path 
     for the LSP, the TED MAY be filtered to include only links where 
     both end include requested LSP switching type. In this way 
     hierarchical routing is done by using a TED filtered with respect 
     to switching capability (that is, with respect to particular layer). 
      
     If triggered signaling is allowed, the path computation mechanism 
     MAY produce a route containing multiple layers/regions. The path is 
     computed over the multiple layers/regions even if the path is not 
     "connected" in the same layer as the endpoints of the path exist. 
     Note that here we assume that triggered signaling will be invoked 
     to make the path "connected", when the upper-layer signaling 
     request arrives at the boundary node.  
      
     The upper-layer signaling request may contain an ERO that includes 
     only hops in the upper layer, in which case the boundary node is 
     responsible for triggered creating of the lower-layer FA-LSP using 
     a path of its choice, or for the selection of any available lower 
     layer LSP as a data link for the higher layer. This mechanism is 
     appropriate for environments where the TED is filtered in the 
     higher layer, where separate routing instances are used per layer, 
     or where administrative policies prevent the higher layer from 
     specifying paths through the lower layer. 
      
     Obviously, if the lower layer LSP has been advertised as a TE link 
     (virtual or real) into the higher layer, then the higher layer 
     signaling request may contain the TE link identifier and so 
     indicate the lower layer resources to be used. But in this case, 
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 14] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     the path of the lower layer LSP can be dynamically changed by the 
     lower layer at any time.  
      
     Alternatively, the upper-layer signaling request may contain an ERO 
     specifying the lower layer FA-LSP route. In this case, the boundary 
     node is responsible for decision as to which it should use the path 
     contained in the strict ERO or it should re-compute the path within 
     in the lower-layer. 
      
     Even in case the lower-layer FA-LSPs are already established, a 
     signaling request may also be encoded as loose ERO. In this 
     situation, it is up to the boundary node to decide whether it 
     should a new lower-layer FA-LSP or it should use the existing 
     lower-layer FA-LSPs. 
      
     The lower-layer FA-LSP can be advertised just as an FA-LSP in the 
     upper-layer or an IGP adjacency can be brought up on the lower-
     layer FA-LSP. 
      
  5.8. LSP resource utilization  
      
     It MUST be possible to utilize network resources efficiently. 
     Particularly, resource usage in all layers SHOULD be optimized as a 
     whole (i.e., across all layers), in a coordinated manner, (i.e., 
     taking all layers into account). The number of lower-layer LSPs 
     carrying upper-layer LSPs SHOULD be minimized (Note that multiple 
     LSPs MAY be used for load balancing). Unneccesary lower-layer LSPs, 
     which would not carry any traffic by rerouting the traffic over it 
     to alternative lower-layer LSPs, SHOULD be avoided.  
      
  5.8.1. FA-LSP release and setup 
      
     Statistical multiplexing can only be employed in PSC and L2SC 
     regions. A PSC or L2SC LSP may or may not consume the maximum 
     reservable bandwidth of the FA LSP that carries it. On the other 
     hand, a TDM, or LSC LSP always consumes a fixed amount of bandwidth 
     as long as it exists (and is fully instantiated) because 
     statistical multiplexing is not available.  
      
     If there is low traffic demand, some FA LSPs that do not carry any 
     LSP MAY be released so that lower-layer resources are released. 
     Note that if a small fraction of the available bandwidth of an FA-
     LSP is still in use, the nested LSPs can also be re-routed to other 
     FA-LSPs (optionally using the make-before-break technique) to 
     complete free up the FA-LSP. Alternatively, the FA LSPs MAY be 
     retained for future use. Release or retention of underutilized FA 
     LSPs is a policy decision.  
       
     As part of the re-optimization process, the solution MUST allow 
     rerouting of an FA LSP while keeping interface identifiers of 
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 15] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     corresponding TE links unchanged. Further, this process MUST be 
     possible while the FA LSP is carrying traffic (higher layer LSPs) 
     with minimal disruption to the traffic. 
      
     Additional FA LSPs MAY also be created based on policy, which might 
     consider residual resources and the change of traffic demand across 
     the region. By creating the new FA LSPs, the network performance 
     such as maximum residual capacity may increase.  
      
     As the number of FA LSPs grows, the residual resource may decrease. 
     In this case, re-optimization of FA LSPs MAY be invoked according 
     to policy.  
      
     Any solution MUST include measures to protect against network 
     destabilization caused by the rapid setup and teardown of LSPs as 
     traffic demand varies near a threshold. 
   
  5.8.2. Virtual TE-Link 
      
     It may be considered disadvantageous to fully instantiate (i.e. 
     pre-provision) the set of lower layer LSPs that provide the VNT 
     since this might reserve bandwidth that could be used for other 
     LSPs in the absence of the upper-layer traffic.  
      
     However, in order to allow path computation of upper-layer LSPs 
     across the lower-layer, the lower-layer LSPs MAY be advertised into 
     the upper-layer as though they had been fully established, but 
     without actually establishing them. Such TE links that represent 
     the possibility of an underlying LSP are termed "virtual TE-link". 
     It is an implementation choice at a boundary node whether to create 
     virtual TE-links, and the choice if available MUST be under the 
     control of operator policy. Note that there is no requirement to 
     support the creation of virtual TE-links, since real TE-links (with 
     established LSPs) may be used, and even if there are no TE-links 
     (virtual or real) advertised to the higher layer, it is possible to 
     route a higher layer LSP into a lower layer on the assumptions that 
     proper hierarchical LSPs in the lower layer will be dynamically 
     created (triggered) as needed. 
      
     If an upper-layer LSP that makes use of a virtual TE-Link is set up, 
     the underlying LSP MUST be immediately signaled in the lower layer.  
      
     If virtual TE-Links are used in place of pre-established LSPs, the 
     TE-links across the upper-layer can remain stable using pre-
     computed paths while wastage of bandwidth within the lower-layer 
     and unnecessary reservation of adaptation ports at the border nodes 
     can be avoided.  
      
     The concept of the VNT can be extended to allow the virtual TE-
     links to form part of the VNT. The combination of the fully 
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 16] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     provisioned TE-links and the virtual TE-links defines the VNT 
     provided by the lower layer.  
      
     The solution SHOULD provide operations to facilitate the build-up 
     of such virtual TE-links, taking into account the (forecast) 
     traffic demand and available resource in the lower-layer.  
      
     virtual TE-links MAY be modified dynamically (by adding or removing 
     virtual TE links, or chancing their capacity) according to the 
     change of the (forecast) traffic demand and the available resource 
     in the lower-layer.  
      
     Any solution MUST include measures to protect against network 
     destabilization caused by the rapid changes in the virtual network 
     topology as traffic demand varies near a threshold. 
      
     The VNT can be changed by setting up and/or tearing down virtual TE 
     links as well as by modifying real links (i.e. the fully 
     provisioned LSPs).  
      
     The maximum number of virtual TE links that can be defined SHOULD 
     be configurable.  
      
     How to design the VNT and how to manage it are out of scope of this 
     document. 
      
  5.9. Verification of the LSP  
      
     When a lower layer LSP is established for use as a data link by a 
     higher layer, the LSP MAY be verified for correct connectivity and 
     data integrity. Such mechanisms are data technology-specific and 
     are beyond the scope of this document, but may be coordinated 
     through the GMPLS control plane. 
      
      
      
  6. Security Considerations  
      
     The current version of this document does not introduce any new 
     security considerations as it only lists a set of requirements. In 
     the future versions, new security requirements may be added.  
      
  7. References  
      
  7.1. Normative Reference  
      
     [RFC2119]       Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
                      Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, 
                      March 1997. 
      
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 17] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     [RFC3979]       Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
                      Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005. 
      
     [RFC4202]  K.Kompella and Y.Rekhter, "Routing Extensions in 
                   Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
                   Switching (GMPLS)," RFC4202, October 2005.  
      
     [Inter-domain]  A.Farrel, J-P. Vasseur, and A.Ayyangar, "A 
                   framework for inter-domain MPLS traffic   
                   engineering," draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-
                   framework, work in progress.  
      
     [RFC4206]  K.Kompella and Y.Rekhter, "Label Switched Paths (LSP) 
                   Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
                   Switching (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE),"  
                   RFC4206, Oct. 2005.  
      
     [STITCH]   Ayyangar, A. and Vasseur, JP., "Label Switched Path 
                   Stitching with Generalized MPLS Traffic Engineering",  
                   draft-ietf-ccamp-lsp-stitching, work in progress. 
      
     [RFC4204]  J. Lang, "Link management protocol (LMP)," RFC4204, 
                   October 2005.  
      
     [RFC3945]  E.Mannie (Ed.), "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
                   Switching (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October 
                   2004.  
      
  7.2. Informative References 
   
     [MAMLTE]     K. Shiomoto et al., "Multi-area multi-layer traffic 
                   engineering using hierarchical LSPs in GMPLS 
                   networks", draft-shiomoto-multiarea-te, work in 
                   progress.  
      
     [MRN-EVAL] Le Roux, J.L., Brungard, D., Oki, E., Papadimitriou, D., 
                   Shiomoto, K., Vigoureux, M.,"Evaluation of existing 
                   GMPLS Protocols against Multi Layer and Multi Region 
                   Networks (MLN/MRN)", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval, 
                   work in progress. 
      
     [IW-MIG-FW]   Shiomoto, K., Papadimitriou, D., Le Roux, J.L., 
                   Brungard, D., Oki, E., Inoue, I., " Framework for 
                   IP/MPLS-GMPLS interworking in support of IP/MPLS to 
                   GMPLS migration ", draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-gmpls-
                   interwork-fmwk-00.txt, work in progress. 
      
     [AUTO-MESH]   Vasseur, JP., Le Roux, JL., et al., "Routing 
                   extensions for discovery of Multiprotocol (MPLS) 
                   Label Switch Router (LSR) Traffic Engineering (TE) 
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 18] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
                   mesh membership", draft-ietf-ccamp-automesh, work in 
                   progress. 
                                       
      
      
  8. Author's Addresses  
      
     Kohei Shiomoto  
     NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories  
     3-9-11 Midori-cho,   
     Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan  
     Email: shiomoto.kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp  
      
     Dimitri Papadimitriou  
     Alcatel  
     Francis Wellensplein 1,   
     B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium  
     Phone : +32 3 240 8491  
     Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be  
      
     Jean-Louis Le Roux  
     France Telecom R&D,   
     Av Pierre Marzin,   
     22300 Lannion, France  
     Email: jeanlouis.leroux@orange-ft.com  
      
     Martin Vigoureux   
     Alcatel  
     Route de Nozay, 91461 Marcoussis cedex, France  
     Phone: +33 (0)1 69 63 18 52  
     Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel.fr  
      
     Deborah Brungard  
     AT&T  
     Rm. D1-3C22 - 200   
     S. Laurel Ave., Middletown, NJ 07748, USA  
     Phone: +1 732 420 1573  
     Email: dbrungard@att.com  
      
     Contributors  
      
     Eiji Oki (NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories)   
     3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan   
     Phone: +81 422 59 3441 Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp  
      
     Ichiro Inoue (NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories)   
     3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan   
     Phone: +81 422 59 3441 Email: ichiro.inoue@lab.ntt.co.jp  
      
     Emmanuel Dotaro (Alcatel)   
   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 19] 
   
   
   
                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs-02.txt    October 2006              
   
   
   
     Route de Nozay, 91461 Marcoussis cedex, France  
     Phone : +33 1 6963 4723 Email: emmanuel.dotaro@alcatel.fr  
      
  9. Intellectual Property Considerations  
      
     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
     Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
     documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
      
     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.   
      
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
     ipr@ietf.org.   
      
     The IETF has been notified by Tellabs Operations, Inc. of 
     intellectual property rights claimed in regard to some or all of 
     the specification contained in this document. For more information, 
     see http://www.ietf.org/ietf/IPR/tellabs-ipr-draft-shiomoto-ccamp-
     gmpls-mrn-reqs.txt  
      
  10. Full Copyright Statement  
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject 
     to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
     except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.  
      
     This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
     an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
     THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
     EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
     THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
     ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 



   
                            Expires April 2007                 [Page 20] 
   
   
