KITTEN                                                       Jiang Yu
Internet Draft                                              Huang Jie
Intended status: Standards Track                    Southeast University
Expires: June 2014                                   December 19, 2013



              RF fingerprint authentication of wireless device
               draft-jiang-kitten-rf-fingerprint-auth-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 19, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
   as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
   document. Code Components extracted from this document must include
   Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
   Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in
   the Simplified BSD License.




Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      RF fingerprint authentication        December 2013


Abstract

   This memo documents the concept of RF fingerprint which is the unique
   identity characteristics of wireless device and can not be modified.
   Then, we give the method to get the RF fingerprint from the emitted
   wireless signal. At last, we tell how to use the RF fingerprint to
   carry out the authentication. Because of the non-replicable of RF
   fingerprint, the security of the authentication can be improved.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................. 2
   2. The concept of RF fingerprint ................................ 3
      2.1. The definition of RF fingerprint ........................ 3
      2.2. The RF fingerprinting technology ........................ 3
         2.2.1. Recognition for transient signals .................. 3
         2.2.2. Recognition for stationary signals ................. 3
   3. RF fingerprint transformation method ......................... 4
   4. Authentication on RF fingerprint ............................. 4
   5. Security Considerations ...................................... 5
   6. IANA Considerations .......................................... 5
   7. References ................................................... 5
      7.1. Normative References .................................... 5
   8. Acknowledgments .............................................. 5

1. Introduction

   As the rapid development of wireless networks and the increase of
   security threats, the physical-layer security of wireless networks is
   becoming important more and more.

   Authentication is the foundation of the security of wireless network
   services, authentication ensures that the communication entity is the
   entity he claims, and the goal of authentication is to prevent the
   access of illegal users. Authentication above the physical layer of
   wireless networks is normally based on cryptography mechanism and
   security protocol, while the key of cryptography mechanism is easy to
   be compromised and the defects of security protocol are common.

   The Radio Frequency (RF) fingerprints, which embodies the hardware
   property of the wireless transmitter to be identified, has the
   characteristics difficult to be cloned and can be used for non-
   cryptographic authentication of wireless transmitters.





Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      RF fingerprint authentication        December 2013


2. The concept of RF fingerprint

2.1. The definition of RF fingerprint

   RF fingerprint is transformed results carry the wireless device
   hardware information transmitter receives wireless signals, the
   results reflect this transformation transmitter hardware features of
   wireless devices and have comparable.

2.2. The RF fingerprinting technology

   RF fingerprinting architecture is divided into signal layers, layer
   RF fingerprint characteristic layer and layer of wireless transmitter
   to be identified. To be identified with a wireless transmitter sends
   a radio signal that can be converted from a different perspective for
   a variety of RF fingerprint; while the same kind of radio frequency
   fingerprint, different features can be extracted from a different
   perspective. RF fingerprint recognition based on multiple features RF
   fingerprints to identify or confirm the identity of the wireless
   transmitter.

2.2.1. Recognition for transient signals

   Fingerprint identification based on radio frequency transient signals
   is the signal for the interception of the radio fingerprint received
   radio signal converting transient components, namely: the wireless
   device is a transmitter state, the transmission power from zero to
   rated power or the power back from the nominal when part of the
   process signals emitted by 0. The transmitter transmits a signal
   during the transient, the capacitor charging and discharging, a power
   amplifier gradually ascending or descending, the frequency
   synthesizer (if it exists) between the output and the non-steady
   output switching.

2.2.2. Recognition for stationary signals

   Steady-state signal is the signal portion of the received wireless
   signal between the start and end of the transient signals. RF
   fingerprint recognition based on steady-state signal has been more
   and more attention, and achieved good recognition performance.

   Since the RF signal based on steady-state fingerprint carries more
   wireless transmitter device hardware information, and thus achieve a
   better recognition performance.





Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      RF fingerprint authentication        December 2013


3. RF fingerprint transformation method

   Radiofrequency fingerprinting is divided in 4 Step process: the
   starting time of receiving a wireless signal detection and signal
   interception, RF fingerprint transform, feature extraction and
   recognition or recognition of wireless devices and radio frequency
   based on the intermediate results of fingerprint identification
   process, try RF fingerprinting of built architecture includes a
   signal layer, RF fingerprint layer, feature layer and wireless
   transmitters layer.

   RF fingerprint can be divided into a transient signal from the turn-
   on conversion RF fingerprint and fingerprint using steady-state RF
   two steady-state signal transformations comes. Transient signal
   refers to a wireless transmitter transmitting power when the
   transient part of the signal from 0 to reach the rated power, the
   section does not contain information transmitted symbols, which are
   comparable; hardware and reflect the nature of the transmitter, which
   has long been transformed time domain envelope spectrum, wavelet
   factors and based on fractal dimension, such as the turn-on transient
   signal RF wireless transmitter for fingerprint recognition.

   In which the radio signal transmitter transmits the steady state
   power of the transmitted signal stable, because the wireless
   transmitter frequency offset, the preamble, the constellation points
   with comparable hardware and reflect the nature of the wireless
   transmitter, and thus a "steady state signal" is converted to a
   frequency bias, leading envelope, leading the spectrum, leading
   wavelet factors and constellation points, etc. steady-state RF
   fingerprinting is used to identify a wireless transmitter

4. Authentication on RF fingerprint

   We need to choose proper features to carry out the authentication.
   The goal of feature selection is to obtain distinctive feature
   templates fingerprints from raw transient signals. Our feature
   selection procedure consists of two stages: (1) initial
   transformation and (2) feature extraction using statistical analysis.
   The initial transformation is selected from a set of known
   transformations and is an input into a Linear Discriminant Analysis
   (LDA) feature extraction. The feature extraction is done using a
   linear transformation derived from Fisher LDA. In the initial
   transformation stage, we experimentally test a number of signal
   transformations to find initial features that capture most
   discriminant information in a device's transient. In the statistical
   analysis stage, we statistically determine linear boundaries between
   the initial features in order to efficiently reduce the


Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      RF fingerprint authentication        December 2013


   dimensionality and increase the system accuracy. The used Fisher LDA
   has been effectively applied to discriminate human biometrics and
   outperforms related methods when the training data is sufficiently
   large. Then, the selected features are transformed to obtain the
   stable features to carry out the authentication.

5. Security Considerations

   The current version of this document does not affect the existing
   security issues. In the future versions, new security requirements
   may be added.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.

7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and
         Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

8. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot


















Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      RF fingerprint authentication        December 2013


   Authors' Addresses

   Yu Jiang
   Southeast University
   2# Sipailou, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China
   Email: jiangyu@seu.edu.cn


   Jie Huang
   Southeast University
   2# Sipailou, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China
   Email: jhuang@seu.edu.cn




































Yu & Jie                Expires June 19, 2014                 [Page 6]

