

SIPPING Working Group                                       S. Niccolini
Internet-Draft                                                J. Quittek
Expires: July 15, 2007                                               NEC
                                                        January 11, 2007


        Signaling TO Prevent SPIT (SPITSTOP) Reference Scenario
                  draft-niccolini-sipping-spitstop-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.
   This document may not be modified, and derivative works of it may not
   be created, except to publish it as an RFC and to translate it into
   languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 15, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).

Abstract

   This memo discusses the need for standards that support SPam over
   Internet Telephony (SPIT) prevention applications.  After explaining
   the general need for SPIT prevention applications the memo provides a
   reference scenario for potential communication between entities that
   may be involved in SPIT prevention.  Within this scenario the need



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   for standardizing communication is analyzed for each pair of
   communicating entities.  The analysis is intended to serve as a
   starting point for discussing the requirements for signaling
   standards, for example, SIP extensions, that support SPIT prevention
   applications.

   This memo is not intended to suggest any solution of SPIT signaling
   issues.  Such work, if necessary at all, would be subject of separate
   follow-up documents.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  The SPIT Threat  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Communication Need for SPIT Prevention . . . . . . . . . .  4

   2.  Reference Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   3.  Signaling Interfaces Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Interfaces on the Signaling Path . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.1.1.  Downstream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.1.2.  Upstream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Off-Path Interfaces between Proxy Servers  . . . . . . . . 12
     3.3.  Interfaces to Special SPIT Prevention Entities . . . . . . 13

   4.  Need for Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.1.  Preliminary Protocol Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   5.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18














Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


1.  Introduction

   Email is an essential means for world-wide communication.  The
   openness of the Internet make use of email easy but also makes it
   easy to mis-use it, particular to annoy users with spam email.
   Today, there is more spam email transmitted by the public Internet
   than regular email.

   Internet telephony is on its way to replace the traditional circuit-
   switched telephony.  There is a strong concern that this migration to
   the open Internet will result in Spam over Internet Telephony (SPIT)
   that potentially will be annoy the users even more than spam email
   does today.  If there are more SPIT calls than regular calls in the
   telephony world, then phones will ring all day making it hard to use
   this medium in a convenient and productive way.

   This memo discusses the need for producing standards that help
   preventing SPIT in the future.  Although SPIT is not an actual
   problem today, it has a big potential to become one very soon.  At
   this point in time it will be good to be prepared and have technology
   already available that protects users from SPIT.

1.1.  The SPIT Threat

   Most of the spam emails are generated by so-called bot nets.  Bot
   nets are networks of hosts that have been invaded by a spammer in
   order to use them for sending spam email without the knowledge of or
   admission by the regular administrators of these hosts.  Bot nets can
   easily be used for initiating spam voice calls instead of or in
   addition to sending spam email.

   Today, there is already voice spam in the switched telephony network.
   Many households in Europe receive between 1 and 10 automated spam
   calls per month.  During such a call, a prerecorded messages is
   played to the callee without supporting any interaction.  However,
   these calls create significant cost for the caller, at least if they
   are made in numbers of thousands or hundred thousands.

   With the ongoing migration from traditional connection-switched
   telephony to packet-switched Internet telephony the cost of spam
   calls will drop drastically.  The infrastructure for generating Spam
   over Internet Telephony (SPIT) is already there in form of the
   existing bot nets.  A recent study [I-D.ietf-sipping-spam] estimated
   that the cost per delivery of SPIT call will be three order of
   magnitude cheaper than the costs per delivery of spam over circuit-
   switched telephony.  This is expected to cause a flood of SPIT calls
   as soon as Internet telephony becomes the dominating telephony
   technology.



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   For dealing with this problem, particularly for preventing unwanted
   SPIT, not all methods that are used today for blocking spam email can
   be applied.  Particularly, content checking, that is a basic method
   for detecting email spam, is not applicable, because content of a
   call is not available for checking before the phone rings.  And
   stopping the phone from ringing for spam calls is one of the major
   goals of SPIT prevention.  Therefore, further methods are needed.  An
   overview of methods that are currently available for SPIT prevention
   is given in [I-D.ietf-sipping-spam].

   The number of SPIT prevention methods listed there is quite large.
   Still, it is not considered to be a complete list or a list that is
   exhaustive enough for preventing SPIT sufficiently.  In the contrary,
   this list shows that there are still a lot of opportunities left for
   SPIT generators to place SPIT calls successfully.

1.2.  Communication Need for SPIT Prevention

   An important aspect in this context has not been investigated in
   detail yet.  It is sharing of information between entities that are
   involved in preventing SPIT.  They may have a need to exchange
   information related to SPIT.  The range of information to be
   exchanged includes information about

   o  SPIT events that actually occurred,
   o  likeliness or indicators concerning callers to be sources of SPIT,
   o  likeliness or indicators concerning concrete calls to be SPIT,
   o  etc.

   This memo investigates the need of communication between entities
   involved in SPIT prevention and the need of standards for this
   communication.  For this purpose, a reference scenario is defined in
   Section 2 that serves for identifying which communications interfaces
   may be required for sharing SPIT-related information between involved
   entities.  Based on this scenario, requirements for individual
   interfaces are discussed in Section 3.

   Currently, the requirements are stated on a high level.  Future
   revisions of this memo may elaborate the requirements in more detail.
   Which (kind of) communication protocol should be chosen for meeting
   the requirements is not subject of this memo.

   However, this memo is supposed to stimulate discussion on the need of
   standardization work in this area.  The standardization work should
   both identify the best suited protocols for such information sharing
   at each interface and if extensions to such protocols for the support
   of SPIT information sharing is needed.  If no suitable protocols
   matching the requirements for a particular interface is found a



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   suggestion for the design of a new protocol suited to such
   information sharing should be initiated.


2.  Reference Scenario

   For our reference scenario we consider four kinds of communicating
   entities:

   o  the caller User Agent (UA) that generates SPIT,
   o  Proxy Servers (PS) forwarding call signaling,
   o  specialized SPIT prevention entities,
   o  the callee User Agent (UA).

   With the goal of avoiding that the callee's phone rings for SPIT
   calls, a goal of SPIT prevention is detecting a SPIT message already
   based on the INVITE method that is sent in order to initiate the SPIT
   call.  This goal can only be achieved along the path the INVITE
   message is forwarded from the caller towards the callee.  This path
   starts at the caller UA, then potentially includes a set of
   forwarding PS, and terminates latest at the callee UA.

   Please note that the described reference scenario does not addresses
   management interfaces to entities involved in SPIT prevention.  A
   first approach to this issue has been made is described in
   [I-D.froment-sipping-spit-authz-policies].

























Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


                          +--------+
                          |        |
                          | caller |
                          |   UA   |
                          |        |
                          +--------+                           |d   ^
                           #   | ^                             |o   |
                           #   | |                             |w   |u
                           #   | |                             |n   |p
                           #  -------(a)                       |s   |s
                           #   | |                             |t   |t
                           #   | |                             |r   |r
                    (d)    V   v |     (e)                     |e   |e
       +--------+    |    +--------+    |    +--------+        |a   |a
       |        |    |    |        |    |    | SPIT   |        |m   |m
       | Other  |<---|----| Proxy  |----|--->| Prev.  |        |    |
       | Proxy  |----|--->| Server |<---|----| Entity |        v    |
       |        |    |    |        |    |    |        |
       +--------+         +--------+         +--------+
                           #   | ^
                           #   | |
                           #   | |
                           #  -------(b)                         # S
                           #   | |                               # I
                           #   | |                               # P
                    (d)    V   v |     (e)                       #
       +--------+    |    +--------+    |    +--------+          # I
       |        |    |    |        |    |    | SPIT   |          # N
       | Other  |<---|----| Proxy  |----|--->| Prev.  |          # V
       | Proxy  |----|--->| Server |<---|----| Entity |          # I
       |        |    |    |        |    |    |        |          # T
       +--------+         +--------+         +--------+          # E
                           #   | ^                               #
                           #   | |                               # m
                           #   | |                               # e
                           #  -------(c)                         # t
                           #   | |                               # h
                           #   | |                               # o
                           V   v |     (f)                       # d
                          +--------+    |    +--------+          #
                          |        |    |    | SPIT   |          V
                          | callee |----|--->| Prev.  |
                          |   UA   |<---|----| Entity |
                          |        |    |    |        |
                          +--------+         +--------+

   Figure 1: SPIT prevention reference scenario with two proxy servers




Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   Entities on this path may share information related to SPIT
   prevention.  Related communication may happen already before a
   certain INVITE methods is transmitted or it may be initiated by this
   message.  If this communication includes transmitting information in
   the same direction as the INVITE message along the path, then we talk
   about downstream communication.  Transmitting information in the
   opposite direction we call upstream communication.

   The SPIT prevention reference scenario shown in Figure 1 contains a
   caller UA, a callee UA and two PS on the path of the INVITE message
   from caller UA to callee UA.  This number of PS was chosen because it
   contains exactly one instance of each pair of interacting kinds of
   entities along the path of the INVITE message:

   o  at interface (a) the caller UA is interacting with a PS,
   o  at interface (b) two consecutive PS are interacting with each
      other,
   o  at interface (c) a PS is interacting with the callee UA.

   The number of two PS matched the common SIP signaling trapezoid.
   However, any number of proxy servers greater than zero can be applied
   to the scenario.  If there is only one PS present, then the interface
   (b) is not instantiated.  If there are two or more PS on the path,
   then interface (b) is used between each consecutive pair of them.  In
   general, the INVITE message could be sent directly from caller UA to
   callee UA without involving any PS.  A direct call would be possible
   if the caller UA sends the INVITE directly to the callee UA, anyway
   such IP address retrieval is prone to errors either because of
   possible change of IP address during time of callee UA or because of
   Network Address Translator along the path masking the real IP
   address.  The direct call case becomes even less relevant if the
   callee UAs are configured to accept INVITEs only from their proxy
   servers.  For these reasons we decided not to include an interface
   for direct communication between caller UA and callee UA in the
   reference scenario.  This issues is also been addressed by work on
   authentication between inbound proxy and the caller UA in [I-D.jung-
   sipping-authentication-spit]

   Each proxy server on the signaling path of the INVITE message may
   communicate with off-path entities in order to perform the task of
   SPIT prevention.

   These entities include one or more specific SPIT prevention entities
   that are consulted by the proxy server using interface (e) in order
   to get an indication or estimation of the probability of a given
   INVITE message to belong to a SPIT call.

   These entities also include one or more cooperating PS with which



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   information about SPIT calls (or call attempts, resp.) is shared
   using interface (d) in order to improve the SPIT prevention
   performance.  An example for such a cooperation would be a set of PS
   in a single administrative domain sharing information about known
   sources of SPIT.

   The callee UA may also interact with a specific SPIT prevention
   entity similar to the PS.  Since in this case, the offered service
   might be more personalized than in the case of the PS, we use a
   different interface (f) for our reference model.  This does not
   preclude that instantiations of (e) and (f) may have identical
   functions.


3.  Signaling Interfaces Considerations

   This section discusses the interactions between entities of the
   reference scenario that is shown in Figure 1.  The interfaces are
   grouped into three sections.

   1.  The first one deals with interfaces (a), (b), and (c) which all
       serve for exchanging information between consecutive entities
       along the path of the INVITE message of a particular call.
   2.  Interface (d) has a similar function but is off-path and not
       necessarily related to individual (SPIT) calls.
   3.  Interfaces (e) and (f) are used by PS or the callee UA when they
       need to decide whether or not to consider a particular call
       request as SPIT.

3.1.  Interfaces on the Signaling Path

   At all three interfaces (a), (b), and (c) information may be
   exchanged in upstream direction as well as in downstream direction.

3.1.1.  Downstream

   There are several considerations of downstream communication that
   apply to all three interfaces.  We first describe them before
   pointing out differences between the three interfaces.

   All Interfaces (a), (b), and (c)

      Downstream information is sent along with an INVITE in order to
      indicate an estimation of the likelihood of the INVITE to belong
      to a SPIT call.  A sender or forwarder of an INVITE may, for
      example, be able to make such an estimation, but still not have
      sufficient certainty or not have legal rights for blocking a SPIT
      call.



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007



      In any case, interface (a), (b), or (c) would allow to pass such
      an estimation further along the path of the INVITE.  Even if such
      information does not always lead to achieving a clear idea on the
      nature of the requested call, the transmitted estimations can be
      recorded by the receivers of this information and used for
      improving future judgments of call requests for SPIT prevention.

      In addition to the estimation of the likelihood of the INVITE to
      belong to a SPIT call such interfaces would allow to pass
      statistics about the recent behavior of the sender.  An example of
      these statistics would consist in the rate of (SPIT) calls
      initiated by the sender during the last time slot, the ratio
      between regular calls and SPIT calls initiated by the sender
      during the last time slot, etc.  The above mentioned statistics
      can also be bundled together and passed only after the expiration
      of a timeout in order to increase scalability.

      Besides the estimation and the statistics itself, also the source
      of the estimation may be transmitted.  This way, an entity can
      indicate, whether it has been involved in producing the estimate,
      or just forwarded the received estimation along the path of the
      INVITE.

   Interface (a)

      This interface is instantiated between the caller UA and the first
      PS along the INVITE path.  The relevance of interface (a) seems to
      be rather limited.  It does not seem a good idea to have the
      caller UA neither estimating itself the likelihood of the INVITE
      to belong to a SPIT call not transmitting statistics about the its
      recent behavior.  Moreover the instantiation of such an interface
      could be maliciously used by entities initiating SPIT without the
      PS having the proper means to judge if the information passed is
      trustable or not.

   Interface (b)

      This interface is instantiated if there are two or more PS on the
      path.  In this case interface (b) is used between each consecutive
      pair of them.  It is used to send downstream information about the
      likelihood of an INVITE to belong to a SPIT call and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior.  If
      also the source of the estimation and statistics is transmitted, a
      receiving PS may be able to judge how much trust to associate with
      the indications based on local policies.  Still depending on local
      policies and legal rights the PS can decide to carry out
      additional tests on the INVITE, initiate communication to other



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


      entities (see Section 3.2 or Section 3.3), or block the call.

   Interface (c)

      This interface is instantiated between the last PS and the callee
      UA.  It is used to send downstream information about the
      likelihood of an INVITE to belong to a SPIT call and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior.  If
      also the source of the estimation and statistics is transmitted,
      the callee UA can judge how much trust to associate to the
      indications based on local policies.  Still depending on local
      policies and legal rights the callee UA can decide to carry out
      additional tests on the INVITE, initiate communication to other
      entities (see Section 3.3), or block the call without having the
      phone ringing.

3.1.2.  Upstream

   As for downstream communication above, we first describe
   considerations that are common for all three interfaces before them
   before pointing out differences between them.

   All Interfaces (a), (b), and (c)

      Upstream information is sent by entities after receiving an INVITE
      as feedback to the entity from which they received it.  It may
      contain an estimation of the likelihood that the INVITE belonged
      to a SPIT call.  This feedback may be sent before the call is
      established (if at all), after it was blocked, while the call is
      established, and after the call has been terminated.  This
      information can help the sender in better judging following calls
      that are forwarded and the users sending the call initiation
      request.  An example for this use of interfaces (a), (b) and (c)
      for the delivery of feedback information is given in
      [I-D.niccolini-sipping-feedback-spit].

      In addition to the estimation of the likelihood that the INVITE
      belonged to a SPIT call, such interfaces, similar to downstream
      communication of statistics, would allow to feed back statistics
      about the recent behavior of the sender.  An example of these
      statistics would consist in the rate of SPIT calls initiated by
      the sender during the last time slot, the ratio between regular
      calls and SPIT calls initiated by the sender during the last time
      slot, etc.  The above mentioned statistics can also be bundled
      together and passed only after the expiration of a timeout in
      order to increase scalability.





Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007



      Similar to downstream communication of estimates and statistics,
      the source of the feedback information may be contained.  This is
      particularly interesting if the feedback was generated by the
      callee who received the call.

   Interface (a)

      This interface is instantiated between the first PS along the
      INVITE path and the caller UA.  The relevance of interface (a)
      seems to be rather limited.  It does not seem to be a good idea to
      give feedback to an initiator of SPIT on if and why requested
      calls have been blocked.  This would allow the SPIT initiator to
      use this feedback for improving methods that bypass SPIT
      prevention systems in the network.

      A potential argument for sending a notification about detected
      SPIT to the SPIT generator would be that many legal operators of
      SPIT generating hosts might not be aware of this.  Today, this is
      the case for email spam.  Most of them are generated by bot nets
      where the legal operators of the contained hosts are not aware of
      their hosts being used for this purpose.  However, in case of SPIT
      generation, it must be assumed that the generating software is
      either a software not in control of the legal operator or it is
      controlling the caller UA and capable of suppressing any feedback
      that should not be seen by the legal operator.  Therefore, this
      means would probably not show the desired results.

   Interface (b)

      This interface is instantiated if there are two or more PS on the
      path.  In this case interface (b) is used between each consecutive
      pair of them.  It is used to feed back information about the
      likelihood that an INVITE belonged to a SPIT call and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior.  If
      also the source of the estimation and statistics is transmitted,
      the PS can judge how much trust to associate to the indications
      based on local policies and act consequently.  Still depending on
      local policies and legal rights the PS can decide to carry out
      additional tests on selected subsequent INVITEs, initiate
      communication to other entities (see Section 3.2 or Section 3.3),
      or block selected subsequent calls.

   Interface (c)







Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007



      This interface is instantiated between the callee UA and the last
      PS along the INVITE path.  It is used to feed back information
      about the likelihood that an INVITE belonged to a SPIT call and
      about most relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent
      behavior (even if in this case the statistics can be rather
      limited since are generated by the callee UA directly which has a
      narrow view on all the traffic).  This feedback is supposed to be
      a very important one since it is the one directly generated by the
      callee UA (be it the software or the human itself).  The PS will
      therefore associate high trust to such a feedback and act
      consequently.  Still depending on local policies and legal rights
      the PS can decide to carry out additional tests on selected
      subsequent INVITEs, initiate communication to other entities (see
      Section 3.2 or Section 3.3), or block selected subsequent calls.

3.2.  Off-Path Interfaces between Proxy Servers

   The basic idea of interface (d) is similar to the interface (b) where
   different PS exchange SPIT-related information.  The difference to
   (b) is that for (d) this exchange is not bound to the path of an
   INVITE message.  At interface (d) information will be shared among PS
   that collaborate on SPIT prevention.  While the (b) interface can
   potentially be an inter-domain interface, (d) is rather seen as an
   intra-domain interface where collaborating proxies of a domain
   enforce a domain-wide SPIT prevention policy.  For such a purpose,
   information needs to be exchanged rather on collected information
   than on single events of an observed INVITE message, although this
   case should not be excluded.

   Interface (d) has two major purposes. the first is the exchange of
   information regarding the likeliness of a caller UA or a certain
   administrative domain to produce SPIT.  This does not necessarily
   require exchanging observations per INVITE message, but rather on a
   regular basis or incident-driven, for example whenever a PS detects a
   correlation between several calls that have been classified as SPIT.

   The exchange of such information may, for example, lead to a
   classification of a source address or a source network as source of
   SPIT which requires and update of blacklists and SPIT detection
   mechanisms.

   Consequently, the second major purpose of interface (d) is exchanging
   information that updates or synchronizes the prevention mechanisms
   that are acting at different PS.  This includes particularly
   blacklist and whitelist entries, but also other SPIT prevention
   mechanisms may make use of exchanged information.




Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


   Still, interface (d) may also serve for exchanging estimated
   likelihoods of single call to be SPIT, for example for collecting
   this information at a central repository that serves for updating
   domain-wide SPIT prevention policies.

3.3.  Interfaces to Special SPIT Prevention Entities

   Communication to special SPIT prevention entities can be performed
   either by a proxy server via interface (e) or by the callee UA via
   interface (f).  We first discuss considerations that apply to both
   interfaces before pointing out differences between the two.

   Both Interfaces (e) and (f)

      The service offered by special SPIT prevention entities is related
      to the estimation of the likelihood of the INVITE to belong to a
      SPIT call.  This communication is supposed to be instantiated in
      order to off-load computational intensive tasks to an external
      entity.

      The communication with this SPIT prevention entity follows the
      client-server scheme.  The PS or UA acting as client requests an
      estimation of the likelihood of a given INVITE message to belong
      to a SPIT call.  The estimation is performed by the SPIT
      prevention entity acting as server.  A request may include call
      parameters to be used by the server when performing the
      estimations.

   Interface (e)

      This interface is instantiated between a proxy server and a
      special SPIT prevention entity in order to either request for SPIT
      likelihood estimations.  In addition to the above considerations
      it is necessary to note that such service could be less
      personalized with respect to the service offered over the
      interface (f) since the estimations have to be general in order to
      deal with all the users served by the proxy server using such an
      interface.  Otherwise the instantiated functions seems to be
      identical.

   Interface (f)

      This interface is instantiated between a UA and a special SPIT
      prevention entity in order to either request for SPIT likelihood
      estimations.  In addition to the above considerations it is
      necessary to note that such service should be more personalized
      with respect to the service offered over the interface (e) since
      the estimations have to be specific to the callee requesting them



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


      over the interface.  Otherwise the instantiated functions seems to
      be identical.


4.  Need for Standardization

   The considerations above indicate that there is an actual need for
   standardization of communication information.

   The strongest need seems to be for interfaces (b) and (c) in upstream
   direction for providing feedback on calls or call attempts.  But also
   in downstream direction, there seems to be an obvious need to support
   this communication by providing a standard for it.  This concerns
   both in intra- and inter-domain communication.

   The situation is very different for Interface (a).  The
   considerations in Section 3.1 indicate that it might even be a bad
   idea to provide any feedback via (a) at all.  Therefore, we do not
   see a need to work on standards for interface (a).

   Interface (d) seems to be useful but with a more limited scope of
   application within a (federated) administrative domain (intra-
   domain).  Still for interoperability between different devices is
   appears to be beneficial to have a standard way of sharing SPIT-
   related information.

   For the remaining interfaces (e) and (f) we do not yet see a clear
   need for interoperability.  SPIT prevention engines to which
   functions are outsourced by a PS or callee UA may typically be part
   of a solution that is offered together with the PS or with a set of
   SIP UAs.  For these cases proprietary communication protocols appear
   to be sufficient.  Still need for standardization may arise at later
   stages when SPIT prevention entities become more common.

4.1.  Preliminary Protocol Considerations

   The fact that the communication over interfaces (b) and (c) follows
   the same path as the SIP signaling itself may influence the choice of
   the signaling protocols used for exchanging information at the
   interfaces.  An obvious choice to be discussed would be embedding the
   SPIT information directly in the SIP messages flowing among the
   entities anyway.

   For the other interfaces (d), (e) and (f) other signaling protocols
   may be preferable since the communication will happen anyway not
   synchronously with the SIP messages used to initiate the session.  An
   example could be the exchange of XML files among different entities.




Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


5.  Conclusions

   This memo addresses the necessity of providing standards for
   communication between entities involved in SPIT prevention.  For this
   purpose a reference scenario is defined with involved entities and
   interfaces between them.  For each interface the need for it and the
   need for standards for is discussed.

   This memo is intended to stimulate a discussion on SPIT prevention
   and to reach consensus on the identification of standardization goals
   in this area.  Some of the considerations in Section 3 seem to
   indicate that there is an actual need to standardize communication
   for some of the discussed interfaces.  This memo does not try to
   standardize any solution to the problems identified.  The necessary
   work outcoming from the discussion stimulated will have to be carried
   out in separate documents.


6.  Security Considerations

   This memo discusses the exchange of information related to SPIT
   prevention.  This includes information on particular calls or call
   attempts as well as information on call initiators potentially being
   a source of SPIT.

   Exchanging per-call information may violate the privacy of a caller.
   Therefore, instantiations of the discussed exchange of information
   need to be carefully checked for compliance with legal regulations of
   information privacy.  Also, since this information may be sensitive,
   appropriate steps should be undertaken to provide confidentiality
   when it is transmitted over the Internet.

   Both, per-call information and information of a caller being a source
   of SPIT may be a target of denial-of-service attacks.  If such
   messages are faked, a regular caller may be blocked network-wide and
   not able anymore to perform calls.  Therefore, integrity and
   authenticity need to be provided when this kind of information is
   transmitted over the Internet.

7.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-spam]
              Jennings, C. and J. Rosenberg, "The Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) and Spam", draft-ietf-sipping-spam-03 (work
              in progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.froment-sipping-spit-authz-policies]
              Froment, T., "Authorization Policies for Preventing SPIT",



Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


              draft-froment-sipping-spit-authz-policies-01 (work in
              progress), June 2006.

   [I-D.jung-sipping-authentication-spit]
              Jung, S., "Authentication between the Inbound Proxy and
              the UAS for Protecting SPIT in  the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", draft-jung-sipping-authentication-spit-00
              (work in progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.niccolini-sipping-feedback-spit]
              Niccolini, S., "SIP Extensions for SPIT identification",
              draft-niccolini-sipping-feedback-spit-02 (work in
              progress), August 2006.






































Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Saverio Niccolini
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 118
   Email: saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Juergen Quittek
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 115
   Email: quittek@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de





























Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario          January 2007


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Niccolini & Quittek       Expires July 15, 2007                [Page 18]

