


Network Working Group                                         M. Bagnulo
Internet-Draft                                                      UC3M
Updates: 3972 (if approved)                                     J. Arkko
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: September 3, 2007                                 March 2, 2007


  Support for Multiple Hash Algorithms in Cryptographically Generated
                            Addresses (CGAs)
                   draft-bagnulo-multiple-hash-cga-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document analyzes the implications of recent attacks on commonly
   used hash functions on Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGAs)
   and updates the CGA specification to support multiple hash
   algorithms.





Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Impact of collision attacks in CGAs  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Options for Multiple Hash Algorithm Support in CGAs  . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Where to encode the hash function? . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  CGA generation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10



































Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


1.  Introduction

   Recent attacks to currently used hash functions have motivated a
   considerable amount of concern in the Internet community.  The
   recommended approach [6] [10] to deal with this issue is first to
   analyze the impact of these attacks on the different Internet
   protocols that use hash functions and second to make sure that the
   different Internet protocols that use hash functions are capable of
   migrating to an alternative (more secure) hash function without a
   major disruption in the Internet operation.

   This document performs such analysis for the Cryptographically
   Generated Addresses (hereafter CGAs) defined in [2].  The first
   conclusion of the analysis is that the security of the protocols
   using CGAs is not affected by the recently available attacks against
   hash functions.  The second conclusion of the analysis is that the
   hash function used is hard coded in the CGA specification.  This
   document updates the CGA specification [2] to enable the support of
   alternative hash functions.  In order to do so, this documents
   creates a new registry managed by IANA to register the different hash
   algorithms used in CGAs.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].


3.  Impact of collision attacks in CGAs

   Recent advances in cryptography have resulted in simplified attacks
   against the collision-free property of certain commonly used hash
   functions [6] [10], including SHA-1 that is the hash function used by
   CGAs [2].  The result is that it is possible to obtain two messages
   M1 and M2 that have the same hash value with much less than 2^(L/2)
   attempts.  We will next analyze the impact of such attacks in the
   currently proposed usages of CGAs.

   As we understand it, the attacks against the collision-free property
   of a hash function mostly challenge the application of such hash
   function for the provision of non-repudiation capabilities.  This is
   so because an attacker would be capable to create two different
   messages that result in the same hash value and it can then present
   any of the messages interchangeably (for example after one of them
   has been signed by the other party involved in the transaction).
   However, it must be noted that both messages must be generated by the



Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


   same party.

   As far as we understand, current usages of CGAs does not include the
   provision of non-repudiation capabilities, so attacks against the
   collision-free property of the hash function do not enable any useful
   attack against CGA-based protocols.

   Current usages of the CGAs are basically oriented to prove the
   ownership of a CGA and then bind it to alternative addresses that can
   be used to reach the original CGA.  This type of application of the
   CGA include:
   o  The application of CGAs to protect the shim6 protocol [7].  In
      this case, CGAs are used as identifiers for the established
      communications.  CGA features are used to prove that the owner of
      the identifier is the one that is providing the alternative
      addresses that can be used to reach the initial identifier.  This
      is achieved by signing the list of alternative addresses available
      in the multihomed host with the private key of the CGA.
   o  The application of CGAs to secure the IPv6 mobility support
      protocol [8] as proposed in [9].  In this case, the CGAs are used
      as Home Addresses and they are used to prove that the owner of the
      Home Address is the one creating the binding with the new Care-off
      Address.  Similarly to the previous case, this is achieved by
      signing the Binding Update message carrying the Care-off Address
      with the private key of the CGA.
   o  The application of CGA to Secure Neighbour Discovery [4].  In this
      case, the CGA features are used to prove the address ownership, so
      that it is possible to verify that the owner of the IP address is
      the one that is providing layer 2 address information.  This is
      achieved by signing the layer 2 address information with the
      private key of the CGA.

   Essentially, all the current applications of CGAs rely on CGAs to
   protect a communication between two peers from third party attacks
   and not to provide protection from the peer itself.  Attacks against
   the collision-free property of the hash functions suppose that one of
   the parties is generating two messages with the same hash value in
   order to launch an attack against its communicating peer.  Since CGAs
   are not currently used to provide this type of protection, it is then
   natural that no additional attacks are enabled by a weaker collision
   resistance of the hash function.


4.  Options for Multiple Hash Algorithm Support in CGAs

   CGAs as currently defined in [2] are intrinsically bound to the SHA-1
   hash algorithm and no other hash function is supported.




Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


   Even though the attacks against the collision-free property of the
   hash functions does not result in new vulnerabilities in the current
   applications of CGAs, it seems wise to enable multiple hash function
   support in CGAs.  This is so mainly for two reasons: first, potential
   future applications of the CGA technology may be susceptible to
   attacks against the collision-free property of SHA-1.  Supporting
   alternative hash functions would allow applications which have
   stricter requirements on the collision-free property to use CGAs.
   Second, one lesson learned from the recent attacks against hash
   functions is that it is possible that one day we need to move to
   alternative hash functions because of successful attacks against
   other properties of the commonly used hash functions.  Because of
   that, it seems wise to modify protocols in general and the CGAs in
   particular to support this transition to alternative hash functions
   as easy as possible.

4.1.  Where to encode the hash function?

   The next question we need to answer is where to encode the hash
   function used.  There are several options that can be considered:

   One option would be to include the hash function used as an input to
   the hash function.  This basically means to create an extension to
   the CGA Parameter Data Structure as defined in [3] that codifies the
   hash function used.  The problem is that this approach is vulnerable
   to bidding down attacks or downgrading attacks as defined in [10].
   This means that even if a stronger hash function is used, an attacker
   could find a CGA Parameter Data Structure which hash value using the
   weaker function is the same than the original hash value (created
   using the stronger hash function).

   In other words, the downgrading attack would work as follows: suppose
   that Alice generates a CGA CGA_A using the strong hash function
   HashStrong using a CGA Parameter Data Structure CGA_PDS_A The
   selected hash function HashStrong is encoded as an extension field in
   the CGA_PDS_A. Suppose that an attacker X finds, using a brute force
   attack, an alternative CGA Parameter Data Structure CGA_PDS_X which
   hash value, using a weaker hash function, is CGA_A. At this point the
   attacker can pretend to be the owner of CGA_A and the stronger hash
   function has not provided additional protection.

   The conclusion from the previous analysis is that the hash function
   used in the CGA generation must be encoded in the address itself.
   Since we want to support several hash functions, we are likely to
   need at least at least 2 or 3 bits for this.

   One option would be to use more bits from the hash bits of the
   interface identifier.  The problem with this approach is that the



Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


   resulting CGA is weaker because less hash information is encoded in
   the address.  In addition, since those bits are currently used as
   hash bits, it is impossible to make this approach backward compatible
   with existent implementations.  Another option would be to use the
   "u" and the "g" bits to encode this information, but this is probably
   not such a good idea, since those bits have been honoured so far in
   all interface identifier generation mechanisms which allow them to be
   used for the original purpose (for instance we can still create a
   global registry for unique interface identifiers).  Finally another
   option is to encode the hash value used in the Sec bits.  The Sec
   bits are used to artificially introduce additional difficulty in the
   CGA generation process in order to provide additional protection
   against brute force attacks.  The Sec bits have been designed in a
   way that the lifetime of CGAs are extended when it is feasible to
   attack 59 bits long hash values.  However, this is not the case
   today, so in general CGA will have a Sec value of 000.  The proposal
   is to encode in the Sec bits, not only information about brute force
   attack protection but also to encode the hash function used to
   generate the hash.  So for instance the Sec value 000 would mean that
   the hash function used is SHA-1 and that 0 bits of hash2 (as defined
   in RFC3972) must be 0.  Sec value of 001 could be that the hash
   function used is SHA-1 and that 16 bits of hash2 (as defined in
   RFC3972) must be zero.  However, the other values of Sec could mean
   that an alternative hash function needs to be used and that a certain
   amount of bits of hash2 must be zero.  The proposal is not to define
   any concrete hash function to be used for other Sec values since it
   is not clear yet that we need to do so nor is it clear which hash
   function should be selected.

   It should be noted that since there are only 8 Sec values, it may be
   needed to reuse Sec values when we run out of unused Sec values.  The
   scenario where such approach can make sense is where there are some
   Sec values that are no longer being used because the resulting
   security has become weak.  In this case, where the usage of the Sec
   value has long been abandoned, it would be possible to reassign the
   Sec values.  However, this must be a last resource option, since it
   may affect interoperability.  This is because two implementations
   using different meaning of a given Sec value would not be able to
   interoperate properly (i.e. if an old implementation receives a CGA
   generated with the new meaning of the Sec value, it will fail and the
   same for a new implementation receiving a CGA generated with the old
   meaning of the Sec value).  In case the approach of reassigning a Sec
   value is followed, a long time is required between the deprecation of
   the old value and the reassignment in order to prevent
   misinterpretation of the value by old implementations.

   Erroneous interpretation of a re-used Sec value, both on the CGA
   owner's side and the CGA verifier's side, would have the following



Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


   results: CGA verification would fail in the worst case and both nodes
   would have to revert to unprotected IPv6 addresses.  This can happen
   only with obsolete CGA parameter sets, which would be considered
   insecure anyway.  In any case, an implementation must not support two
   different meanings of a Sec value simultaneously.


5.  CGA generation procedure

   The SEC registry defined in the IANA considerations section of this
   document contains entries for the different Sec values.  Each of this
   entries points to a RFC that defines the CGA generation procedure
   that MUST be used when generating CGAs with the associated Sec value.

   It should be noted that the CGA generation procedure may be changed
   by the new procedure not only in terms of the hash function used but
   also in other aspects, e.g. longer Modifier values may be required if
   the number of 0s required in Hash2 exceed the currently defined bound
   of 112 bits.  The new procedure (which potentially involves a longer
   Modifier value) would be described in the RFC pointed to by the
   corresponding Sec registry entry.

   In addition, the RFC that defines the CGA generation procedure for a
   Sec value MUST explicitly define the minimum key length acceptable
   for CGAs with that Sec value.  This is so to provide a coherent
   protection both in the hash and the public key techniques.


6.  IANA considerations

   This document defines a new registry entitled "CGA SEC" for the Sec
   field defined in RFC 3972 [2] that is to be created and maintained by
   IANA.  The values in this name space are 3-bit unsigned integers.

   Initial values for the CGA Extension Type field are given below;
   future assignments are to be made through Standards Action [5].
   Assignments consist of a name, the value and the RFC number where the
   CGA generation procedure is defined.

   The following initial assignments are done in this document:

          Name        | Value |  RFC
   -------------------+-------+------
   SHA-1_0hash2bits   |   000 | 3972
   SHA-1_16hash2bits  |   001 | 3972
   SHA-1_32hash2bits  |   010 | 3972





Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


7.  Security considerations

   All this note considers security issues and in particular protection
   against potential attacks against hash functions.


8.  Acknowledgements

   Russ Housley, James Kempf, Christian Vogt, Pekka Nikander and Henrik
   Levkowetz reviewed and provided comments about this document.

   Marcelo Bagnulo worked on this document while visiting Ericsson
   Research Laboratory Nomadiclab.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
         RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [3]   Bagnulo, M. and J. Arkko, "Cryptographically Generated
         Addresses (CGA) Extension Field Format", RFC 4581,
         October 2006.

   [4]   Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
         Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

9.2.  Informative References

   [5]   Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
         October 1998.

   [6]   Hoffman, P. and B. Schneier, "Attacks on Cryptographic Hashes
         in Internet Protocols", RFC 4270, November 2005.

   [7]   Nordmark, E. and M. Bagnulo, "Multihoming L3 Shim Approach",
         draft-ietf-shim6-l3shim (work in progress), November 2006.

   [8]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [9]   Arkko, J., "Applying Cryptographically Generated Addresses and



Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


         Credit-Based  Authorization to Mobile IPv6",
         draft-arkko-mipshop-cga-cba-03 (work in progress), March 2006.

   [10]  Bellovin, S. and E. Rescorla, "Deploying a new hash algorithm",
         2005 September.


Authors' Addresses

   Marcelo Bagnulo
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   SPAIN

   Phone: 34 91 6249500
   Email: marcelo@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com

























Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Multiple Hash Support in CGAs           March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Bagnulo & Arkko         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 10]


