
Network Working Group                                    Andrew M. Fuqua
Internet Draft                                                       IBM
expires in six months                                       January 1996


                  The PPP SNA Control Protocol (SNACP)
                     draft-ietf-pppext-snacp-00.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is a submission to the Point-to-Point Protocol Working
   Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should
   be submitted to the ietf-ppp@merit.edu mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
   Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, ds.internic.net,
   venera.isi.edu, nic.nordu.net, or munnari.oz.au to learn the current
   status of any Internet Draft.

Abstract

   The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) [1] provides a standard method for
   transporting multi-protocol datagrams over point-to-point links.  PPP
   defines an extensible Link Control Protocol, and proposes a family of
   Network Control Protocols for establishing and configuring different
   network-layer protocols.

   This document defines the Network Control Protocols for establishing
   and configuring Systems Network Architecture (SNA) over PPP and SNA
   over LLC 802.2 over PPP.






Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page i]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


1.  Introduction

   PPP has three main components:

      1. A method for encapsulating multi-protocol datagrams.

      2. A Link Control Protocol (LCP) for establishing, configuring,
         and testing the data-link connection.

      3. A family of Network Control Protocols for establishing and
         configuring different network-layer protocols.

   In order to establish communications over a point-to-point link, each
   end of the PPP link must first send LCP packets to configure and test
   the data link.  After the link has been established and optional
   facilities have been negotiated as needed by the LCP, PPP must send
   SNACP packets to choose and configure the SNA network-layer protocol.
   Once SNACP has reached the Opened state, SNA datagrams can be sent
   over the link.

   The link will remain configured for communications until explicit LCP
   or SNACP packets close the link down, or until some external event
   occurs (an inactivity timer expires or network administrator
   intervention).



1.1.  Specification of Requirements

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.

   MUST      This word, or the adjective "required", means that the
             definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.

   MUST NOT  This phrase means that the definition is an absolute
             prohibition of the specification.

   SHOULD    This word, or the adjective "recommended", means that there
             may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to
             ignore this item, but the full implications must be
             understood and carefully weighed before choosing a
             different course.

   MAY       This word, or the adjective "optional", means that this
             item is one of an allowed set of alternatives.  An
             implementation which does not include this option MUST be
             prepared to interoperate with another implementation which



Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


             does include the option.



1.2.  Terminology

   This document frequently uses the following terms:

   datagram  The unit of transmission in the network layer (such as IP).
             A datagram may be encapsulated in one or more packets
             passed to the data link layer.

   frame     The unit of transmission at the data link layer.  A frame
             may include a header and/or a trailer, along with some
             number of units of data.

   packet    The basic unit of encapsulation, which is passed across the
             interface between the network layer and the data link
             layer.  A packet is usually mapped to a frame; the
             exceptions are when data link layer fragmentation is being
             performed, or when multiple packets are incorporated into a
             single frame.

   peer      The other end of the point-to-point link.

   silently discard
             This means the implementation discards the packet without
             further processing.  The implementation SHOULD provide the
             capability of logging the error, including the contents of
             the silently discarded packet, and SHOULD record the event
             in a statistics counter.

   PIU       Path information unit.  A message unit consisting of a
             transmission header (TH) alone, or a TH followed by a basic
             information unit (BIU) or a BIU segment.  PIU is analogous
             to datagram.

   TH        Transmission header.  Control information, optionally
             followed by a basic information unit (BIU) or a BIU
             segment, that is created and used by path control to route
             message units and to control their flow within the network.

   BIU       Basic information unit.  In SNA, the unit of data and
             control information passed between half-sessions.  It
             consists of a request/response header (RH) followed by a
             request/response unit (RU).

   message unit



Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


             In SNA, the unit of data processed by any layer; for
             example, a basic information unit (BIU), a path information
             unit (PIU), or a request/response unit (RU).

   NLP       Network Layer Packet.  In High Performance Routing (HPR),
             the message unit used to carry data over the route.
             Network Layer Packet is analogous to datagram.












































Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


2.  A PPP Network Control Protocol for SNA

   The SNA Control Protocol (SNACP) is responsible for configuring,
   enabling, and disabling SNA on both ends of the point-to-point link.
   SNACP uses the same packet exchange mechanism as the Link Control
   Protocol (LCP). SNACP packets may not be exchanged until PPP has
   reached the Network-Layer Protocol phase.  SNACP packets received
   before this phase is reached should be silently discarded.

   Note that there are actually two SNA Network Control Protocols; one
   for SNA over LLC 802.2 and another for SNA without LLC 802.2.  These
   SNA NCPs are negotiated separately and independently of each other.

   The SNA Control Protocol is exactly the same as the Link Control
   Protocol [1] with the following exceptions:

   Frame Modifications

      The packet may utilize any modifications to the basic frame format
      which have been negotiated during the Link Establishment phase.

   Data Link Layer Protocol Field

      Exactly one SNACP packet is encapsulated in the PPP Information
      field, where the PPP Protocol field indicates type hex 804B (SNA
      over LLC 802.2) or hex 804D (SNA).

   Code field

      Only Codes 1 through 7 (Configure-Request, Configure-Ack,
      Configure-Nak, Configure-Reject, Terminate-Request, Terminate-Ack
      and Code-Reject) are used.  Other Codes should be treated as
      unrecognized and should result in Code-Rejects.

   Timeouts

      SNACP packets may not be exchanged until PPP has reached the
      Network-Layer Protocol phase. An implementation should be prepared
      to wait for Authentication and Link Quality Determination to
      finish before timing out waiting for a Configure-Ack or other
      response.  It is suggested that an implementation give up only
      after user intervention or a configurable amount of time.

   Configuration Option Types

      There are no Configuration Options for SNA or for SNA over LLC
      802.2.




Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


3.  Sending SNA PIUs and NLPs.

   Before any SNA packets may be communicated, PPP must reach the
   Network-Layer Protocol phase, and the SNA Control Protocol must reach
   the Opened state.

   Exactly one SNA PIU or NLP is encapsulated in the PPP Information
   field, where the PPP Protocol field indicates type hex 004B (SNA over
   LLC 802.2) or hex 004D (SNA).  The maximum length of a SNA packet
   transmitted over a PPP link is the same as the maximum length of the
   Information field of a PPP encapsulated packet.

   The format of the Information field itself is the same as that
   defined in [1].  Detailed information on SNA and APPN can be found in
   [3], [4], and [5].



3.1.  General Considerations

   Hex 004B (SNA over LLC 802.2) is used for SNA packets that require
   link-level error recovery and includes all PIUs and NLPs (that
   require link-level error recovery).  Hex 004D (SNA) is used for NLPs
   that do not require link-level error recovery.



























Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.



References

   [1]   Simpson, W. A., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51,
         RFC 1661, Daydreamer, July 1994.

   [2]   Reynolds, J., and Postel, J., "Assigned Numbers", STD 2, RFC
         1700, USC/Information Sciences Institute, October 1994.

   [3]   "SNA Formats", GA27-3136, IBM (orderable through 1-800-879-
         2755).

   [4]   "SNA APPN Architecture Reference", SC30-3422, IBM (orderable
         through 1-800-879-2755).

   [5]   APPN Implementers Workshop homepage,
         http://www.raleigh.ibm.com/app/aiwhome.htm



Acknowledgements

   Some of the text in this document is taken from previous documents
   produced by the Point-to-Point Protocol Working Group of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF).

   Some of the text in this document is taken from miscellaneous IBM
   documents.

   Many people provided suggestions and portions of text for this
   document.  Special thanks to Marcia Peters and Scott G. Wasson.



Chair's Address

   The working group can be contacted via the current chair:

      Fred Baker
      Cisco Systems
      519 Lado Drive
      Santa Barbara, California, 93111




Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 6]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


      EMail: fred@cisco.com



Author's Address

   Questions about this memo can also be directed to:

      Andrew M. Fuqua
      International Business Machines Corporation
      P. O. Box 12195
      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709

      EMail: fuqua@vnet.ibm.com





































Fuqua                    expires in six months                  [Page 7]

Internet Draft                 PPP SNACP                    January 1996


                           Table of Contents


     1.     Introduction ..........................................    1
        1.1       Specification of Requirements ...................    1
        1.2       Terminology .....................................    2

     2.     A PPP Network Control Protocol for SNA ................    4

     3.     Sending SNA PIUs and NLPs. ............................    5
        3.1       General Considerations ..........................    5

     SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS ......................................    6

     REFERENCES ...................................................    6

     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .............................................    6

     CHAIR'S ADDRESS ..............................................    6

     AUTHOR'S ADDRESS .............................................    7






























Fuqua                    expires in six months                 [Page ii]
