
CIDRD Working Group                                        Y. Rekhter
Internet Draft                 T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corp.
                                                                T. Li
                                                        cisco Systems
                                                             May 1995



     On the Implications of Address Ownership for Internet Routing
                  <draft-ietf-cidrd-ownership-01.txt>


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.


1 Abstract


   IP unicast address allocation and management are essential
   operational functions for the Internet. The exact policies for IP
   unicast address allocation and management continue to be the subject
   of many discussions.  Such discussions cannot be pursued in a vacuum
   - the participants must understand the technical issues and
   implications associated with various address allocation and
   management policies.

   The purpose of this document is to articulate certain relevant
   fundamental technical issues which must be considered in formulating
   unicast address allocation and management policies for the Internet.
   The major focus of this document is on one possible policy, the
   concept of "address ownership," and the technical implications of
   this concept for the Internet.








Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


2 Address allocation and management policies


   IP address allocation and management policy is a fairly complex,
   multifaceted issue. It covers a broad range of issues, such as who
   formulates the policies, who executes the policies, what are the
   roles of various registries, what are the roles of various
   organizations (e.g. ISOC, IAB, IESG, IETF, IEPG, various government
   bodies, etc.), the participation of end users in requesting
   addresses, and so on.

   Support for "address ownership" is one possible address allocation
   and management policy. Supporting "address ownership" means that once
   a portion of the address space is allocated or assigned to an
   organization, the organization may always use these addresses.  This
   implies that the organization will never need to change addresses
   (renumber), even if the organization changes its topological
   interconnection to the Internet.

   Some parties have asserted that the Internet assumes the concept of
   address ownership already.  At the same time the fact remains that
   the concept of address ownership has never been explicit - the words
   that have been used have been "assignment," "allocation," and
   "delegation".  One should also note that even if the current
   allocation procedures are consistent with "address ownership," this
   does not mean that address ownership is, in fact, the current policy.

   Address allocation and management and the ability of the Internet
   routing system to scale are not independent - only certain address
   allocation and management policies yield scalable routing.  Since
   address ownership is a significant factor in such policies, we need
   to understand its implications on the scalability of the Internet
   routing system.


3 On the relationship between addressing and routing


   Syntactically, the set of IPv4 unicast addresses is the (finite) set
   of integers in the range 0x00000000 - 0xdfffffff.  The notable
   semantics of an IP unicast address is its ability to gain access to
   the Internet routing service and thereby exchange data with the
   remainder of the Internet.  IP addresses are used for Network Layer
   (IP) routing, thus an IP address is the sole piece of information
   about the node that is injected into the routing system.  In other
   words, it is the reachability of an IP address that gives it an
   intrinsic value - without reachability the address is worthless.

   The above implies that it is the service environment (the Internet)
   and its continued operation, including its routing system, which
   provides an IP address with its intrinsic value, rather than the
   inverse.  Consequently, if the Internet routing system ceases to be
   operational, the service disappears, and the addresses cease to have
   any non-local functional value.  At this point, in the context of the



Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


   Internet, all address allocation and management policies, including
   "address ownership," are rendered meaningless.


4 Address ownership and its implication on hierarchical routing


   Hierarchical routing [Kleinrock 77] is used in the Internet as the
   primary mechanism to contain the growth of routing information -
   without hierarchical routing the Internet routing system would
   already have collapsed.  Further, hierarchical routing is the only
   known mechanism for scaling routing to the current size of the
   Internet.

   Hierarchical routing works by taking a set of addresses and
   generating a single routing advertisement for the entire set.
   Further, if addresses are assigned correctly, this can be done
   recursively: multiple advertisements can be combined into a single
   advertisement.  by exercising this recursion, the amount of
   information necessary to provide routing can be decreased
   substantially.

   A common example of hierarchical routing is the phone network (and
   more precisely, the North American Numbering Plan), where country
   codes, area codes, exchanges, and finally subscriber lines are
   different levels in the hierarchy.  In the phone network, a switch
   need not keep detailed routing information about every possible
   subscriber in a distant area code.  Instead, the switch knows one
   routing entry about the entire area code.

   Notice that the effect on scaling is dramatic.  If we look at the
   space complexity of the different schemes, the switch which knows
   about every subscriber in the world needs O(n) space for n worldwide
   subscribers.  Now consider the case of hierarchical routing.  If we
   break n down into the number of subscribers in the local area (l),
   the number of other exchanges in the area code (e), the number of
   other area codes in the local country code (a) and the number other
   country codes (c), then hierarchical routing has space complexity O(l
   + e + a + c).  Notice that each of these factors is much, much less
   than n, and grows very slowly, if at all.  This implies that a phone
   switch can be built today which has some hope of not running out of
   space as soon as it is deployed.

   The fundamental property of hierarchical routing that makes this
   scalability possible is the ability to form abstractions: in this
   case the ability to group subscribers into exchanges, area codes and
   country codes.  Further, such abstractions must provide useful
   information for the ability to perform routing.  Some abstractions,
   such as the group of users with green phones, are not useful when it
   comes time to route a call.  Since the information that routing
   really needs is the location of the address within the topology, it
   is essential that an address in the network reflect its topological
   location within the network.  Consequently, to preserve hierarchical
   routing as the topology changes, an entity's address may be required



Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


   to change - this process is known as "renumbering."

   Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) [RFC 1518, RFC 1519] is an
   example of the application of hierarchical routing in the Internet,
   where providers, subscribers, and finally subnets are some of the
   many different possible levels in the hierarchy. For example, a
   router within a site need not keep detailed routing information about
   every possible host in that site.  Instead the router maintains
   routing information on a per subnet basis.  Likewise, a router within
   a provider need not keep detailed routing information about
   individual subnets within its subscribers. Instead the router could
   maintain routing information on a per subscriber basis.

   It should be noted that there are today a considerable number of
   exceptions in the routing system.  Information within the routing
   system is contained in routes, that carry information about possible
   paths.  Also associated with each route is a prefix that describes
   the portion of the address space that can be found at the end of the
   path.  Each exception is a prefix that has been injected that does
   not reflect the topology of the network.  Further, because the
   topology of the network is not strictly hierarchical, there are a
   large number of exceptions which will have to be injected into the
   routing system in the future, in addition to those exceptions which
   currently exist.  Each such exception which is added to the routing
   system has a deleterious effect on the scalability of the routing
   system.  The number of exceptions which can be tolerated is dependent
   on the exact technology which is used to support routing.  Unbridled
   injection of such exceptions will certainly cause the routing system
   to collapse.  Similarly, if the sustained rate of injection of
   exceptions exceeds the rate at which routing technology scales, the
   routing system is doomed.

   By definition, address ownership assumes that addresses, once
   assigned, do not change, and therefore no renumbering can take place.
   By definition, hierarchical routing assumes that addresses reflect
   network topology.  Therefore, the only way to accommodate both
   address ownership and hierarchical routing for everyone is to assume
   that the topology (or at least certain pieces of it) will be
   permanently fixed. In circumstances where the topology can change
   arbitrarily, we can accommodate one, but not both - we can either
   have address ownership, in combination with a non-routable (and
   therefore non-functional) Internet, or we can have a routable
   Internet, but without address ownership. In the latter case the
   concept of "address ownership" is being superseded by a policy of
   "address leasing".

   An "address leasing" policy means that an organization acquires its
   addresses on a "lease" basis. After the lease expires, or if the
   organization moves, the organization may either renew the lease (in
   which case the addresses stay the same), or terminate the old lease
   and establish a new lease (in which case the addresses change).  The
   "leasing" policy must be hierarchical as well, so that addresses may
   be "sub-let" to other organizations.  The implication here is that
   the expiration of a single lease may have effects on organizations



Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


   which have recursively sub-let a portion of the address space from
   the main lease.


5 Recommendations


   This document proposes that all requests for address assignment and
   allocation which are fulfilled by various registries be under the
   policy of address leasing.  Consequently, such assignments and
   allocations should explicitly include (among other things) the
   duration of the lease, and conditions under which the lease could be
   renewed or terminated.  Existing address assignments and allocations
   are outside the scope of this document.

   Observe that the goal of hierarchical routing in the Internet is not
   to reduce the total amount of routing information in the Internet to
   the theoretically possible minimum, but just to contain the volume of
   routing information within the limits of technology,
   price/performance, and human factors.  Therefore, organizations which
   could provide reachability to a sufficiently large fraction of the
   total destinations in the Internet and could express such
   reachability through a single IP address prefix could expect that a
   route with this prefix will be maintained throughout the default-free
   part of the Internet routing system.

   For all other organizations, the reachability information they inject
   into the Internet routing system would be subject to hierarchical
   aggregation.  Consequently, when such an organization changes its
   topological attachment to the Internet, but wishes to preserve
   Internet-wide IP connectivity, the organization eventually needs to
   renumber to eliminate any exceptional prefixes that they would
   otherwise inject into the Internet routing system.  This applies both
   to the case where the organization takes its addresses out of its
   direct provider's block and the organization changes its direct
   provider, and to the case where the organization takes its addresses
   out of its indirect provider's block, and the organization changes
   its indirect provider.

   If the organization doesn't require Internet-wide IP connectivity,
   then renumbering can be avoided. In this case the organization may
   still maintain limited IP connectivity (e.g. with all the subscribers
   of its direct provider) by limiting the scope of its routing
   exception to its direct provider.

   Since renumbering is not cost-free, an organization, when presented
   with a choice of renumbering vs. limited IP connectivity, needs to
   carefully analyze its own requirements and compare the tradeoffs
   associated with each alternative.

   Organizations should be strongly encouraged to deploy tools that
   facilitate renumbering (e.g. Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol [RFC
   1541]). Use of the DNS (rather than /etc/hosts) should be strongly
   encouraged.



Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


6 Conclusions


   Any address allocation and management policy for IP addresses used
   for the Internet connectivity must take into account its impact on
   the scalability of the Internet routing system.

   Among all of the possible address allocation and management policies
   only the ones that yield a scalable routing system are feasible - all
   other policies are self-destructive in nature, as they lead to a
   collapse of the Internet routing system, and thereby to the collapse
   of the Internet.

   Within the context of hierarchical routing, address allocation and
   management policies that assume unrestricted address ownership have
   an extremely negative impact on the scalability of the Internet
   routing system - such policies are almost certain to exhaust the
   scalability of the Internet routing system well before we even
   approach the exhaustion of the IPv4 address space and certainly well
   before we will be able to make moderate use of the IPv6 address
   space.

   With the current technology or any near-term foreseeable technology,
   given the Internet's growth rate, the notion that everyone should be
   able to own address space and receive routing services, regardless of
   where they connect to the Internet, is technically infeasible.

   Therefore, this document recommends that any address allocation and
   management policy should explicitly dispel the notion of "address
   ownership" and use the policy of "address leasing" instead.


7 Security Considerations


   Security issues are not discussed in this document.


8 Acknowledgments


   This document borrows heavily from various postings on various
   mailing lists. Special thanks to Noel Chiappa, Dennis Ferguson, Eric
   Fleischman, Geoff Huston, and Jon Postel whose postings were used in
   this document.

   Many thanks to Randy Bush, John Curran, Andrew Partan, Scott Bradner,
   Dave Piscitello and David Conrad for their review and comments.


9 References


   [Kleinrock 77] Kleinrock, L., Farouk, K., "Hierarchical Routing for



Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT                                                  May 1995


   Large Networks," Computer Networks 1 (1977), North-Holland Publishing
   Company.

   [RFC 1541] Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol".

   [RFC 1519] V. Fuller, T. Li, J. Yu, K. Varadhan, "Classless Inter-
   Domain
              Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and Aggregation
   Strategy"

   [RFC 1518] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, "An Architecture for IP Address
   Allocation with
              CIDR"


10 Authors' Addresses

   Yakov Rekhter
   T.J. Watson Research Center IBM Corporation
   P.O. Box 218
   Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
   Phone:  (914) 945-3896
   email:  yakov@watson.ibm.com

   Tony Li
   cisco Systems, Inc.
   470 Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134
   Phone: (408) 526-8186
   email: tli@cisco.com



























Expiration Date November 1995                                   [Page 7]

