


HTTPAuth Working Group                                        J. Reschke
Internet-Draft                                                greenbytes
Updates: 2617 (if approved)                                 July 4, 2014
Intended status: Experimental
Expires: January 5, 2015


          An Encoding Parameter for HTTP Basic Authentication
                  draft-ietf-httpauth-basicauth-enc-04

Abstract

   This draft is obsolete.  Its contents has been integrated into
   draft-ietf-httpauth-basicauth-update-01.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Reschke                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Basic Auth Encoding Parameter            July 2014


1.  Introduction

   (see abstract)

Author's Address

   Julian F. Reschke
   greenbytes GmbH
   Hafenweg 16
   Muenster, NW  48155
   Germany

   EMail: julian.reschke@greenbytes.de
   URI:   http://greenbytes.de/tech/webdav/





































Reschke                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 2]

