


Multiparty Multimedia Session                                  T. Lohmar
Control Working Group                                      Ericsson GmbH
Internet-Draft                                                 J. Gordon
Intended status: Experimental                         RealNetworks, Inc.
Expires: January 30, 2010                                   T. Einarsson
                                                             Ericsson AB
                                                           July 29, 2009


                  Fast Content Switching with RTSP 2.0
                    draft-lohmar-mmusic-rtsp-fcs-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 30, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.






Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


Abstract

   RTSP defines the setup and control for on demand and live streaming
   media sessions, which are delivered via an external media transport
   protocol such as RTP/UDP.  RTSP does not define a mechanism to change
   the content during an on-going streaming session.  Such a mechanism
   improves the streaming experience when a user browses through
   multiple offerings on a single streaming site.

   This document describes several methods to improve content switching.
   The basic principle is to re-use already established transport
   sessions (e.g.  RTP/UDP sessions) and negotiate new content to be
   delivered on the existing sessions.  If additional transport sessions
   are necessary, those sessions are established separately.  This
   principle of re-using the RTSP control and transport sessions
   decreases the content switch delay to a large extent and improves the
   end-user experience.

   The present document defines a mechanism for switching to new
   content, both when the client already has the content description
   available and when it does not.

   This document additionally considers switching of a single media
   stream in a session, when several alternative media components are
   available.  For instance, the content may provide several alternate
   audio tracks in different languages to be played with a single video
   stream.

   The principle of Fast Content Switching and Start-up is also defined
   in 3GPP TS 26.234 [3GPP.26.234] for RTSP 1.0 [RFC2326].

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].















Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  High level procedure description . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  New features for RTSP 2.0  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  RTSP 2.0 Protocol Extension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  "Switch-Stream" RTSP Header Field  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Semantics of RTSP PLAY method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.3.  RTP Transport Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Switching to new content with available description  . . . . .  8
   4.  Switching to new content without content description . . . . .  9
   5.  Switching Media within an RTSP session . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Adding Media Components to an ongoing session  . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Removing Media Components from an ongoing session  . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14






























Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


1.  Introduction

   RTSP defines the setup and control for on demand and live streaming
   media sessions.  The media data is delivered via an external media
   transport protocol, typically RTP/UDP.  RTSP does not define a
   mechanism to change the content during an on-going streaming session.
   When changing from one RTSP resource to another offered by the same
   server, the streaming session must be torn down and newly
   established.  This procedure can take an excessive amount of time and
   resources.

   The present document defines a mechanism to change the streaming
   content during an on-going RTSP session.  The existing transport
   sessions are re-used.  Additional transport sessions may be
   established when the new content conains more media components than
   needed for the old content and unnesessary transport sessions may be
   released when no longer needed.  Such a mechanism improves the
   streaming experience when a user browses through various content
   offered by same streaming server.

   The RTSP protocol extensions defined in the present document are
   applicable for both live and on-demand streaming sessions.  A number
   of general RTSP extensions are defined to enable fast content
   switching during an on-going streaming session.  These extensions are
   to be implemented by RTSP clients and servers wishing to support any
   of these features.  Feature tags are used to exchange supported
   capabilities.

1.1.  High level procedure description

   A streaming client needs to have an RTSP URI to start the streaming
   session.  The required codecs and transmission formats are described
   via SDP or other supported media description format.  The client may
   need to retreive the content description from the RTSP server prior
   to session setup.

   In order to establish a streaming session, the client first needs to
   establish transport sessions for each media component it will be
   streaming.  Each media component is uniquely identified by a media
   control URI.  Transport parameters such as UDP source and destination
   ports are exchanged during the set-up of the transport sessions.  The
   control URIs are described in the session description.

   When all needed transport sessions are established, the actual
   content delivery and reception process can begin (RTSP PLAY method).
   The client receives needed synchronization information with the PLAY
   response from the server.  This includes timestamp synchronization,
   sequence numbers and synchronization source identifiers (SSRCs) per



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   media components (identified by according media control URIs).

   When the user changes to new content on the same server, only one
   PLAY transaction is needed when the number of media components are
   the same (e.g. old session contains audio and video media components
   and the new content does as well).  New synchronization information
   is provided with the RTP-Info in the PLAY response.  Replacement the
   media control URIs for the transport sessions is also clarified
   during the PLAY transaction.

   In case the number of needed media components is increased (e.g.
   switching from audio and video content to audio, video and timed-
   text), then the client establishes additonal transport sessions.
   Synchronization with the earlier established components is realized
   through the RTSP PLAY transaction.  In case the new content needs
   fewer media components then the old content, the unnecessary
   components are released.

   The fast content switching procedure does not require a client to
   have all SDP information before switching to new content.  It may
   request the SDP information for the new content with the RTSP PLAY
   request.  Therefore, the procedure of content switching with and
   without an available session description is slightly different and
   will be handled independently in the following.

   Content Switching with content description:

   If the client has already received the content description before the
   fast content switch request, it can process it prior to the switch
   request and determine whether or not additional media components are
   needed.  In case new media components are needed, the client may
   establish the new transport sessions either before or pipelined with
   the PLAY request for the new content.

   Content Switching without content description:

   Often the client does not have the content description but only an
   aggregate RTSP content description URI.  Since the streaming sessions
   will frequently constist of the same number of media components (e.g.
   one audio and one video), it is very likely that the client can re-
   use established transport sessions.  In case fewer media sessions are
   required, the client can release its established resources when it
   receives the response.  If additional media sessions are needed, the
   client may establish these sessions after the media description
   response is received.

   Switching an individual component in a streaming session:




Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   This document also defines a mechanism to change parts of the content
   during an ongoing streaming session.  For instance, the user may
   choose to change the audio stream from the original language track to
   a translation in another language.  Alternatively, he may wish to
   change only the video component - such as a different camera view
   during a racing event - while keeping the same audio stream.

   In most cases, a content switch can be performed with a single RTSP
   transaction.  However, in order to preserve interoperability with
   RTSP-aware intermediate devices such as application layer gateways,
   RTSP clients should ensure that SETUP requests and responses are sent
   for each transport session to be used.  This allows the intermediate
   device to establish the necessary configuration, for instance routing
   of UDP ports for RTP/UDP sessions.  Once the transport session has
   been negotiate with a SETUP request and response, it may be reused
   for subsequent content upon a switch.

1.2.  New features for RTSP 2.0

   The following new RTSP feature tags are defined:

   o "rtsp-switch" feature-tag, defined in Section 3.

   o "rtsp-switch-req-sdp" feature-tag, defined in Section 4.

   o "rtsp-switch-stream" feature-tag, defined in Section 5.

   In addition the following new RTSP header fields are defined:

   o "Switch-Stream" header, defined in Section 2.1.

   o "SDP-Requested" header, defined in Section 4.


2.  RTSP 2.0 Protocol Extension

   In order to change the content of an on-going RTSP session, a number
   of streaming parameters are changed for the new content.  The new
   parameters for the transport session can be provided with the RTP-
   Info field in the PLAY response.  A new protocol header to replace
   the RTSP control and media URIs is described in the next section
   followed by the expected semantics of the RTSP PLAY method.

2.1.  "Switch-Stream" RTSP Header Field

   The "Switch-Stream" header field may be used in an RTSP PLAY request
   or response message.  It is used to describe the replacement of media
   streams after a content switch.  The "Switch-Stream" header field may



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   be used with aggregated control and with media control URIs.

   The "Switch-Stream" header syntax in ABNF [RFC5234] is as follows:

      Switch-Stream   = "Switch-Stream" COLON switch-spec
                        *(COMMA switch-spec) CRLF
      switch-spec     = old-stream ";" new-stream
      old-stream      = "old" "=" (DQ rtsp-url DQ) / (DQ DQ)
      new-stream      = "new" "=" (DQ rtsp-url DQ) / (DQ DQ)
      rtsp-url        = rtsp-url ; as defined in RFC 2326 [5]
      DQ              = %x22 ; US-ASCII double-quote mark (34)
      LWS             = [CRLF] 1*( SP / HT )
      SWS             = [LWS] ; sep whitespace
      COMMA           = * ( SP / HT ) "," SWS; comma
      COLON           = * ( SP / HT ) ":" SWS; colon

   If both old media stream and new media stream URIs are indicated in
   the "Switch-Stream" header field of a PLAY request from an RTSP
   client to an RTSP server, then the server MUST interpret this as a
   request to replace the specified media stream with the new media
   stream, hence reusing the existing transport parameters.

   If the "Switch-Stream" header field is included in a PLAY response
   from an RTSP server to an RTSP client, then this header informs the
   client about the media streams that are currently being streamed to
   the client.  The old media stream MAY be omitted in this case.

   If only the new media stream URI is indicated in the "Switch-Stream"
   header field of a PLAY request from an RTSP client to an RTSP server,
   then the RTSP server MUST interpret this as a request to switch to
   the new media stream.  The server decides the mapping.  The RTSP
   server MUST indicate the SSRC of the new media stream in the RTP-Info
   of the reply, in order to enable the client to locate the new stream.

   If only the old stream URI is indicated in the "Switch-Stream" header
   field of a PLAY request from an RTSP client to an RTSP server, then
   the server MUST interpret this as a request for complete removal of
   the specified media stream.  The client and the server release the
   resources for this stream without explicit TEARDOWN signalling, as
   such signalling may lead intermediate application level gateways or
   RTSP proxies to also release the RTSP session and the other transport
   resources.  The usage of the "Switch-Stream" header is defined in
   clauses Section 3, Section 4 and Section 7.

2.2.  Semantics of RTSP PLAY method

   A PLAY request sent while a stream is still playing is a legal
   operation in RTSP 2.0 with different semantics than those defined in



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   RTSP 1.0.  The later PLAY request replaces the first PLAY request.
   The new PLAY request MAY change RTSP session attributes such as the
   session identifier.

2.3.  RTP Transport Sessions

   The most common media transport for RTSP is RTP/UDP.  The following
   descriptions and definitions are applicable when using RTP/UDP as
   media transport.  Other media transport protocols may require similar
   considerations which are not defined in the present document.

   After switching content as defined by this document, the SSRC
   identifier used on a specific RTP session may change.  In the event
   that the SSRC changes, it MUST be included in the RTP-Info header.
   The RTSP server MUST change the SSRC value for a specific RTP session
   after a fast content switching operation is performed if any of the
   following apply:

   o the payload types of the old and new media streams are the same but
   the payload configuration differs;

   o the clockrate of the new media stream is different from the old; or

   o the mapping of the new media stream is otherwise unknown to the
   RTSP client.

   In case the SSRC remains unchanged after a content switch, the RTP
   sequence numbering MUST be continuous and monotonically increasing
   and the timestamp clock MUST maintain continuity.  Additionally, if
   the payload type also remains the same, the old media stream and new
   media stream MUST NOT contain any packets with decoding dependencies
   on unsent packets.

   Otherwise, if the SSRC is updated, a random RTP sequence number and
   timestamp SHOULD be chosen using the same or similar mechanisms to
   those used when initiating a new media session as described in RFC
   3550 [RFC3550].


3.  Switching to new content with available description

   This clause defines all necessary RTSP client and server features for
   fast content switching when the client already has the content new
   description locally available; for instance, the client may have
   previously fetched the SDP using RTSP DESCRIBE or HTTP GET.  Clients
   should assume that the herein defined fast content switching
   procedure is supported for all content items offered by this server.
   This feature reduces the RTSP protocol overhead of switching to a



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   single client-server interaction.

   The feature-tag indicating this feature is "rtsp-switch".  The client
   should probe the server capabilities as early as possible in the
   communication using the "rtsp-switch" tag in the "Supported" header.
   The client SHOULD use the "Require" header with this feature tag
   value when requesting this behaviour from the server.  The server
   MUST use the PLAY method as defined in Section 2.2 and
   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis] when the client requests this feature.
   Thus replacing the currently streaming content with the newly
   requested media, resulting in a switch of streamed content.

   When the RTSP client wants to change the content of the RTSP session,
   the RTSP client sends a PLAY request with the aggregated control URI
   of the new content to the RTSP server.  The aggregated control URI is
   defined as in RFC 3550 [RFC3550]

   The RTSP client MUST add the media control URIs of the new streams
   requested in the "Switch-Stream" header field of the RTSP PLAY
   request.  Whenever possible, the RTSP client SHOULD map media control
   URIs of the same media type (e.g. audio or video) in the old content
   to the same media type of the new session.  Note, this is only
   applicable for media types which are present in both the old and new
   content.  The server MUST always include the "Switch-Stream" header
   in the response, indicating the new media streams being sent.  The
   "Switch-Stream" header field is defined in Section 2.1.

   If the SSRC identifiers have changed, then the server MUST indicate
   the new SSRC values of the new media streams within the "RTP-Info"
   header in the RTSP PLAY response.

   Note: if the new session contains more media components than the
   current session, the client MAY switch according to this section,
   describing the desired components in the "Switch-Stream" header and
   add the missing components using the method defined in Section 6.

   If fewer media components are present in the new session than the
   existing session, the client and the server remove the unused
   components as defined in Section 7.


4.  Switching to new content without content description

   Clients should assume, that the here defined fast content switching
   procedure is supported for all content items offered by this server.
   The client uses the RTSP URI of the content session as the request
   URI to describe the new content item.




Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   Without an SDP or other adequate content description, the client is
   unable to specify the streams to which it wishes to subscribe.  In
   order to initiate a content switch within a single RTSP round trip,
   the client MAY perform a PLAY request to initiate a switch via
   content URI without specifying individual streams.  This allows the
   client to request that the server return a content description,
   initiate a new session, setup all relevant media streams (or make an
   appropriate stream selection), and begin playback.  The content URI
   used in the PLAY request is the same content URI used in a DESCRIBE
   request.  In order to signal that it wishes to receive the
   description and make a switch, the client MUST include the "SDP-
   Requested" header as defined below.

   SDP-Requested-Header = " SDP-Requested" COLON "1"

   If a server receives a PLAY request and completes all actions
   successfully, the server responds with the content description,
   Session-ID, RTP-Info or other required transport headers, and a
   "Switch-Stream" Section 2.1 descriptor and begins streaming the new
   content immediately.  Whenever possible, the RTSP server SHOULD map
   the media control URIs of the same media type (e.g. audio or video)
   in the old content to the same media type of the new session.  Note:
   this is only applicable for media types which are present in both the
   old and new content.  In case of RTP transport, the RTP-Info in the
   PLAY response MUST contain the SSRC for each stream.  The server MAY
   issue a new session ID in the response, or it may re-use the existing
   session ID.  The client MUST be prepared for either case.

   If the server is not yet able to begin streaming, it responds with a
   202 (Accepted) success code and an appropriate session description.
   The client may then perform a switch as described in Section 3
   specifying the streams it would like to receive.  This condition can
   occur if the server requires further client input regarding stream
   setup prior to beginning playback - for instance if the content
   requested is available in multiple alternate languages and the server
   does not have the information necessary to choose a language.

   If the server is not yet able to begin transmitting all the media
   streams, it MAY begin a subset of the streams and respond with a 206
   (Partial Data) success code and a session description.  The "Switch-
   Stream" header and the "RTP-Info" header will indicate which streams
   have been selected for playback.  The client MAY then add additional
   media components as described in Section 6.

   If fewer media components are present in the new content than are
   currently in use, then the server responds with a 200 (OK).  The
   client MUST then remove the "unused" media components as defined in
   Section 7.



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   The client and the server SHOULD release the resources for the unused
   streams without explicit TEARDOWN signalling.

   The feature tag "rtsp-switch-req-sdp" is defined to describe support
   for this feature.  The client SHOULD probe the server capabilities as
   early as possible in the communication using the "Supported" header
   and SHOULD use the "Require" header with this feature tag value when
   requesting this behaviour from the server.  The server MUST use the
   PLAY method semantics defined in Section 2.2 and
   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis] when the client requests this feature.


5.  Switching Media within an RTSP session

   Some content may be available for streaming in different
   representations.  An example of such a use case is the live streaming
   of a sport event with multiple camera views.  The session description
   available at the receiver describes multiple options for one or
   several media types (e.g. video, audio, or subtitles).  Upon initial
   setup of the session, the player (or the user) selects the preferred
   combination of the presentation to be consumed and sets up the
   corresponding media streams.  At a later point, the user may trigger
   a switch to a different media stream carrying an alternative
   representation of the media.

   The PLAY request is sent with the "Switch-Stream" header field as
   defined in Section 2.1 indicating the URIs of both the old media
   stream and the new replacement stream.  Upon receiving a PLAY request
   with a "Switch-Stream" header field for an active session, an RTSP
   server that supports this feature switches to the new media stream
   using the same transport parameters described in the initial SETUP
   request for the old media stream.  After successfully processing the
   request, the RTSP server MUST reply with an "RTP-Info" header
   indicating all active media streams in the changed session, including
   those that are unchanged.  The "RTP-Info" header MAY include the
   SSRCs for each active media stream; it MUST contain all new SSRCs of
   the changed streams if the SSRCs have changed.  The response MAY also
   include the "Switch-Stream" header, indicating the stream switches
   that were successful.  If the "Switch-Stream" header field is not
   present in a successful response and the RTSP server was identified
   to support the media switching functionality, the receiver MUST
   assume that all requested switches were successful.

   The feature tag "rtsp-switch-stream" is defined to describe support
   for this feature.  This feature tag is different than the feature tag
   "rtsp-switch" described in Section 3 indicating the support for
   content (aggregated stream) switch.  The client SHOULD use the
   "Require" header with this feature tag value when requesting this



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


   behaviour from the server.

   The server MUST use the PLAY method semantics as defined in
   Section 2.2 and [I-D.ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis]when the client requests
   this feature.  Note that several media streams of a presentation may
   be switched at the same time in a single PLAY request.


6.  Adding Media Components to an ongoing session

   It may happen that the new content stream consists of more media
   components than the ongoing content stream.  In such a case, it is
   RECOMMENDED that the client switch to the new content with the
   already established resources and then add further components.

   The client SHOULD pipeline the setup requests for the new components
   after the content switching request.  The client MUST issue a PLAY
   request after the successful establishment of the new media
   components to start all media components.  If the server has
   successfully added the media component, the "RTP-Info" header in the
   RTSP PLAY response MUST contain the synchronization information for
   all media components.

   The session id value of the already established session MUST be
   included in the SETUP request to indicate the relation of the new
   media component to the established session.


7.  Removing Media Components from an ongoing session

   A RTSP client wishing to terminate the streaming of a specific media
   stream MAY send a PLAY request with a "Switch-Stream" header
   Section 2.1 indicating the URI of the media stream to be torn down as
   the "old-stream".  No URI for the "new-stream" should be specified.

   Upon receiving a PLAY request with a "Switch-Stream" header field
   indicating that one or more media streams are to be terminated, the
   server MUST stop streaming the indicated media streams and SHOULD
   release the unused resources, (e.g.  RTP/RTCP UDP ports).  The other
   media streams MUST NOT be interrupted.

   After successfully processing the request, the server MUST reply with
   a success response message and a "Session" header field, even if the
   session contains no more media streams.

   The RTSP client MUST only use TEARDOWN to completely tear down the
   whole session.




Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


8.  IANA Considerations

   The feature tags "rtsp-switch", "rtsp-switch-req-sdp" and "rtsp-
   switch-stream" need to be registered with IANA.


9.  Security Considerations

   Same as for RTSP [I-D.ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis].


10.  Acknowledgements

   This document has benefited greatly from the discussions and comments
   from all those participating in 3GPP TSG SA4.  In particular, the
   following individuals have contributed to this specification: Gamze
   Seckin, Imed Bouazizi, Frederic Gabin, Igor Curcio, Francois Martin


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis]
              Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A., Lanphier, R., Westerlund, M.,
              and M. Stiemerling, "Real Time Streaming Protocol 2.0
              (RTSP)", draft-ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis-22 (work in
              progress), July 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

11.2.  Informative References

   [3GPP.26.234]
              3GPP, "Transparent end-to-end Packet-switched Streaming
              Service (PSS); Protocols and codecs", 3GPP TS 26.234
              7.5.0, March 2008.

   [RFC2326]  Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A., and R. Lanphier, "Real Time
              Streaming Protocol (RTSP)", RFC 2326, April 1998.



Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  RTSP-FCS                       July 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Thorsten Lohmar
   Ericsson GmbH
   Ericsson Allee 1
   Herzogenrath  52134
   Germany

   Phone: +49-2407-5757816
   Fax:   +49-2407-575400
   Email: Thorsten.Lohmar@ericsson.com


   Jamie Gordon
   RealNetworks, Inc.
   2601 Elliott Avenue
   Seattle, WA  98121
   USA

   Phone: +1-206-674-2700
   Fax:
   Email: jgordon@real.com


   Torbjoern Einarsson
   Ericsson AB
   Faeroegatan 6
   Stockholm  164 80
   Sweden

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: Torbjorn.Einarsson@ericsson.com


















Lohmar, et al.          Expires January 30, 2010               [Page 14]


