

                                                            James Kempf 
   Internet Draft                                         Jonathan Wood 
   Document: draft-kempf-mobileip-fmipv6-sem-00.txt              DoCoMo 
                                                         Communications 
                                                           Laboratories 
                                                                    USA 
   Expires: April 2003                                                  
   November 2002                                                        
    
             Improving the Architectural Alignment for FMIPv6 
                                      
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. This draft is an individual 
   submission to the Mobile IP working group. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   The FMIPv6 draft proposes a number of changes in the local link and 
   routing information exchange architecture for wireless networks that 
   are not quite aligned with standard IETF protocols, including the 
   base MIPv6 protocol itself. This draft proposes modifications of 
   FMIPv6 to tighten the semantics of anticipated care-of address 
   configuration around the prehandover signaling as a logical 
   extension of Router Discovery, and around the HI/HAck exchange as a 
   logical extension of routing information propagation. It also 
   proposes some extensions to Router Discovery for reactive handover 
   to piggyback signaling for quickly establishing a tunnel to the 
   Previous Access Router on top of standard RFC 2461 Router Discovery 
   signaling. 
    
Table of Contents 
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION....................................................2 

2.0  PROBLEMS WITH FMIPV6............................................3 
    
   Kempf and Wood       Informational                     [Page 1] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
3.0  ARCHITECTURAL ALIGNMENT POINTS..................................5 

4.0  PROPOSED PROTOCOL MODIFICATIONS.................................7 

5.0  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS.........................................9 

6.0  REFERENCES.....................................................10 

7.0  AUTHOR'S CONTACT INFORMATION...................................10 

8.0  FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT.......................................11 
 
 
1.0     Introduction 
    
   FMIPv6 [1] describes a protocol to replace the standard Mobile IPv6 
   [2] movement detection algorithm. Conceptually, the protocol 
   consists of two phases: 
    
      1) Prior to the link switch, anticipating care-of address change 
         by performing as much of the care-of address change as 
         possible on the old link, 
       
      2) Repair of the routing failure due to the link switch so that 
         the Mobile Node can continue to receive packets while it 
         completes the care-of address change on the new link. 
 
   The first phase is optional, and depends on the availability of 
   prehandover information about the Mobile Node's next destination. 
   The implementations of some link layers, for example 802.11 [3][4], 
   may not provide enough information or IP stack control prior to 
   handover to achieve anticipated care-of address configuration. The 
   first phase may also not be necessary if the link layer (for example 
   [5]) securely conveys enough information between the Mobile Node and 
   the Previous Access Router prior to the handover that the Previous 
   and New Access Routers can complete the second phase without any 
   wireless IP signaling. 
    
   The second phase consists of two steps: 
    
     1) Establishing a bidirectional tunnel between the Previous Access 
        Router and the New Access Router prior to the link switch, if 
        possible, or as soon as possible after the link switch, if 
        necessary, 
      
     2) Forwarding of packets between the old link and new through the 
        bidirectional tunnel so the Mobile Node can send and receive 
        packets under its old care-of address while on the new link. 
 

    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 2] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
   If prehandover information is available, the tunnel can be set up 
   prior to the handover. If not, the Mobile Node will lose packets 
   during the link switch (unless they are buffered by the Previous 
   Access Router), but quick action on the part of the Mobile Node or 
   the Access Router after the link switch can establish the tunnel. In 
   either case, the tunnel maintains the flow of packets while the 
   Mobile Node undergoes the time-consuming process of changing its 
   care-of address binding at the Home Agent and performing route 
   optimization with any Correspondent Nodes. 
    
   In this draft, we describe some cases in which the FMIPv6 design is 
   not well aligned with the base IPv6 local link routing protocol [6], 
   standard IPv6 routing information exchange, and the base MIPv6 
   protocol [2]. We suggest a few minor changes to tighten the 
   semantics of anticipated care-of address configuration around the 
   Router Solicitation for Proxy (RtSolPrxy) and Proxy Router Advert 
   (PrxyRtAdv) messages, and to align posthandover routing information 
   propagation with standard IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [6].  
    
   We view this approach as an extension of the base MIPv6 philosophy 
   of not introducing any novel MIPv6-specific features into the access 
   link, but rather confining MIPv6-specific features to the home 
   network and utilizing standard IPv6 access link features (or, in 
   this case, modest extensions) for handover. We consider in this 
   draft the cases where anticipated care-of address change is 
   necessary or where it is not possible due to lack of enough link 
   layer information prior to the link switch. We do not consider the 
   case in which enough prehandover information is available from the 
   link layer to avoid the need for anticipated care-of address change. 
 
2.0     Problems with FMIPv6 
    
   Some of the problems in FMIPv6 are involved in proposed changes in 
   binding update semantics. The base MIPv6 draft [2] has two uses of 
   binding update: 
    
     1) From the Mobile Node to the Home Agent after the Mobile Node 
        has completed care-of address configuration on the local link, 
        to change the routing at the Home Agent to the new care-of 
        address. The Mobile Node uses an IPsec security association 
        between the Mobile Node and Home Agent for security. 
 
     2) From the Mobile Node to the Correspondent Node after the Mobile 
        Node has completed care-of address configuration, and 
        concurrently with Home Agent binding update, to change the 
        Correspondent Node's routing to the new care-of address. The 
        Mobile Node uses return routability by default for security. 
 
   In both cases, the Mobile Node is in the topologically correct place 
   for the routing update (i.e. the source address of the packet is on 
   the local link), and there is a clearly defined security algorithm 
   for securing the routing change.  
    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 3] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
    
   The following subsections detail specific problems with FMIPv6. 
    
2.1 Lack of Confirmed Prehandover Care-of Address Configuration 
    
   The FMIPv6 draft contains a message, Fast Neighbor Discovery (FND), 
   which the Mobile Node is specified to use when it moves onto a new 
   link and is still "unsure" whether it should uses the anticipated 
   care-of address. The reason for this message is unclear, but it 
   seems to relate to the lack of a specific invariant in the 
   prehandover RtSolPrxy/PrxyRtAdv message sequence which assures the 
   Mobile Node that it can use the preconfigured new care-of address 
   for initiating binding changes at the Home Agent and Correspondent 
   Nodes immediately after it has switched links.  
    
2.2 Bidirectional Tunnel Activation Times Unclear 
    
   The FMIPv6 draft specifies that FBU should be sent immediately after 
   the PrxyRtAdv is received, and that the Previous Access Router 
   should wait to activate the bidirectional tunnel to the New Access 
   Router until an FBU is received. The source address in the FBU is 
   specified to be the previous care-of address. If the Mobile Node is 
   still on the old link, then the FBU source address is topologically 
   correct, and the routing information from the Previous Access Router 
   is current so that the FBU is being routed properly. If, however, 
   the Mobile Node has moved to the New Access Router, the FBU source 
   address is no longer topologically correct. If the bidirectional 
   tunnel were active, this would not be a problem, however, the tunnel 
   is not activated until *after* the FBU is received at the Previous 
   Access Router.  
    
   The relationship between when the routing tunnel is activated from 
   the New Access Router and from the Previous Access Router is thus 
   unclear. The tunnel from the Previous Access Router to the New 
   Access Router is only activated by the FBU, but the tunnel from the 
   New Access Router to the Previous Access Router is presumed to be 
   activated by the HI/HAck sequence, otherwise the FBU with the 
   Previous Care of Address could not be sent to the Previous Access 
   Router, though this is not stated in the draft. The draft is unclear 
   why routing in one direction on the tunnel should be activated after 
   routing in the other, and why explicit signaling is required to 
   activate the tunnel on the Previous Access Router but not on the New 
   Access Router. 
    
2.3 Unclear Security on FBU 
    
   The FMIPv6 draft states that the Mobile Node should use Neighbor 
   Discovery security if the FBU is sent while the Mobile Node is still 
   on the old link, but if the FBU is sent when the Mobile Node moves 
   to the new link, Neighbor Discovery security cannot be used because 
   the Previous Access Router is now more than one hop removed from the 

    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 4] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
   Mobile Node. The draft is not clear how the FBU should be secured in 
   this case. 
    
2.4 New Access Router Address Not Secured 
    
   In order to use an address as an alternate care-of address, the 
   Mobile Node MUST perform the return routability test with the 
   address used in the Alternate Care-of Address option ([2] Section 
   5.2.6). The FBU uses the New Access Router as an alternate care-of 
   address, in the FBU sent to the Previous Access Router to activate 
   the tunnel. However, the Mobile Node is not required to perform 
   return routability with the New Access Router, nor is it entirely 
   clear whether this would be such a good idea, since it would result 
   in performance degradation. The Mobile Node cannot use Neighbor 
   Discovery security because the FBU may be sent while the Mobile Node 
   is on the old link.  
    
2.5 Practicality of FBU Signaling 
    
   Although this is not an architectural point, the practicality of the 
   FBU signaling is entirely unclear. If the FBU is sent when the 
   Mobile Node is still on the Previous Access Router, the tunnel is 
   activated and the Mobile Node can no longer send and receive packets 
   until it moves to the new link. The FBU is largely useless in this 
   case, because the tunnel could just as well have been activated by 
   the HI/HAck. If the FBU is sent after the Mobile Node moves, it 
   delays activation of the tunnel for some period of time until the 
   Previous Access Router responds. During this time, the Mobile Node 
   can lose packets if the Previous Access Router drops them. If the 
   FBU transmission is interrupted by the handover, the Mobile Node 
   must resend after switching links. The FBU thus increases the number 
   of messages that must successfully negotiate the wireless link 
   during the difficult transmission and reception conditions around 
   handover without really contributing much, if anything, to 
   accelerating handover. 
      
3.0     Architectural Alignment Points 
    
   This section contains a few points that align FMIPv6 more closely 
   with the standard IPv6 on-link routing and routing information 
   distribution architecture. 
    
3.1 New Care-of Address Invariant 
    
   After the completion of RtSolPrxy/PrxyRtAdv, an invariant is 
   established: either the Mobile Node has a confirmed care-of address 
   on the new link or it doesn't. If the Mobile Node has a confirmed 
   new care-of address, it can use the address to begin changing 
   bindings on the Home Agent and Correspondent Nodes immediately when 
   it reaches the new link. If the Mobile Node doesn't have a new care-
   of address, the optimization is considered to have failed and the MN 

    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 5] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
   must perform standard Mobile IP movement detection, considerably 
   simplifing error handling 
    
   If the handover is anticipated and network triggered (i.e. a 
   gratuitous PrxyRtAdv is sent), the Previous Access Router sends the 
   MN's current host identifier in the HI, the New Access Router 
   replies with a confirmed address that it is prepared to defend. If 
   the handover is anticipated and mobile triggered, the MN sends its 
   desired host identifier in the RtSolPrxy, the Previous Access Router 
   forwards that to the New Access Router, and the New Access Router 
   returns the confirmed address. If the handover is reactive (i.e. 
   there is no prehandover signaling), the MN sends its desired host 
   identifier in the Router Solicitation (RS) and the New Access Router 
   sends a confirmed address back in the Router Advertisement (RA). 
    
   Note that this requires the New Access Router to be able to quickly 
   determine whether a proposed new care-of address would not result in 
   a collision on the link. The suggested way for the New Access Router 
   to achieve this is for the neighbor cache data structure defined in 
   [6] to be a neighbor table, that is, for the neighbor cache entries 
   to be locked down so that they constitute a complete map of the IP 
   addresses and Layer 2 identifiers of all hosts on the link. This 
   technique is used in Mobile IPv4 at the Foreign Agent to lock down 
   the ARP cache entry until the MN deregisters [8]. 
    
3.2 HI/HAck Constitutes Routing Information Propagation 
    
   The HI/HAck message exchange between the Previous and New Access 
   Routers constitutes the exchange of routing information, 
   specifically, the propagation of a source route from the Previous 
   Access Router to the New Access Router for purposes of establishing 
   a bidirectional tunnel. As such, the exchange MUST be secured with 
   the same security association as is used for exchanging routing 
   information through the Interior Gateway Protocol between the two 
   routers. This assures that any redirection of packets between the 
   routers is the result of information obtained from an authentic 
   source. Furthermore, once the HI/HAck message completes, the 
   bidirectional tunnel is (logically) activated and packets to/from 
   the Mobile Node's previous care-of address are routed through the 
   tunnel. As a practical matter, the Previous Access Router may obtain 
   information from the link layer, in a secure fashion, that allows a 
   finer grained determination of when to activate the tunnel. In 
   addition, the New Access Router may perform additional buffering, 
   beyond the simple 3 packet buffer of Neighbor Discovery, in order to 
   smooth the handover. These are additional optimizations that may be 
   available in specific implementations. 
    
3.3 On-Link Signaling Extends Neighbor Discovery 
 
   The RtSolPrxy/PrxyRtAdv signaling prior to handover to establish the 
   care-of address and signaling after handover to start or terminate 
   the tunnel is an extension of the on-link routing protocol defined 
    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 6] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
   by Neighbor Discovery. As such, any exchanges MUST be secured with 
   the same security association as is used for standard IPv6 Neighbor 
   Discovery. RFC 2461 [6] specifies that IPsec AH headers MUST be 
   included on all Neighbor Discovery packets, but the specification is 
   not complete and there is ongoing work in the IETF to define 
   Neighbor Discovery security more precisely. 
    
   Furthermore, all signaling to change routing is done between the 
   Mobile Node and its current on-link router. This allows the local 
   Neighbor Discovery security to be used, and avoids the need for 
   defining how to set up a different kind of security association.  
    
4.0     Proposed Protocol Modifications 
    
   This section describes a modification of FMIPv6 to align the 
   protocol more closely with the architectural points in Section 3.0. 
    
4.1 Anticipated Care-of Address Configuration 
    
   Prior to the link switch, the Mobile Node and/or the Previous Access 
   Router can optionally perform anticipated care-of address 
   configuration if supported by sufficient link layer information. The 
   following steps are followed: 
    
     1) If the handover is mobile-triggered, the Mobile Node sends a 
        RtSolPrxy to the Previous Access Router with the following 
        extensions: an (optional) proposed host identifier for the last 
        64 bits of the Mobile Node's new care-of address and a 
        (required) Layer 2 address for the access point to which the 
        Mobile Node will be connecting. The source address is the 
        Mobile Node's current care-of address. 
     2) The Previous Access Router uses the Layer 2 address of the new 
        access point to determine the Subnet Router Anycast Address [9] 
        for the subnet corresponding to the access point Layer 2 
        address. The method whereby the Previous Access Router obtains 
        the mapping between access point Layer 2 addresses and router 
        addresses is outside the scope of this specification. 
     3) The Previous Access Router sends a HI message to the New Access 
        Router containing the Layer 2 address of the Mobile Node, the 
        previous care-of address of the Mobile Node, and the proposed 
        Mobile Node new care-of address host identifier. If the Mobile 
        Node did not send a host identifier, or if the handover was 
        triggered at the Previous Access Router (i.e. network-
        triggered), the Previous Access Router uses the same host 
        identifier as the Mobile Node used in its current care-of 
        address. 
     4) The New Access Router forms a care-of address for the Mobile 
        Node and checks its neighbor table to determine if the proposed 
        care-of address is in use. If the address is not in use, the 
        New Access Router returns a HAck indicating that the address is 
        OK. If the address is in use, the New Access Router returns an 

    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 7] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
        indication that the address is not OK, terminating the 
        optimization.  
     5) The New Access Router defends the proposed address until the 
        Mobile Node arrives on the link and announces that it has 
        completed care-of address configuration. 
    
4.2 Tunnel Establishment and Activation 
    
   The HI/HAck exchange triggered by anticipated care of address 
   establishment between the Previous Access Router and New Access 
   router both establishes and activates the tunnel. Upon receipt of 
   the HAck, The Previous Access Router establishes a forward host 
   route for the previous care-of address to the tunnel. Upon sending 
   the HAck, the New Access Routers installs a reverse host route for 
   the previous care-of address to the tunnel and a forward host route 
   for the previous care-of address to the Layer 2 address on the link. 
   The New Access Router modifies its ingress filter to install a /128 
   prefix for passing the Mobile Node's previous care-of address, while 
   the Previous Access Router modifies its ingress filter to exclude 
   packets having the Mobile Node's previous care-of address. Upon 
   completion of the HI/HAck exchange, packets with destination address 
   being the Mobile Node's previous care-of address arriving at the 
   Previous Access Router's wired interface are tunneled to the New 
   Access Router, and packets arriving at the New Access Router's 
   wireless interface having the Mobile Node's source address are 
   tunneled to the Previous Access Router. 
    
   As a practical matter, the Mobile Node may still be on the old link 
   and the Previous Access Router may delay activating the tunnel and 
   modifying its ingress filter until the Mobile Node leaves the link. 
   Similarly, the New Access Router may delay activating the tunnel and 
   modifying its ingress filter until the Mobile Node arrives on the 
   link. The New Access Router may also buffer traffic to the Mobile 
   Node received down the tunnel if it has not yet received link layer 
   notification that the Mobile Node has arrived. 
    
   If anticipated care-of address configuration is not possible, the 
   Mobile Node may trigger tunnel establishment from the new link. 
   Immediately upon arrival on the new link, if the Mobile Node has not 
   performed anticipated care-of address configuration, the Mobile Node 
   sends a Router Advertisement Solicatitation message to the All 
   Routers Multicast Address, containing the Subnet Router Anycast 
   Address of the Previous Access Router, the Mobile Node's previous 
   care-of address, and the Mobile Node's Layer 2 identifier, and a 
   proposed host identifier for the new care-of address. A designated 
   default router on the link assumes the role of the New Access 
   Router, and contacts the Previous Access Router by sending a HI 
   message, including the Mobile Node's previous care-of address and 
   Layer 2 identifier. If that information matches one of the Previous 
   Access Router's neighbor table entries, the Previous Access Router 
   responds with a HAck confirming the tunnel request, and the tunnel 
   is activated.  
    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 8] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
    
   In addition, the New Access Router includes a proposed new care-of 
   address in the Router Advertisement that it sends back to the Mobile 
   Node. The Mobile Node can get a jumpstart on configuring the new 
   care-of address and start sending the BUs to the HA and CNs right 
   away, rather than having to go through DAD (optimized or 
   unoptimized). If the Mobile Node would prefer a different subnet 
   prefix, it can discard the proposed new care-of address and form a 
   different one.  
    
   The Router Advertisement also includes an indication that the tunnel 
   establishement succeeded. If the tunnel did not succeed, the Mobile 
   Node should refrain from sending out any packets under the previous 
   care-of address and fall back to standard MIPv6 handover, waiting 
   until all binding updates are complete. 
    
4.3 Tunnel Termination 
    
   After anticipated handover signaling, once the Mobile Node is on the 
   new link it either has a new care-of address that it can use to 
   start updating routing on the Home Agent and Correspondent Nodes or 
   it doesn't. If it doesn't, then it SHOULD use standard IPv6 Address 
   Autoconfiguration or stateful address configuration to obtain a new 
   address. The Mobile Node MAY continue to use the old care-of address 
   for some period of time. The New Access Router continues to renew 
   the tunnel until the Mobile Node has completed care-of address 
   configuration, subject to network operator policy. If the tunnel 
   must be terminated for any reason, the New Access Router sends the 
   Mobile Node a Router Advertisement with a tunnel termination 
   extension containing the remaining lifetime of the tunnel. At this 
   point, the Mobile Node MUST complete configuration of the new care-
   of address by the time the tunnel expires, or risk losing IP 
   service. 
    
   When the Mobile Node is ready to terminate the tunnel, it sends a 
   Neighbor Advertisment message to the All Router's Multicast Address 
   with an extension that includes the Subnet Router Anycast Address of 
   the Previous Access Router and the Previous care-of address 
   indicating that it is fully up on the link. If the New Access Router 
   finds a source route for the Mobile Node to the indicated Previous 
   Access Router IP address, the New Access Router sends a HI message 
   to the Previous Access Router indicating that the tunnel should be 
   terminated.  
    
    
5.0     Security Considerations 
    
   There are two kinds of trust relationships involved in the proposed 
   modifications to FMIPv6: 
    


    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 9] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
     1) A trust relationship between a node and its access router. This 
        relationship only lasts as long as the node is on-link and the 
        access router is acting as the next hop router for the node. 
      
     2) A trust relationship between two routers within an interior 
        routing domain. 
    
   A node asking its access router for a modification in its routing is 
   verified using a security association for the first trust 
   relationship. If the request is authentic, then the second trust 
   relationship is activated when the access router asks the proposed 
   new access router for the routing change. The new router utilizes 
   the security association for the second trust relationship to verify 
   the routing request. 
    
   Additional simple security measures can reduce the need for 
   expensive cryptographic computation as an adjunct to security 
   associations for the two trust relationships. Setting the TTL to 255 
   for on-link signaling, such as is done in Neighbor Discovery, allows 
   the router or host to quickly check that no off-link node can change 
   the routing for an on-link host. Requiring the New Access Router to 
   check the IP address of the Previous Access Router before 
   terminating a tunnel avoids a denial of service attack. Other such 
   simple measures are possible and should be included in the design. 
    
6.0     References 
    
    [1] Koodli, R., editor, "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6," draft-
        ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-05.txt, a work in progress. 
    [2] Johnson, D., et. al. " Mobility Support in IPv6," draft-ietf-
        mobileip-ipv6-17.txt, a work in progress. 
    [3] McCann, P., " Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers for 802.11 Networks," 
        draft-mccann-mobileip-80211fh-00.txt, a work in progress. 
    [4] IEEE, " Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical 
        Layer (PHY) specifications," ISO/IEEE 8802-11, 1999. 
    [5] 3GPP2, "Upper Layer (Layer 3) Signaling Standard for cdma2000 
        Spread Spectrum Systems," 3GPP2 C.S0005-C, Version 1.0, May 28, 
        2002. 
    [6] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and Simson, W., "Neighbor Discovery 
        for IP Version 6 (IPv6)," RFC 2461, December, 1998. 
    [7] Thompson, S., and Narten, T., " IPv6 Stateless Address 
        Autoconfiguration," RFC 2462, December 1998. 
    [8] Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4," RFC 3220, January 
        2002. 
    [9] Hinden, R., and Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing 
        Architecture," draft-ietf-ipngwg-addr-arch-v3-10.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
            
    
7.0     Author's Contact Information 
    
    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 
   10] 
    
   Internet Draft          Aligning FMIPv6             November, 2002 
    
    
   James Kempf                  Phone: +1 408 451 4711 
   DoCoMo Communications        Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com  
     Laboratories USA 
   180 Metro Drive 
   Suite 300 
   San Jose, CA 
   USA 
   95430 
    
   Jonathan Wood                Email: wood@docomolabs-usa.com 
   DoCoMo Communications          
     Laboratories USA 
   180 Metro Drive 
   Suite 300 
   San Jose, CA 
   USA 
   95430 
    
    
8.0     Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.  
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    







    
   Kempf and Wood             Informational                    [Page 
   11] 
    