Internet Engineering Task Force                            Wassim Haddad 
Mobility and Multi-homing Privacy                               Ericsson
Internet Draft                                             Erik Nordmark
Expires July 2005                                       Sun Microsystems
                                                          Francis Dupont
                                                                  Point6
                                                         Marcelo Bagnulo
                                                                    UC3M
                                                     Soohong Daniel Park
                                                     Samsung Electronics
                                                         Basavaraj Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           February 2005


                        
                Privacy for Mobile and Multi-homed Nodes:
                       MoMiPriv Problem Statement
              <draft-haddad-momipriv-problem-statement-01>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been 
   disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware 
   will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

   This document is an Internet Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited



Abstract

   This memo describes the privacy in mobility and multi-homing 
   problem statement.



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



Table of Contents


   1. Introduction................................................2
   2. Glossary....................................................3
   3. Problem Statement...........................................6
      3.1. Location Privacy vs. Privacy...........................6
      3.2. The MAC Layer Problem..................................8
      3.3. The IP Layer Problem...................................9
      3.4. The Interdependency Problem...........................11
   4. Security Considerations....................................11
   5. Acknowledgments............................................11
   6. References.................................................12
   7. Authors' Addresses.........................................13
   Intellectual Property Statement...............................15
   Disclaimer of Validity........................................15
   Copyright Statement...........................................15



1. Introduction


   In the near future, mobility and multi-homing functionalities 
   will coexist in the majority of end hosts, such as terminals, 
   PDAs, etc. For this purpose, Mobile IPv6 [MIPv6] protocol has 
   been designed to provide a solution for the mobility at the
   network layer while Multi-homing is still an ongoing work.

   MIPv6 does not provide any mechanism to protect the mobile 
   node's privacy when moving across the Internet, while in the 
   multi-homing area, the privacy may well be supported in any 
   potential solution but may probably lack some features. This is 
   mainly due to the fact that the privacy issues are not limited 
   to the IP layer only.

   This memo describes the privacy in mobility and multi-homing
   (momipriv) problem statement based on IPv6 only.















Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



2. Glossary



   Anonymity

       Anonymity is a property of network security. An entity "A" 
       in a system has anonymity if no other entity can identify 
       "A", nor is there any link back to "A" that can be used, nor
       any way to verify that any two anonymous acts are performed
       by "A".


       Anonymity ensures that a user may use a resource or service
       without disclosing the user's identity.
       
       Anonymity in wireless networks means that neither the mobile 
       node nor its system software shall by default expose any 
       information, that allows any conclusions on the owner or 
       current use of the node. 
       
       Consequently, in scenarios where a device and/or network 
       identifiers are used (e.g., MAC address, IP address), 
       neither the communication partner nor any outside attacker 
       should be able to disclose any possible link between the 
       respective identifier and the user's identity.
    

   Pseudonymity

       Pseudonymity is a weaker property related to anonymity. It 
       means that one cannot identify an entity, but it may be 
       possible to prove that two pseudonymous acts were performed 
       by the same entity.

       Pseudonymity ensures that a user may use a resource or 
       service without disclosing its user identity, but can still
       be accountable for that use.

       Consequently, a pseudonym is an identifier for a party to a 
       transaction, which is not in the normal course of events, 
       sufficient to associate the transaction with a particular 
       user.
  
       Hence a transaction is pseudonymous in relation to a 
       particular party if the transaction data contains no direct
       identifier for that party, and can only be related to them 
       in the event that a very specific piece of additional data 
       is associated with it.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   Unlinkability
   
       Two events are unlinkable if they are no more and no less
       related than they are related concerning the a-priori
       knowledge.

       Unlinkability ensures that a user may make use of resources
       or services without others being able to link these two
       uses together.

       Note that unlinkability is a sufficient condition of 
       anonymity, but it is not a necessary condition. 


   Privacy
               
       Privacy is a more general term than anonymity. Privacy is 
       the claim of individuals, groups and institutions to 
       determine for themesleves, when, how and to what extent
       information about them is communicated to others.
       
       In wireless telecommunications, privacy addresses especially
       the protection of the content as well as the context (e.g.,
       time, location, type of service, ...) of a communication
       event.

       Consequently, neither the mobile node nor its system 
       software shall support the creation of user-related usage 
       profiles. Such profiles basically comprise of a correlation 
       of time and location of the node's use, as well as the type 
       and details of the transaction performed.

       Privacy can even be achieved by disconnectivity, i.e., not 
       being connected to a network.


   MAC Address
       
       A MAC Address is a 48 bits unique value associated with a 
       network adapter. The MAC address uniqueness is by default
       global. A MAC Address is also known as the device/hardware 
       identifier.


   Link

       A communication facility or medium over which nodes can
       communicate at the link layer, such as an Ethernet (simple
       or bridged). A link is the layer immediately below IP.




Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   IPv6 Address
    
       An IP address is a unique 128-bit IP layer identifier for an
       interface or a set of interfaces attached to an IP network.
       An IPv6 address can be unicast, i.e., identifier for a
       single interface, or anycast, i.e., an identifier for a set
       of interfaces, and a packet sent to an anycast address is
       delivered to only one interface, or multicast, i.e., an
       identifier for a set of interfaces and a packet sent to a
       multicast address is delivered to all these interfaces.


   Interface Identifier

       A number used to identify a node's interface on a link. The
       interface identifier is the remaining low-order bits in the 
       node's IP address after the subnet prefix.


   Basic Service Set (BSS)

       A set of stations controlled by a single coordination 
       function.


   Extended Service Set (ESS)

       A set of one or more interconnected basic service set (BSSs)
       and integrated local area networks (LANs) that appears as a 
       single BSS to the logical link control layer at any station
       associated with one of those BSSs.


   Distribution System (DS)

       A system used to interconnect a set of basic service sets 
       (BSSs) and integrated local area networks (LANs) to create 
       an extended service set (ESS).
       

   For more literature about the Glossary content, please refer to
   [ANON], [ISO99], [Priv-NG], [Freedom] and [ANON-PRIV].











Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



3. Problem Statement


   The growing ability to trace a mobile node by an untrusted 
   third party, especially in public access networks, is a direct 
   and serious violation of the mobile user's privacy and can 
   cause serious damage to its personal, social and professional 
   life. Privacy becomes a real concern especially when the mobile 
   node (MN) uses permanent device and/or network identifiers. 
   Unfortunately, the privacy problem is not limited to a single
   layer and should not be solved independantly on one layer. 

   Protecting the user's privacy can be achieved, in many 
   scenarios, by providing one or many of the privacy aspects 
   defined above with regards to the mobile node's requirements 
   and/or location. For this purpose, we try in the rest of this 
   document to use the terms defined above, in order to highlight 
   the issues in a more precise way. 

   It should be noted that this document focuses only on the 
   privacy problem for a mobile and multi-homed node only and does 
   not make any assumption regarding the privacy of a static node, 
   e.g., static correspondent node (CN). In addition, this 
   document assumes that the real IPv6 address is not hidden by 
   default, i.e., any node is always reachable via its real IPv6 
   address.
 
   The problem statement is divided into three problems. The first 
   two problems are related to the identifiers associated with a 
   mobile device, i.e., the MAC address and the IP address, and the 
   third problem highlights their interdependency. But before 
   delving into these problems, a quick overview on differences 
   between location privacy and privacy is provided.



3.1. Location Privacy vs. Privacy


   Before describing privacy problems related to the IP and the
   link layer, it seems useful to highlight the differences between
   the location privacy and privacy, in order to avoid a possible
   confusion later. 

   Location privacy is the ability to prevent other parties from
   learning one's current or past location [LOPRIPEC]. In order 
   to get such ability, the mobile node must conceal any relation 
   between its location and the personal identifiable information. 
   Note that in the momipriv context, the mobile node location 
   refers normally to the topological location and not the



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005


 
   geographic one. The latter is provided by other means (e.g., 
   GPS) than an IPv6 address. But it should be noted that it may 
   possible sometimes to deduce the geographical location from 
   the topological one. 

   However, concealing any relation between the location and the 
   user's identifier(s) does not guarantee that the identifier(s) 
   itself will not be disclosed, since it may be possible to hide 
   the real location alone. But, having at least one user's 
   identifier disclosed may be enough (e.g., if coupled with prior 
   knowledge about few possible whereabouts) for other party to 
   discover the user's current and/or previous location(s). 
 
   For example, in a context limited to IP and MAC layers, the 
   only available identifiers and/or locators are the IP and MAC 
   addresses, and only the IP address carries information, which 
   can directly disclose the MN's location (note that mobile IPv6 
   discloses both the mobile node's home and current locations).
   
   The MAC address alone does not provide any hint regarding the 
   mobile node current/previous location. But if the other party
   has already established the link between the target and its 
   MAC address and gained knowledge about some of the user's 
   possible current/future whereabouts, then it will be possible 
   to locate and even track the target.

   On the other side, it should be noted that the two main 
   privacy aspects, i.e., anonymity and pseudonymity, provide 
   implicitly the location privacy feature by concealing the 
   real user's identifiers regardless of his/her location(s).
   Actually, in both privacy aspects, real identifiers are 
   replaced by static or dynamic ones, thus making the other
   party no more able to identify its target even at the 
   correct location, i.e., any past/current location 
   information becomes practically useless for locating and 
   tracking purposes.

















Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



3.2. The MAC Layer Problem


   The first problem focus on the MAC layer and is raising growing
   concerns related to the user's privacy, especially with the  
   massive ongoing indoor/outdoor deployment of WLAN technologies.
 
   A mobile device attached to a particular link is uniquely 
   identified on that link by its MAC address, i.e., the device
   identifier. In addition, the device identifier is disclosed in
   any packet sent by/to the MN when it reaches that particular
   link, thus making it a very efficient tool to trace a mobile
   user in a shared wireless medium access. Similar problems have
   caused bad press for cellular operators. 

   For example, a malicious node located in one distributed system
   (DS) can trace a mobile node via its device identifier while
   moving in the entire ESS, and learn enough information about
   the user's activities and whereabouts. Having these information
   available in the wrong hands, especially with the exact time
   when they occur, may have bad consequences on the user.

   Another concern on the MAC layer, which can also be exploited 
   by an eavesdropper to trace its victim, is the sequence number
   carried by the frame header. The sequence number is incremented 
   by 1 for each data frame and allows the bad guy to trace its 
   targeted node, in addition to the MAC address. 
   In addition, the sequence number allows also the malicious node 
   to keep tracing the MN, if/when the real MAC address is replaced 
   by one or many pseudo-identifier(s) during an ongoing session 
   [WLAN-IID]. 
   
   In addition, it should be noted that even if the real MN's device 
   identifier remains undisclosed during all the session(s), it may 
   probably not be enough to provide the unlinkability protection 
   on the MAC layer, between ongoing session(s).
   Actually, in a scenario, where the malicious node is located on
   the link or in the distributed system, replacing the real MAC
   address with a static pseudo-identifier, i.e., to provide 
   pseudonymity, or with temporary ones, i.e., to provide anonymity, 
   it will always be possible to break the unlinkability protection
   provided by the MAC layer if the MN's IPv6 address remains
   unchanged.

   Note that in such scenario, even a periodical change of the 
   sequence number won't prevent the eavesdropper from correlating 
   ongoing session(s), pseudo-identifiers and the mobile node.   
   
   However, it should be mentioned that replacing the real device
   identifier with static/dynamic pseudo-identifiers, in order to



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005


 
   provide anonymity/pseudonymity, during an ongoing session(s), 
   raises another critical issue on the MAC layer level, which 
   concerns the uniqueness of these new pseudo-identifier(s). 

   In fact, any temporary/static identifiers MUST be unique within 
   the Extended Service Set (ESS) and the distributed system (DS).
 


3.3. The IP Layer Problem


   The second problem focus on the IP layer and analyzes the 
   privacy problems related to IPv6 only. 

   A MN can configure its IPv6 address either from a DHCP server 
   or by itself. The latter scenario is called the stateless 
   address autoconfiguration [STAT], and discloses the MN MAC 
   address in the IPv6 address, thus enabling an eavesdropper to 
   easily learn both addresses in this case. 

   In order to mitigate the privacy concerns raised from using 
   the stateless address auto-configuration [PRIV-STAT], [PRIVACY] 
   introduced a method allowing to periodically change the MN's 
   interface identifier. 
   However, being limited to the interface identifier only, such 
   change discloses the real network identifier, which in turn can 
   reveal enough information about the topological location, the 
   user or can even be the exact piece of information needed by the 
   eavesdropper. Another limitation to its efficiency lays in the 
   fact that such change cannot occur during an ongoing session.

   While using only a different IPv6 address for each new session 
   may prevent/mitigate the ability to trace a MN on the IP layer 
   level, it remains always possible to trace it through its device 
   identifier(s) on the MAC layer level, i.e., when a malicious node 
   (or another one) is also attached to the same link/DS than its 
   target. Consequently, it will be possible to learn all IPv6 
   addresses used by the MN by correlating different sessions, thus 
   breaking any unlinkability protection provided at the IP layer.
 
   MIPv6 allows an MN to move across the Internet while ensuring 
   optimal routing (i.e., by using route optimization (RO)) mode 
   and keeping ongoing session(s) alive. Although these two 
   features make the RO mode protocol looks efficient, they 
   disclose the MN's home IPv6 address and its current location, 
   i.e., care-of address (CoA), in each data packet exchanged 
   between the MN and the correspondent node (CN). 
   Furthermore, each time a MN switches to a new network, it has 
   to send in clear a binding update (BU) message to the CN to 



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005                [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   notify it about its new location. 

   Consequently, MIPv6 RO mode discloses to a malicious node 
   located between the MN and the CN, all data required to 
   identify, locate and trace in real time its mobile target, 
   once it moves outside its home network(s) [Priv-NG].

   MIPv6 defines another mode called the bidirectional tunneling 
   (BT), which allows the MN to hide its movements and locations 
   from the CN by sending all data packets through its HA (i.e.,
   encapsulated). In such mode, the CN uses only the MN's home 
   IPv6 address to communicate with the MN.

   But if the CN initiates a session with a MN then it has to use 
   the MN's home IPv6 address. In such scenario, if the MN wants 
   to keep its movements hidden from the CN, then it has to switch 
   to the bidirectional tunneling mode. 

   Consequently, all data packets sent/received by the MN are 
   exchanged through the MN's HA and the MN needs to update only 
   its HA with its location.
 
   Although, the bi-directional tunneling mode allows hiding the 
   MN's care-of address to the CN, it can disclose its real 
   identity, i.e., IPv6 home address, and current location to a  
   malicious node located between the HA and the MN (e.g., by 
   looking to the data packets inner header), unless the HA-MN
   tunnel is protected by using ESP. 

  
   In addition to mobility, the multi-homing feature allows a
   mobile node to belong to different home networks and to switch
   between these home networks without interrupting ongoing 
   session(s) [MULTI].

   Although multi-homing can be considered as another aspect of 
   mobility, switching between different home networks, in addition
   to moving between foreign networks, can disclose to a malicious    
   node well located between the multi-homed MN and the CN, part or 
   all of the MN's home IPv6 addresses, its device identifiers 
   (e.g., when stateless address autoconfiguring is used) and its 
   location(s). Such variety of identifiers can make the malicious 
   eavesdropper's task easier.

   For example, a malicious node located between the MN and the CN
   can start tracing its victim based on prior knowledge of one of
   its home address or MAC address, and by tracking the BU messages 
   (e.g., the MN is using the RO mode). 
   After that, the malicious eavesdropper can correlate between 
   different signaling messages and possibly data packets to expand



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   his knowledge to other victim's home/MAC addresses.
   Learning new identifiers offer the eavesdropper additional tools
   to detect and track future movements.  



3.4. The Interdependency Problem


   The MAC and IP layers problems described above highlight another
   concern that needs to be addressed in order to protect the MN's 
   identifiers and/or hiding its locations: any change/update of 
   the IP address and the pseudo-identifier must be performed in a 
   synchronized way. 

   Otherwise, a change/update at the IP layer only, may allow the 
   eavesdropper to keep tracing the MN via the device identifier 
   and consequently to learn how/when the MN's identifiers are 
   modified on the MAC layer, thus making such change(s)    
   meaningless. 




4. Security Considerations


   This document is a problem statement, which describes privacy 
   issues related to a mobile and multi-homed node, and does not
   introduce security considerations by itself.
 
   However it should be noted that any potential solution for 
   the momipriv problem, which allows using temporary device 
   identifiers, dynamic pseudo-IP addresses and other parameters 
   during an ongoing session should not allow a malicious 
   eavesdropper to learn how nor when these identifiers are 
   updated. 
   
   Any potential solution must protect against replaying messages 
   using old identifiers and/or hijacking an ongoing session 
   during an update of the identifiers.

   Any potential solution should not allow exploiting any aspect 
   of privacy, in order to gain access to networks. 









Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



5. Acknowledgements
    
    
    Many Thanks to Hannes Tschofenig for his review and comments on
    the draft.



6. References


   [ANON]       A. Pfitzmann et al. "Anonymity, Unobservability,
                Pseudonymity, and Identity Management - A Proposal
                for Terminology", Draft v0.21, September, 2004.


   [ANON-PRIV]  M. Schmidt, "Subscriptionless Mobile Networking:
                Anonymity and Privacy Aspects within Personal Area
                Networks", IEEE WCNC 2002.


   [Freedom]    A.F. Westin, "Privacy and Freedom", Atheneum Press,
                New York, USA, 1967.


   [ISO99]      ISO IS 15408, 1999, http://www.commoncriteria.org/.


   [LOPRIPEC]   A. Beresfold, F. Stajano, "Location Privacy in
                Pervasive Computing", IEEE Pervasive Computing, 
                2(1):46-55, 2003 IEEE. 

   
   [MIPv6]      D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko, "Mobility Support 
                in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.


   [MULTI]      N. Montavont, R. Wakikawa, T. Ernst, T. Noel, C. Ng,
                "Analysis of Multihoming in Mobile IPv6",
                draft-montavont-mobileip-multihoming-pb-statement-03,
                January, 2005.


   [PRIV-NG]    A. Escudero-Pascual, "Privacy in the Next Generation
                Internet", December 2002.


   [PRIV-STAT]  S. Deering, B. Hinden, "Statement on IPv6 Address 
                Privacy", http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/
                specs/ipv6-address-privacy.html November, 1999.



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   [Privacy]    T. Narten, R. Draves, S. Krishnan, "Privacy 
                Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration 
                in IPv6", draft-ietf-ipv6-privacy-addrs-v2-02,
                December, 2004.
              

   [STAT]       S. Thomson, T. Narten, T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
                Address Autoconfiguration",
                draft-ietf-ipv6-rfc2462bis-07, December, 2004.
              

   [WLAN-IID]   M. Gruteser, D. Grunwald, "Enhancing Location 
                Privacy in Wireless LAN Through Disposable Interface 
                Identifiers: A Quantitative Analysis, September 
                2003", First ACM International Workshop on Wireless 
                Mobile Applications and Services on WLAN Hotspots, 
                September 2003. 




6. Authors'Addresses


   Wassim Haddad
   Ericsson Research
   8400, Decarie Blvd
   Town of Mount Royal
   Quebec H4P 2N2 
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900
   E-Mail: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com


   Erik Nordmark
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   17 Network Circle
   Mountain View, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 786 2921
   Fax:   +1 650 786 5896
   E-Mail: Erik.Nordmark@sun.com   
   
   
   Francis Dupont
   Point6
   c/o GET/ENST Bretagne
   Campus de Rennes



Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



   2, rue de la Chataigneraie
   CS 17607
   35576 Cesson-Sevigne Cedex
   France

   E-Mail: Francis.Dupont@enst-bretagne.fr


   Marcelo Bagnulo
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   SPAIN

   Phone: 34 91 6249500
   E-Mail: Marcelo@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/marcelo


   Soohong Daniel Park
   Samsung Electronics
   Mobile Platform Laboratory, Samsung Electronics
   416. Maetan-Dong, Yeongtong-Gu, Suwon 
   Korea 

   Phone: +81 31 200 4508 
   E-Mail: soohong.park@samsung.com


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX 75039
   USA

   Phone:  +1 972 894-6709
   E-Mail: Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com
















Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT            MoMiPriv Problem Statement       February 2005



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document or the extent to which any 
   license under such rights might or might not be available; nor 
   does it represent that it has made any independent effort to 
   identify any such rights. Information on the IETF's procedures 
   with respect to rights in IETF Documents can be found in BCP 78 
   and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
   use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be 
   required to implement this standard. Please address the 
   information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights 
   claimed in regard to some or all of the specification contained 
   in this document. For more information consult the online list 
   of claimed rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY 
   THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in 
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all 
   their rights.


   


Haddad et al.                  Expires July 2005               [Page 15] 
