


Congestion and Pre Congestion                               T. Moncaster
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Standards Track                              B. Briscoe
Expires: November 16, 2008                                      BT & UCL
                                                                M. Menth
                                                 University of Wuerzburg
                                                            May 15, 2008


  Encoding and Transport of (Pre-)Congestion Information from within a
                     DiffServ Domain to the Egress
                draft-moncaster-pcn-baseline-encoding-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 16, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   Pre-congestion notification (PCN) is a mechanism designed to protect
   the Quality of Service of inelastic flows.  It does this by marking
   packets when traffic load on a link is approaching or has exceeded a
   threshold below the physical link rate.  This document specifies how



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   such marks are to be encoded into the IP header.  The baseline
   encoding described here provides for two PCN encoding states.

Status

   This memo is posted as an Internet-Draft with an intent to eventually
   progress to standards track.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Encoding Two PCN States in IP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     4.1.  Rationale for Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2.  PCN-Enabled DiffServ Codepoints  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  Valid and Invalid Encoding Transitions at a PCN Node . . .  5
   5.  Backwards Compatability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   10. Comments Solicited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Appendix A.  Tunnelling Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10





















Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


1.  Introduction

   Pre-congestion notification is a mechanism designed to help protect
   the Quality of Service of inelastic flows.  It does this by measuring
   the pre-congestion level on the path used by that flow.  The pre-
   congestion level at each node is indicated by marking packets when
   traffic load is approaching or has exceeded a threshold below the
   physical link rate.  [PCN-arch] describes how PCN marking can be used
   to assure the quality of service of inelastic flows within a single
   DiffServ domain.  This document specifies how those PCN marks are
   encoded into the IP header.  It also describes how packets are
   identified as belonging to a PCN flow.  The baseline encoding
   described here provides for two PCN encoding states.


2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Terminology

   The following terms are used in this document:

   o  Not PCN - packets that are not PCN capable.

   o  PCN-marked - codepoint indicating packets that have been marked at
      a PCN interior node using some PCN marking behaviour.  Also PM.

   o  Not-Marked - codepoint indicating packets that are PCN capable but
      are not PCN-marked.  Also NM.

   o  PCN-Capable codepoints - collective term for all the NM and PM
      codepoints.

   o  PCN enabled Diffserv codepoint - a Diffserv codepoint for which
      PCN has been enabled on a particular machine.

   In addition the document uses the terminology described in
   [PCN-arch].


4.  Encoding Two PCN States in IP

   The PCN encoding states are defined using a combination of the DSCP
   field and ECN field in the IP header.  The baseline PCN encoding



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   closely follows the semantics of ECN [RFC3168].  It allows the
   encoding of two PCN states: Not Marked and PCN-Marked.  It also
   allows for traffic that is not PCN capable to be marked as such (Not-
   PCN).  The following table defines how to encode these states in IP:

      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
      |  DSCP  | Not-ECT (00) | ECT(0) (10) | ECT(1) (01) | CE (11) |
      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
      | DSCP n |    Not-PCN   |      NM     |      NM     |    PM   |
      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+

    Where DSCP n is a PCN-enabled DiffServ codepoint (see Section 4.2)

                        Table 1: Encoding PCN in IP

   The following rules apply to all PCN traffic:

   o  PCN traffic MUST be marked with a DiffServ codepoint that
      indicates PCN is enabled.  To conserve DSCPs, DiffServ Codepoints
      SHOULD be chosen that are already defined for use with admission
      controlled traffic, such as the Voice-Admit codepoint defined in
      [voice-admit].

   o  Any packet that is not PCN capable (Not-PCN) but which shares the
      same DiffServ codepoint as PCN capable traffic MUST have the ECN
      field set to 00.

   o  Any packet that is PCN capable and Not Marked (NM) MUST have the
      ECN field set to one of the two ECT codepoints 10 or 01.

   o  Any packet that is PCN capable and has been PCN-marked by an
      interior node MUST have the ECN field set to 11.

4.1.  Rationale for Encoding

   The exact choice of encoding was dictated by the constraints imposed
   by existing IETF RFCs.  Full details are contained in
   [pcn-enc-compare].  One of the tightest constraints was the need for
   any PCN encoding to survive being tunnelled through either an IP in
   IP tunnel or an IPSec Tunnel.  Appendix A explains this in more
   detail.  The main effect of this constraint was that any PCN marking
   has to use the ECN field set to 11 (CE codepoint).  An additional
   constraint was the need to minimise the use of DiffServ codepoints as
   these are in increasingly short supply.  Section 4.2 explains how we
   have minimised this still further by reusing pre-existing Diffserv
   codepoint(s) such that non-PCN traffic can still be distinguished
   from PCN traffic.




Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   The encoding scheme that best addresses the above constraints ends up
   looking very similar to ECN.  This is perhaps not surprising given
   the similarity in architectural intent between PCN and ECN.

4.2.  PCN-Enabled DiffServ Codepoints

   Equipment complying with the baseline PCN encoding MUST allow PCN to
   be enabled for a certain Diffserv codepoint or codepoints.  This
   document defines the term 'PCN-Enabled Diffserv Codepoint' for such a
   DSCP.  Enabling PCN for a DSCP switches on PCN marking behaviour for
   packets with that DSCP, but only if those packets also have their ECN
   field set to a codepoint other than Not-PCN.

   Enabling PCN marking behaviour disables any other marking behaviour
   (e.g. enabling PCN also disables the default ECN marking behaviour
   introduced in [RFC3168]).  The scheduling behaviour used for a packet
   does not change whether PCN is enabled for a DSCP or not and whatever
   the setting of the ECN field.

4.3.  Valid and Invalid Encoding Transitions at a PCN Node

   PCN edge node behaviour compliant with the PCN baseline encoding:

   o  Any packets with the ECN field already marked as CE or ECT
      arriving at a PCN ingress node SHOULD be dropped or alternatively
      MAY be tunnelled through the PCN region.  They MUST NOT be
      admitted to the PCN region directly.

   o  On leaving the PCN region the ECN bits MUST be set to 00 (Not
      ECT).

   PCN interior node behaviour compliant with the PCN baseline encoding:

   o  PCN Interior nodes MUST NOT change Not-PCN to another codepoint
      and they MUST NOT change a PCN-Capable codepoint to Not-PCN.

   o  PCN interior nodes that are in a pre-congestion state above the
      configured level MUST set the PM codepoint by changing the ECN
      bits to 11.

   o  PM MUST NOT be changed to NM.


5.  Backwards Compatability

   BCP 124 [RFC4774] gives guidelines for specifying alternative
   semantics for the ECN field.  It sets out a number of factors that
   must be taken into consideration.  It also suggests various



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   techniques to allow the co-existence of default ECN and alternative
   ECN semantics.  The alternative semantics specified here are
   compliant with this BCP:

   o  they use a DSCP to allow routers to distinguish that traffic uses
      the alternate ECN semantics;

   o  these semantics are defined for use within a controlled domain;

   o  ECN marked traffic is blocked from entering the PCN domain
      directly (though it might be tunnelled through the domain).


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA.  It does however suggest a
   change to the default ([RFC3168]) behaviour for the ECN field for the
   Voice-Admit [voice-admit] DSCP.


7.  Security Considerations

   Packets claim entitlement to be PCN marked by carrying a PCN-enabled
   DSCP and a PCN-Capable ECN codepoint.  This encoding document is
   intended to stand independently of the architecture used to determine
   whether specific packets are authorised to be PCN marked, which will
   be described in a future separate document on PCN edge-node
   behaviour.  The PCN working group has initially been chartered to
   only consider a PCN region to be entirely under the control of one
   operator, or a set of operators who trust each other [PCN-charter].
   However there is a requirement to keep inter-domain scenarios in mind
   when defining the PCN encoding.  One way to extend to multiple
   domains would be to concatenate PCN regions and use PCN edge-nodes
   back-to back at borders.  Then any one domain's security against its
   neighbours would be described as part of the edge-node behaviour
   document as above.  There is only one proposal on the table to extend
   PCN across multiple domains without PCN edge nodes back-to-back at
   borders [re-PCN]. it is believed that the encoding described here
   would not be incompatible with the security framework described
   there.


8.  Conclusions

   This document defines the baseline PCN encoding utilising a
   combination of a PCN-enabled DSCP and the ECN field in the IP header.
   This baseline encoding allows the existence of two PCN encoding
   states, Not Marked and PCN-Marked.  It also allows for the co-



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   existence of non-PCN traffic within the same DSCP.  The encoding
   scheme is conformant with [RFC4774].


9.  Acknowledgements

   This document builds extensively on work done in the PCN working
   group by Kwok Ho Chan, Georgios Karagiannis, Michael Menth, Philip
   Eardley, Bob Briscoe and others.  Full details of the alternative
   schemes that were considered for adoption can be found in the sister
   document [pcn-enc-compare].


10.  Comments Solicited

   Comments and questions are encouraged and very welcome.  They can be
   addressed to the IETF Transport Area working group mailing list
   <tsvwg@ietf.org>, and/or to the authors.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4774]  Floyd, S., "Specifying Alternate Semantics for the
              Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Field", BCP 124,
              RFC 4774, November 2006.

11.2.  Informative References

   [PCN-arch]
              Eardley, P., "Pre-Congestion Notification Architecture",
              draft-ietf-pcn-architecture-03 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [PCN-charter]
              "IETF Charter for Congestion and Pre-Congestion
              Notification Working Group".

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP",
              RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   [pcn-enc-compare]
              Chan, K., Karagiannis, G., Moncaster, T., Menth, M.,
              Eardley, P., and B. Briscoe, "Pre-Congestion Notification
              Encoding Comparison",
              draft-chan-pcn-encoding-comparison-03 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [re-PCN]   Briscoe, B., "Emulating Border Flow Policing using Re-ECN
              on Bulk Data", draft-briscoe-re-pcn-border-cheat-00 (work
              in progress), July 2007.

   [voice-admit]
              Baker, F., Polk, J., and M. Dolly, "DSCPs for Capacity-
              Admitted Traffic",
              draft-ietf-tsvwg-admitted-realtime-dscp-04 (work in
              progress), February 2008.


Appendix A.  Tunnelling Constraints

   The rules that govern the behaviour of the ECN field for IP-in-IP
   tunnels were defined in [RFC3168].  This allowed for two tunnel modes
   to exist.  The limited functionality mode sets the outer header to
   Not ECT, regardless of the value of the inner header.  The full
   functionality mode copies the inner ECN field into the outer header
   if the inner header is Not ECT or either of the 2 ECT codepoints.  If
   the inner header is CE then the outer header is set to ECT(0).  On
   decapsulation, if the CE codepoint is set on the outer header then
   this is copied into the inner header.  Otherwise the inner header is
   left unchanged.  The reason for blocking CE from being copied to the
   outer header was to prevent this from being used as a covert channel
   through IPSec tunnels.

   The IPSec protocol [RFC4301] changed the ECN tunnelling rule to allow
   IPSec tunnels to simply copy the inner header into the outer header.
   This was because the security community had decided the available
   bandwidth of the covert channel offered by ECN was too low to be a
   significant threat.  On decapsulation the outer header is discarded
   and the ECN field is only copied down if it is set to CE.  Because of
   the possible existence of tunnels, only CE (11) can be used as a PCN
   marking as it is the only mark that will survive decapsulation.

   There is a further issue involving tunnelling.  In RFC3168, IP in IP
   tunnels are expected to set the ECN field to ECT(0) if the inner ECN
   field is set to CE.  This leads to the possibility that some packets
   within the PCN field that have already been marked may have that mark
   concealed further into the region.  This is undesirable for many PCN
   schemes and thus standard IP in IP tunnels SHOULD NOT be used within



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


   a PCN region.


Authors' Addresses

   Toby Moncaster
   BT
   B54/70, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 648734
   Email: toby.moncaster@bt.com
   URI:   http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/B.Briscoe/


   Bob Briscoe
   BT & UCL
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   Email: bob.briscoe@bt.com


   Michael Menth
   University of Wuerzburg
   room B206, Institute of Computer Science
   Am Hubland
   Wuerzburg  D-97074
   Germany

   Phone: +49 931 888 6644
   Email: menth@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de














Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                 May 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgments

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  This document was produced
   using xml2rfc v1.32 (of http://xml.resource.org/) from a source in
   RFC-2629 XML format.



Moncaster, et al.       Expires November 16, 2008              [Page 10]

