
Mobile IPv6 Working Group                                 T. J. Kniveton
Internet Draft                                                  B. Patil
Expires:  April 18, 2004                                           Nokia
                                                          S. Chakrabarti
                                                        Sun Microsystems
                                                             H. Petander
                                       Helsinki University of Technology
                                                              H. Soliman
                                                                 Flarion
                                                        October 19, 2003

 Mobile IPv6 Internet-based Remote Interoperability Testing Description
                 draft-kniveton-mipv6-remote-testing-00


   Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Mobile IPv6 Working Group of the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be submitted
   to the mip6@ietf.org mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   Abstract

   This document describes how implementors of Mobile IPv6 can use
   IPv6-based network facilities to perform remote testing of their
   implementation with other groups participating in the testing
   program.  The document aims to describe how one may become part of a
   testing group, what can be tested through this method, and the steps
   necessary to connect to remote Mobile IPv6 entities.







Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 1]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003




                                 Contents


Status of This Memo                                                    1

Abstract                                                               1

 1. Introduction                                                       3

 2. Terms                                                              4

 3. Requirements for test participation                                4
     3.1. Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
     3.2. Implementation conformance; draft/RFC version . . . . . .    4
     3.3. Technical contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
     3.4. What can be expected of hosts offered for testing against    5

 4. IPv6 Networks / 6bone                                              5

 5. Registering for MIPv6 Test Network                                 5
     5.1. Getting an Account  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
     5.2. Registering Your MIPv6 Node(s)  . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
           5.2.1. Home Agent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
           5.2.2. Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
           5.2.3. Correspondent Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
           5.2.4. Mobile Router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
     5.3. Test web-page items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
           5.3.1. Home Agent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
           5.3.2. Correspondent Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
           5.3.3. Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8

 6. Security Associations                                              9
     6.1. Unprotected Binding Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
     6.2. Authentication Header Protection  . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
     6.3. IPsec ESP SA Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
     6.4. Pre-generating security keys for HA offered for testing .   10
           6.4.1. Adding to Web Site  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10

 7. Testing Configurations and Scenarios                              10
     7.1. MN - HA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     7.2. MN - HA - CN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     7.3. CN - HA - MN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     7.4. MN1 - HA1 - HA2 - MN2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     7.5. Mobility scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
     7.6. Test applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12

 8. Virtual Home Link and MN returning home                           13



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 2]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


     8.1. Tunnel Establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
     8.2. Detecting the home link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13

 9. Configuration                                                     14
     9.1. Home Agent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
     9.2. Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
     9.3. Correspondent Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15

10. Debugging and Web Service                                         16

11. Firewalling and Security                                          16
    11.1. Disclaimer About Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16

12. Appendix A                                                        17

13. IANA Considerations                                               18

14. Intellectual Property Right Considerations                        19

15. Acknowledgements                                                  19

Authors' Addresses                                                    21

Full Copyright Statement                                              22


   1. Introduction

   Throughout the past seven years, various programmers have implemented
   Mobile IPv6 [11] based on the specification.  Along the way, it
   became clear that some effort was necessary to ensure that different
   implementations could inter-operate and co-exist in a diverse and
   heterogeneous environment.  In order to facilitate inter-operation,
   people in the Mobile IP community have organized events where
   implementors test their software against conformance tests, as well
   as testing with other implementors.  Mobile IPv6 testing over the
   IPv6 internet is an effort similar to 6-bone testing in the IPv6
   development phase.

   These events have been useful, and they continue to be important for
   running conformance tests and various interoperability tests that
   are not easily possible over MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing .  Thus,
   this document does not seek to replace the regular interoperability
   events such as Connectathon [3] or ETSI [7].  The goal is that
   by using a distributed network testing model, it is possible to
   make faster progress on the Mobile IPv6 protocol [11] development,
   standardization and finally deployment.





Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 3]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   This document describes the procedures on registering and configuring
   to test Mobile IPv6 base protocol over the IPv6 Internet.  This
   document also assumes that implementors participating the remote
   testing event must support draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-24 or later, or
   the Mobile IPv6 RFC.


   2. Terms

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2].

   In addition, this document uses terms as described by Mobile IPv6,
   such as Mobile Node, Home Agent, and Correspondent Node.

   This terminology is intended to conform to those that have been
   used in IPv6, Mobile IPv6, Network Mobility, and other Internet
   protocols [4, 11, 5, 6, 1]


   3. Requirements for test participation

   3.1. Registration

   All test participants including the Mobile IPv6 hosts sitting on the
   backbone need to register for testing (see section 5).


   3.2. Implementation conformance; draft/RFC version

   Many implementations of Mobile IPv6 exist, each with their own set of
   supported features, and according to a specific draft version of the
   specification.

   For the purposes of this test network, it is assumed that the nodes
   in use will comply with the latest version of the specification,
   draft 24, or later.


   3.3. Technical contact

   It is necessary to supply a technical contact person who can be
   responsible for the registered Mobile IPv6 node.  This is especially
   important for Home Agents, since they will presumably be continuously
   connected to the network to allow Mobile Nodes to register with them.

   The technical contact should be familiar with the implementation
   in use (or at least its configuration), and capable of debugging a



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 4]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   non-functional setup, using packet filtering tools or whatever other
   means are optimal.


   3.4. What can be expected of hosts offered for testing against

   The service of providing registrations on the MIPv6 Test Network web
   site is intended to facilitate easy introductions for parties who
   would like to test their software with each other.  However, for most
   people this will be an ancillary task, which can not take too much of
   their time.

   As such, we hope that all participants will try to keep their nodes
   functional and possibly help in debugging, but there is no guarantee
   of cooperation from the participating individuals, if they are busy
   or unavailable.


   4. IPv6 Networks / 6bone

   The 6bone is an IPv6 testbed that started as a virtual network
   composed of IPv6 over IPv4 tunnels, and is gradually transitioning
   to native IPv6 links.  For those lucky enough to have a native IPv6
   connection, all that will be needed is some way to obtain a global
   IPv6 address, either through address autoconfiguration [12], or some
   other means.

   The 6bone is being gradually phased out as native IPv6 is added
   to the Internet.  [draft-fink-6bone-phaseout] If the user is in
   an environment where native IPv6 connections are available, this
   section can be skipped.  For hosts that are not directly connected
   to the IPv6 Internet, a 6-over-4 tunnel with a tunnel broker will be
   necessary; to establish this, there are a couple of possible means.
   First, Freenet6 [9] will offer users their own /64 or /48 prefix,
   and provides software which will create a virtual tunnel interface
   to the IPv6 connection.  This tunnel endpoint can be established on
   the access router providing connectivity to the Mobile IPv6 node.
   If this does not work, a tunnel can be manually established with a
   tunnel broker.

   Other means of tunnel establishment include ISATAP [13] and
   Teredo [10], amongst others.


   5. Registering for MIPv6 Test Network

   The Mobile IPv6 remote testing is co-ordinated through a central
   administrator.  Presently ETSI [7] has volunteered for the central
   co-ordination.  It is required that implementors interested in Mobile



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 5]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   IPv6 register through the central co-ordinator to receive an account,
   address assignment for the test nodes.  The key assignment for the
   mobile nodes can happen either through the central web-page or by
   contacting the Home Agent implementor contact person directly.

   However, the central administration site should maintain a webpage
   which must include the steps to get an account, available Home
   Agents, Correspondent Nodes and Mobile Nodes and their addresses (see
   Section 5.3).

   The webpage also lists contact information of a contact person of
   each implementation that volunteered to put a machine on the IPv6
   internet for remote testing.  The central web page will be managed by
   ETSI [8].


   5.1. Getting an Account

   The central administrator wants to make sure that only valid Mobile
   IPv6 participants can access the central testing webpage and related
   information.  Thus it is imperative to first get an account for
   the central web-site access.  The steps to receive an account,
   participate in the interoperability mailing list or chatroom etc.
   should be obtained from the Mobile IPv6 Interoperability Central web
   site.


   5.2. Registering Your MIPv6 Node(s)

   Registering MIPv6 nodes happens according to the following
   guidelines:


   5.2.1. Home Agent

   Each participating home agent implementor is required to dedicate a
   home-agent node in the IPv6 internet for interoperability testing
   purpose.  Each home-agent implementation will list a contact person
   information in the web-page for key and address allocation to the
   mobile nodes.  There may be some automated ways to receive the key
   from a home-agent node or implementor's site, but presently key and
   address assignment are handled manually.


   5.2.2. Mobile Node

   There may be a few mobile nodes placed in the internet for testing
   home agent functionality from a correspondent node.  A mobile node
   should register through the central interoperability web page and get



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 6]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   it's home address from the home-agent implementor it wants to test
   with.


   5.2.3. Correspondent Node

   A correspondent node that offers route optimization in Mobile IPv6
   can be a fixed node or a mobile node.  A fixed correspondent node
   must register itself in the central webpage location with its IPv6
   address in the internet.  It should also list a contact information
   for technical correspondence with the mobile node testers.


   5.2.4. Mobile Router

   [Currently this document does not address Mobile Routers]


   5.3. Test web-page items

   The Mobile IPv6 test network website will list the following items
   for the information exchange between the permanent Mobile IPv6 nodes
   and the implementation nodes that want to test against them.  The
   items listed here are required information.  However additional
   information may be listed as well.


   5.3.1. Home Agent

    -  Company and contact information

    -  Home agent IPv6 address and the corresponding IPv4 addresses (if
       dual stack)

    -  List of home-addresses it assigns.  This list must also indicate
       which home-addresses are presently used and which are available.
       Example:
       HOA1 (used by KEIO Univ.- contact name)
       HOA2 (available)
       HOA3 (available)

    -  Security option supported
       - ESP or AH or None

    -  If IPSec is supported, specify encryption algorithm (ESP),
       authentication mechanism (AH), keys for each supported
       home-address(note this information may or may not be publicly
       listed), SPI information.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 7]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


    -  List of other supported functionalities, for example:  Return
       Routability message handling, Dynamic home agent discovery,
       Mobile Prefix Solicitation etc.

    -  Summary of logs:  Each home agent that provides test service on
       the Mobile IPv6 test network must run as web-server as well.  It
       is required to list a web URL of the log-file which provides
       current status of binding cashe of that home agent and possibly a
       packet flow staticstics on the corresponding HA-MN tunnels.  The
       log-file may be updated in every half an hour approximately.

    -  Operating System and platform information


   5.3.2. Correspondent Node

    -  Company and contact information

    -  IPv6 address of the node.  If dual stack node, IPv4 address.

    -  If this node supports Return Routability protocol and any other
       route-optimization protocol.

    -  If this node supports mobile node or home agent functionality.
       If so, if that functionality is turned on.

    -  If this node supports IPsec protocol for regular traffic
       and wants to test intercation of IPSec'ed traffic with
       route-optimization, then it should list security association
       information depending on ESP or AH protocol support.  (optional)

    -  A correspondent node that sits on the Mobile IPv6 test network,
       must run a web-service on it.  It should list a URL of log-file.
       The log-file contains the binding cache information and possibly
       return routability message statistics for others to know which
       mobile nodes are being serviced through that node.  The log-file
       should be updated in every half an hour.

    -  Operating system and platform information


   5.3.3. Mobile Node

    -  Company and contact information

    -  Whether it can act as correspondent node as well






Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 8]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


    -  If this node is placed on the Mobile IPv6 test network
       permanently, then it's IPv6 home address and care-of- address
       should be listed.

    -  Operating system and platform information


   6. Security Associations

   When a Mobile Node registers with a Home Agent, there must be a
   method for the MN to authenticate its identity to the HA. In MIPv6
   Remote Interop Testing , there are three methods of authenticating
   the Binding Updates, listed here in increasing order of completeness.

   The reason for allowing multiple levels of authentication is so that
   implementors can test their software in successive stages, before
   it is necessarily fully implemented.  In operational environments,
   it is not recommended to ever allow unauthenticated BUs; however,
   in testing environments, it may be allowed in order to test other
   aspects of protocol operation.


   6.1. Unprotected Binding Updates

   In the simplest case, Binding Updates can be sent without any
   authentication.  If an HA accepts unauthenticated HAs in the testing
   environment, it allows any MN to register from any Care-of Address,
   without proving its identity.

   Although this is not desirable in a production setting, it is a
   valuable mode for testing purposes.  As an implementation progresses,
   it may be useful to test mobility functionality before the security
   functionality is complete.

   An HA in the testing network may choose whether it will accept
   unprotected BUs.


   6.2. Authentication Header Protection

   The Mobile IPv6 specification does not include information about
   Authentication Headers.  However, many people have implemented
   Authentication Headers according to past specification.  A companion
   specification may be submitted at a later time to specify how Home
   Agents should process these BUs.

   Any Home Agent that already has an AH implementation may choose
   whether it wishes to continue accepting BUs protected by AH.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004       [Page 9]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   When the user that is testing a Mobile Node registers with the Mobile
   IPv6 Network Testing web site, it will be possible to request a
   static security association which will comprise a symmetric key using
   either HMAC-MD5, or HMAC-SHA1.  This key will be provided by the
   web site along with a Home Address, and both should be added to the
   Mobile Node's configuration, so that it can be used in communications
   with the Home Agent.


   6.3. IPsec ESP SA Protection

   In the Mobile IPv6 IPsec companion draft [1], a method of using an
   IPsec ESP Security Association is described.  This is the most secure
   method and is recommended over any other method.  This would be the
   final stage of testing with respect to Binding Update security.

   When IPsec SAs are used, the HA will pre-compute keys as in the
   previous Section, and the web site will contain this information
   along with the rest of the necessary information needed to describe
   an SA as shown in Section 5.2 of [1].

   An HA may choose whether it wishes to accept BUs protected by IPsec
   ESP SAs (and it should choose ``yes'').


   6.4. Pre-generating security keys for HA offered for testing

   In order to facilitate automated key distribution by the web site,
   it will be necessary for Home Agent owners to pre-generate a certain
   number of keys and associate them with Home Addresses, so that when
   the web site delivers a (key,address) couple to the Mobile Node, the
   latter can immediately begin using it with either an Authentication
   Header or IPsec SA.


   6.4.1. Adding to Web Site

   To this end, the Home Agent owner should go through the steps
   necessary to generate these keys and Home Addresses, and provide
   them to the Mobile IPv6 Network Testing web site immediately after
   registering an Home Agent.  The web site interface provides a means
   for doing this.


   7. Testing Configurations and Scenarios

   There exist several possible test configurations.  Each configuration
   requires that the initiator of the test knows the address of at
   least one other node.  The first three subsections present test



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 10]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   configurations followed by mobility scenarios which can be used
   with configurations in which MN is being tested actively.  The last
   subsection describes use of different kinds of network applications
   for testing of Mobile IPv6.


   7.1. MN - HA

   MN is tested actively with an online HA. Address of HA must be known,
   or if dynamic home agent address discovery is used the prefix of HA
   must be known to tester of MN. Details for the configuration of home
   address and SAs in MN are presented in sections 11.2 and 8.  MN can
   also test communication with HA using any of the test applications.

   Communications with public IPv6 enabled servers, such as
   www.kame.net, can be tested for testing of non-route optimized
   communications with CNs.


   7.2. MN - HA - CN

   MN is tested actively with an online CN. This configuration can have
   either a local HA or an online HA. Use of a local HA allows MN to
   move between its home network and a foreign network conveniently.  If
   the HA is online, this scenario is an extension to the previous one.

   The address of CN must be known to MN. Also the list of services
   running in CN must be known and the services accessible to the tester
   of MN.


   7.3. CN - HA - MN

   The CN can also be the actively tested entity.  This requires that
   the home address of MN is known to the tester of CN and that MN is
   running some known service or services.  MN should also be at a
   foreign network to make the test feasible or actively mobile during
   the test.  Acticew mobility requires coordination of the testing.


   7.4. MN1 - HA1 - HA2 - MN2

   Testing of MN - MN communications is a special case of the MN - HA
   - CN test.  Unless the testing is coordinated, one of the MNs, MN2,
   should be located at a foreign network and registered with a HA. The
   home address of MN2 needs to be known by tester of MN1, which would
   be the actively tested entity in this configuration.  MN1 may use
   either the same HA as MN2 or a local HA, as in the MN - HA - CN case.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 11]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   7.5. Mobility scenarios

   Mobility can take different forms such as vertical handoffs, etc..
   However, from the point of view of Mobile IPv6 interoperability
   mobility can be described by four scenarios and their combinations:

    1. Foreign - foreign movement:  MN starts in a foreign network and
       moves between foreign networks.  This requires at least two
       foreign prefixes with the same scope as the home link, assigned
       to two links at location of MN testing.

    2. Foreign - home movement:  MN starts in a foreign network and
       moves to its home network.  This requires MN and HA can be on
       the same link.  The home link may be virtual, i.e., a tunnel, or
       physical, e.g., an ethernet segment.  Also a foreign link with a
       prefix with the same address scope as home link is required.

    3. Home - foreign movement:  MN starts at home amd moves to a
       foreign network.  This requires MN and HA can be on the same
       link.  The link may be virtual, i.e., a tunnel, or physical,
       e.g., an ethernet segment.  Also a foreign link with the same
       address scope as home link is required.

    4. Simultaneous movement of MNs:  Two MNs, which communicate with
       each other move at the same time.  The movement of both MNs can
       be any of the three types described above.  The simultaneous
       movement results in both MNs assuming that the other MN is at
       its old location, which may be an interesting test scenario.
       However, simultaneous movement requires coordination of the
       handoffs.


   7.6. Test applications

   Mobile IPv6 route optimization and tunneling can be tested with
   multiple types of applications.  Connection oriented applications,
   such as HTTP, FTP and SCP can be used for testing session continuity
   over handoffs.  UDP applications, e.g., echo can be used for
   testing connectionless communications and ICMP ping can be used for
   testing when there are no services available and also for testing of
   fragmentation with Mobile IPv6 by using echo packets larger than the
   PMTU.

   Use of applications, such as HTTP, FTP, SCP, SSH and echo requires
   configuration of the services on the node being connected to and
   at least with SSH and SCP, adding of users on the server node and
   communication of the usernames and passwords.  The communication of
   this information is decribed in section XXX.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 12]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   8. Virtual Home Link and MN returning home

   Since the Mobile Node must attach to the Home Link of the home
   network (where the Home Agent is located), there must be a way to
   simulate the Mobile Node on one tester's network returning home to
   the home link on another tester's network.  In order to facilitate
   this, we describe a method of setting up a tunnel and virtual home
   link.

   The home link at the Home Agent has to be a link separate from its
   upstream (towards the Internet) link.  This can be either a physical
   link, or a virtual link (which can be trickier to configure in some
   environments).

   In order to support the tunneling of data to the home link, the Home
   Agent and Mobile Node will need to establish a bi-directional tunnel
   between a new virtual link on the mobile node, and the virtual (or
   real) link at the Home Agent.  Currently, there is no signaling
   mechanism to automatically configure this link, so it should be
   done using some tunnel brokering mechanism, or set through a static
   tunnel.


   8.1. Tunnel Establishment

   There is more than one way for the Mobile Node to switch from Visited
   Link (using Care-of Address and registering with HA) to Virtual Home
   Link (de-registering).  However, there is one suggested method which
   will work with most operating systems and implementations, with only
   one physical interface connected to the IPv6 Internet, which is
   described in the following section.


   8.2. Detecting the home link

   The visited network will be represented by a physical interface, at
   least one of whose IPv6 addresses is the CoA. When the tester wants
   to trigger returning home, a tunnel will be created to the Home
   Agent.  This will be connected to a virtual tunnel interface on the
   MN.

   When the tunnel is established, the Mobile Node will detect Router
   Advertisements from the HA, and should then roam from the Visited
   network (the upstream link it is using to get its Care-of Address) to
   the Virtual Home Network provided by the tunnel.  The Home Agent (or
   Access Router connected to the same link) that provides the tunnel
   from the Home Network side must send Router Advertisements containing
   the prefix of the home network as normal.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 13]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   The Home Agent should send both unsolicited RAs, and respond to
   router solicitations with solicited RAs, as described in Section 7.5
   of [11].

   When the Mobile Node sees these, it will know it has wandered
   (virtually) home, and de-register from the binding cache of the HA.
   In effect, it will ignore the visited network until the tunnel is no
   longer available and it has to roam to the (ever-present) visited
   link again.


   9. Configuration

   This section provides some information about how to configure the
   various Mobile IPv6 nodes in order to operate with this testing
   scheme.


   9.1. Home Agent

   The Home Agent should be placed behind an access router that has
   been delegated an IPv6 prefix refv6net and can provide address
   configuration services to the Home Agent.

   The Home Agent needs to receive one globally-reachable IPv6 address
   to use as its Home Agent address, and a prefix of some size to use as
   the pool of addresses from which to assign Home Addresses.  All of
   the aforementioned addresses should ideally be static and not subject
   to frequent change, for the sake of stability and so that these
   addresses do not need to be updated on the web site.

   The Home Agent should assign its address to the network interface
   that has a direct connection to the access router (and subsequently
   the IPv6 Internet), and assign the prefix of Home Addresses to
   another link, which is the Home Link, that can either be a physical
   network interface (if in the course of testing, the owner will be
   attaching Mobile Nodes to this Home Agent), or a virtual link.

   Once the addresses are assigned, the owner should then proceed to
   generate (Home Address, security key) couples and register them on
   the web site6.  It is optional to set up a tunnel broker so that the
   home network interface can be virtually connected to a Mobile Node
   for testing returning home and de-registration.


   9.2. Mobile Node

   The MN will first need to be manually configured with a home address
   derived from the remote home agent's prefix.  In addition the MN



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 14]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   needs to be configured with a security association with the home
   agent in order to secure binding updates.  The security association
   can be established statically or dynamically.  In the static case the
   MN will be provided with the following information:

    -  Authentication algorithm and key

    -  Encryption algorithm and key

    -  Security association lifetime

    -  The SPI

    -  The MN user will also need to configure the SPD.

   It should be noted that the SPD is configured based on the
   information provided by the home agent operator.  MNs must support
   IPsec ESP (transport mode) in order to protect binding updates sent
   to the home agent.

   If a dynamic security association is feasible, the home agent must be
   configured with a certificate associated with the MN's home address.
   In this scenario both the MN and home agent need to support IKE.

   Dynamic keying will enable the MN to test other Mobile IPv6 features
   like Mobile Prefix solicitation and advertisement messages that can
   be used to discover other home prefixes on the home link and allow
   the MN to test the SW operation when multiple home addresses are in
   use.


   9.3. Correspondent Node

   The correspondent node (CN) operation is described in section 9
   of [11].  It is recommended that a CN for the purpose of testing
   Mobile IPv6 on the testbed implement the data structures and the
   capability to process mobility headers as described in section 9.

   Any IPv6 node can be a correspondent node on the testbed.  However
   it should be noted that the Mobile IPv6 specification has defined a
   new type of header called Mobility header which is used for route
   optimization signaling.  Two types of CNs can be made available for
   testing:

    1. A CN which implements the binding cache for mobility as well as
       the support for route optimization.  This CN would be an IPv6
       node that is compliant with the Mobile IPv6 specification [11].





Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 15]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


    2. A CN that does not implement the binding cache data structures
       or the route optimization feature.  This is a mobility unaware
       IPv6 node.  Such a node should still be capable of the packet
       processing requirements of all IPv6 nodes that are identified in
       section 9.3 of [11].

   An MN can also play the role of a CN on the testbed.  An MN can be
   a CN without necessarily having support for route optimization.
   However, it is strongly recommended that all IPv6 nodes should
   implement route optimization.

   A correspondent node can be connected to the 6bone and obtain an
   IPv6 address as described in other sections of this I-D. For the
   test bed purposes it would be useful to have CNs that are of both
   types.  These CNs would have static IPv6 addresses and advertised on
   the test bed web site.  The CNs can offer HTTP service over IPv6 or
   enable FTP. If the CNs have the capability of logging the Mobile IP
   messages, it would be of benefit if these logs can be made available
   via http.  This will make it easier to test Mobile IPv6 on the
   testbed.


   10. Debugging and Web Service

   It is recommended for debugging purposes that all CNs and HAs make
   their Mobile IPv6 log files avilable.  To that end, the CNs and
   HAs that are registered on the Testing web site should run a web
   server which makes the system log and preferably an updated list of
   Bindings available.  CN users can use this information to debug an
   unsuccessful registration attempt.


   11. Firewalling and Security

   Firewalls can be traversed to some extent, depending on the tunneling
   mechanism used [13, 10].  It is recommended that the Home Agent be
   directly accessible on the IPv6 Internet, and not behind a NAT or
   Firewall.


   11.1. Disclaimer About Security

   It is the responsibility of any individuals or organizations
   participating in Internet-based Mobile IPv6 testing to ensure that
   their implementations and network configurations are sufficiently
   secure and immune to attack.  By the very nature of exposing nodes to
   the IPv6 Internet and to Mobile IPv6 signalling, an increased level
   of risk is present, and an opportunity for malicious attacks exists
   to some extent.



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 16]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   Myriad texts and informational materials exist which describe how
   to deal with and mitigate risks of the Internet.  Information about
   Mobile IPv6-related risks are also well documented (e.g.  see [11]
   Section 15).

   If the potential participant(s) does not understand or feel
   comfortable accepting this risk, or if they are not capable of
   protecting their networks and nodes from malicious attacks, they
   should not participate in testing described in this document.

   In no event will the authors of this document, operators of the MIPv6
   Remote Interop Testing web site, IETF, or any other participants not
   involved in malicious attacks be liable for damage caused to any
   participant's nodes or networks.  Caveat Emptor.


   12. Appendix A


                                 ----+----------P1::/64
                                     |
                   +--------+     +--+----+
                   | CN_MN1 |     | HA1   | HA1Address = P2::HA1
                   +-----+--+     +---+---+
                         |-------------|P2::/64
                                       |
        +-------+P5::/64 +-------------+-----+ P3::/64 +--------+
        | CN_FX |--------|                   |---------| CN_MN2 |
        |       |        |                   |         |        |
        +-------+        |                   |         +--------+
                         |      IPV6         |
                P8::/64  |                   |
        +------------+   |    INTERNET       |            +--------+
        | Test MN-CN |---+                   | P4::/64    |  HA2   |
        +------------+   |                   +------------|        |
                P9::/64  |                   | HA2 Address|        |
        +---------+      |                   | P4::HA2    +--------+
        | Test CN |------+------------+---+--+
        +---------+                   |   |           +-----------+
                                      <.....>---------|Test MN(H) |
                                      |   |           +-----------+
                            P7::/64   |   | P6::/64
                                      |   |
                                  +---+---+-+
                                  |Test HA  |
                                  +---------+


      Figure 1: Example scenario of Base Mobile IPv6 Test Network



Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 17]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   In Figure 1, HA1, HA2, CN_FX, CN_MN1 and CN_MN2 are Home Agents,
   fixed Correspondent Node (with route optimization) and Mobile nodes
   (with CN to MN route optimization functionality).  These nodes
   are dedicated for the Mobile IPv6 test network and they should
   be available all the time to the test participants.  Please see
   section 3 and section 5 for the requirements and registration of
   these nodes in the test network.

   Test HA and Test MN(H) represent an HA test scenario over the
   internet.  It is recommended that test node HA should connect two
   interfaces to the IPv6 backbone and get two different prefixes.  It
   should have a MN node for testing purpose.  This MN node should be
   configured in one of the subnets and moved to other while it remains
   connected to CN_FX (for example).  CN_FX is a dedicated correspondent
   node which provides route optimization functionality, but no mobile
   node functionality.  Note that CN_FX machine may be configured to act
   as HA if the implementation offers the home agent functionality on
   the same box.

   Similarly, a Test MN-CN first needs to get a home address (see
   section 5) from one of the dedicated HA machines and it then should
   plug into the IPv6 network.  This will simulate movement and the
   test mobile node start registration process with that HA. Now the
   test CN-MN start a connection with CN-MN1(for example) and change
   its subnet in the IPv6 network.  At this point, test CN-MN may start
   route-optimization with CN-MN1 in this example.

   Thus for both mobile node and home agent testing,the test nodes
   should acquire two subnet prefixes from the IPv6 Internet.  This test
   network can be used to study the advantage of route optimization as
   we can compare the round-trip-time for correspondent node in some
   subnet (with respect to the mobile node location, speed of link etc.)
   and the CN-MN located in the same subnet as with registered Home
   Agent.

   A test CN node configuration is simple.  It has to connect to the
   IPv6 internet after acquiring a IPv6 prefix and then it should
   work with another Test-MN node to fire up route optimization
   functionality.

   Please note that Figure 1 depicts an example scenario which can be
   used as a basic idea to develop the actual Mobile IPv6 test network.
   Please see section 7 for detailed discussion on test configurations.


   13. IANA Considerations

   The following protocol numbers may require allocation from IANA:




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 18]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


    -  None.


   14. Intellectual Property Right Considerations

   There are no known IPR issues with testing over the IPv6 backbone.
   Please see referenced documents for IPR considerations with respect
   to implementing those protocols.


   15. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank ETSI organizers for agreeing
   to maintain the central co-ordination of the Mobile IPv6
   Interoperability effort.  Patrick Rene Guillemin has set up the
   preliminary central web page.

   The authors would also like to thank the following individuals who
   have made suggestions to improve the text of this draft which were
   incorporated:

   Vijay Devarapalli, Gabriel Montenegro, Hiroshi Miyata, and
   Connectathon 2003 MIPv6 participants for their interest and
   supporting ideas on Remote Mobile IPv6 testing.  Finally, thanks to
   Erik Nordmark for originating the idea of remote Mobile IPv6 Testing
   through the Internet.


   References

    [1] J. Arkko, V. Devarapalli, and F. Dupont.  Using IPsec to Protect
        Mobile IPv6 Signaling between Mobile Nodes and Home Agents.
        Internet Draft draft-ietf-mobileip-mipv6-ha-ipsec-06, Internet
        Engineering Task Force, June 2003.

    [2] S. Bradner.  Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels.  Request for Comments (Best Current Practice) 2119,
        Internet Engineering Task Force, March 1997.

    [3] ``http://www.connectathon.org/''.

    [4] S. Deering and R. Hinden.  Internet Protocol, Version 6 (ipv6)
        Specification.  Request for Comments (Draft Standard) 2460,
        Internet Engineering Task Force, December 1998.

    [5] V. Devarapalli et al.  Nemo basic support protocol.  Internet
        Draft draft-ietf-nemo-basic-support-01, Internet Engineering
        Task Force, September 2003.




Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 19]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


    [6] T. Ernst and H. Lach.  Network mobility support terminology.
        Internet Draft draft-ietf-nemo-terminology-00, Internet
        Engineering Task Force, May 2003.

    [7] ``http://www.etsi.org/''.

    [8] ``http://list.etsi.org/plugtests-mip6.html''.

    [9] ``http://www.freenet6.net/''.

   [10] C. Huitema.  Tunneling IPv6 over UDP through NATs.  Internet
        Draft draft-huitema-v6ops-teredo-00, Internet Engineering Task
        Force, June 2003.

   [11] D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and Arkko J.  Mobility Support in IPv6.
        Internet Draft draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-24, Internet Engineering
        Task Force, June 2003.

   [12] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, and W. Simpson.  Neighbor Discovery for
        IP Version 6 (ipv6).  Request for Comments (Draft Standard)
        2461, Internet Engineering Task Force, December 1998.

   [13] F. Templin, T. Gleeson, M. Talwar, and D. Thaler.  Intra-Site
        Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol.  Internet Draft
        draft-ietf-ngtrans-isatap-15, Internet Engineering Task Force,
        September 2003.


























Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 20]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   Authors' Addresses


        T. J. Kniveton
        Communication Systems Lab
        Nokia Research Center
        313 Fairchild Drive
        Mountain View, California 94043
        USA
        Phone:  +1 650 625-2025
        E-mail:  timothy.kniveton@nokia.com

        Basavaraj Patil
        Nokia
        6000 Connection Drive
        Irving, TX 75039
        USA
        Phone:  +1 972 894-6709
        E-mail:  basavaraj.patil@nokia.com

        Samita Chakrabarti
        Sun Microsystems, Inc.
        4150 Network Circle
        Santa Clara, California 95054
        USA
        Phone:  +1 650 786-5068
        E-mail:  samita.chakrabarti@sun.com

        Henrik Petander
        Helsinki University of Technology
        Laboratory for Theoretical Computer Science
        Konemiehentie 2, 02015 Espoo
        Finland
        Phone:  +358 9 4515846
        E-mail:  henrik.petander@hut.fi

        Hesham Soliman
        Flarion Technologies
        E-mail:  h.soliman@flarion.com













Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 21]

Internet Draft      MIPv6 Remote Interop Testing        October 19, 2003


   Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However,
   this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by
   removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society
   or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose
   of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures
   for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


   Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Kniveton, Chakrabarti, et al.      Expires April 18, 2004      [Page 22]
