

CCAMP Working Group                         CCAMP GMPLS P&R Design Team
Internet Draft
Expiration Date: May 2003                  Eric Mannie (Consult) Editor
                                 Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel) Editor

                                             Deborah Brungard    (AT&T)
                                          Sudheer Dharanikota (Consult)
                                                Jonathan Lang (Calient)
                                                  Guangzhi Li    (AT&T)
                                             Bala Rajagopalan (Tellium)
                                                Yakov Rekhter (Juniper)

                                                          November 2002



       Recovery (Protection and Restoration) Terminology for GMPLS

           draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt



Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
  of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

  For potential updates to the above required-text see:
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt


1. Abstract

   This document defines a common terminology for Generalized MPLS
   (GMPLS) based recovery mechanisms (i.e. protection and restoration)
   that are under consideration by the CCAMP Working Group.




E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.                                     1

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].

3. Introduction

   This document defines a common terminology for Generalized MPLS
   (GMPLS) based recovery mechanisms (i.e. protection and restoration)
   that are under consideration by the CCAMP Working Group.

   The terminology proposed in this document is intended to be
   independent of the underlying transport technologies and borrows
   from an ITU-T ongoing effort (G.gps - Generic Protection Switching
   [G.gps]) and from the G.841 ITU-T Recommendation. The restoration
   terminology and concepts have been gathered from numerous sources
   including IETF drafts.

   In the context of this document we will use the term "recovery" to
   denote both protection and restoration. The specific terms
   "protection" and "restoration" will only be used when
   differentiation is required.

   Note that this document focuses on the terminology for the recovery
   of LSPs controlled by a GMPLS control plane. We focus on end-to-end,
   segment and span (i.e. link) LSP recovery. Terminology for control
   plane recovery is not in the scope of this document.

   Protection and restoration of switched LSPs under tight time
   constraints is a challenging problem. This is particularly relevant
   to optical networks that consist of TDM and/or all-optical
   (photonic) cross-connects referred to as GMPLS nodes (or simply
   nodes, or even sometimes "LSRs") connected in a general topology
   [GMPLS-ARCH].

   Recovery typically involves the activation of a recovery (or
   alternate) LSP when a failure is encountered in the working (or
   primary) LSP.

   A working or recovery LSP is characterized by an ingress interface,
   an egress interface, and a set of intermediate nodes and spans
   through which the LSP is routed. The working and recovery LSPs are
   typically resource disjoint (e.g. node and/or span disjoint). This
   ensures that a single failure will not affect both the working and
   recovery LSPs.

   A bi-directional span between neighboring nodes is usually realized
   as a pair of unidirectional spans. The end-to-end path for a bi-
   directional LSP therefore consists of a series of bi-directional
   segments (i.e. Sub-Network Connections, or SNCs, in the ITU-T
   terminology) between the source and destination nodes, traversing
   intermediate nodes.

E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          2

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


4. Recovery Terminology Common to Protection and Restoration

   This section defines the following general terms common to both
   protection and restoration (i.e. recovery). In addition, most of
   these terms apply to end-to-end, segment and span LSP recovery. Note
   that span recovery assumes that the nodes at each end of the span
   did not fail, otherwise end-to-end or segment LSP recovery is used.

   The terminology and the definitions have been originally taken from
   G.gps. However, for generalization, the following language that is
   not directly related to recovery has been adapted to GMPLS and the
   common IETF terminology:

   An LSP is used as a generic term to designate either an SNC (Sub-
   Network Connection) or an NC (Network Connection) in ITU-T
   terminology. The ITU-T uses the term transport entity to designate
   either a link, an SNC or an NC. The term "Traffic" is used instead
   of "Traffic Signal". The term protection or restoration "scheme" is
   used instead of protection or restoration "architecture".

   The reader is invited to read G.841 and G.gps for references to SDH
   protection and ITU-T generic protection terminology. Note that
   restoration is not in the scope of G.gps.

4.1 Working and Recovery LSP/Span

   A working LSP/span is an LSP/span transporting "normal" user
   traffic. A recovery LSP/span is an LSP/span used to transport
   "normal" user traffic when the working LSP/span fails. Additionally,
   the recovery LSP/span may transport "extra" user traffic (i.e. pre-
   emptable traffic) when normal traffic is carried over the working
   LSP/span.

4.2 Traffic Types

   The different types of traffic that can be transported over an
   LSP/span in the context of this document are defined hereafter:

   A. Normal traffic:

   User traffic that may be protected by two alternative LSPs/spans
   (the working and recovery LSPs/spans).

   B. Extra traffic:

   User traffic carried over recovery resources (e.g. a recovery
   LSP/span) when these resources are not being used for the recovery
   of normal traffic; i.e. when the recovery resources are in standby
   mode. When the recovery resources are required to recover normal
   traffic from the failed working LSP/span, the extra traffic is pre-
   empted. Extra traffic is not protected by definition, but may be
   restored.


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          3

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   C. Null traffic:

   Traffic carried over the recovery LSP/span if it is not used to
   carry normal or extra traffic. Null traffic can be any kind of
   traffic that conforms to the signal structure of the specific layer,
   and it is ignored (not selected) at the egress of the recovery
   LSP/span.

4.3 LSP/Span Protection and Restoration

   The following subtle distinction is generally made between the terms
   "protection" and "restoration", even though these terms are often
   used interchangeably [TEWG].

   The distinction between protection and restoration is made based on
   the resource allocation done during the recovery LSP/span
   establishment. The distinction between different types of
   restoration is made based on the level of route computation,
   signaling and resource allocation done during the restoration
   LSP/span establishment.

   A. LSP/Span Protection

   LSP/span protection denotes the paradigm whereby one or more
   dedicated protection LSP(s)/span(s) is/are fully established to
   protect one ore more working LSP(s)/span(s).

   For a protection LSP, this implies that route computation took
   place, that the LSP was fully signaled all the way and that its
   resources were fully selected (i.e. allocated) and cross-connected
   between the ingress and egress nodes.

   For a protection span, this implies that the span has been selected
   and reserved for protection.

   Indeed, it means that no signaling takes place to establish the
   protecting LSP/span when a failure occurs. However, various other
   kinds of signaling may take place between the ingress and egress
   nodes for fault notification, to synchronize their use of the
   protecting LSP/span, for reversion, etc.

   B. LSP/Span Restoration

   LSP/span restoration denotes the paradigm whereby some restoration
   resources may be pre-computed, signaled and selected a priori, but
   not cross-connected to restore a working LSP/span. The complete
   establishment of the restoration LSP/span occurs only after a
   failure of the working LSP/span, and requires some additional
   signaling.

   Both protection and restoration require signaling. Signaling to
   establish the recovery resources and signaling associated with the
   use of the recovery LSP(s)/span(s) are needed.

E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          4

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002



4.4 Recovery Scope

   Recovery can be applied at various levels throughout the network.
   Local (span) recovery refers to the recovery of an LSP over a link
   between two nodes. Segment recovery refers to the recovery of an LSP
   segment (i.e. an SNC in the ITU-T terminology) between two nodes,
   i.e. the boundary nodes of the segment. End-to-end recovery refers
   to the recovery of an entire LSP from its source to its destination.
   An LSP may be subject to local (span), segment, and/or end-to-end
   recovery.

4.5 Recovery Domain

   A recovery domain is defined as a set of nodes and spans over which
   one or more recovery schemes are provided. A recovery domain served
   by one single recovery scheme is referred to as a "single recovery
   domain", while a recovery domain served by multiple recovery schemes
   is referred to as a "multi recovery domain".

4.6 Recovery Types

   The different recovery types can be classified depending on the
   number of recovery LSPs/spans that are protecting a given number of
   working LSPs/spans. The definitions given hereafter are from the
   point of view of a working LSP/span that needs to be protected by a
   recovery scheme.

   A. 1+1 type: dedicated protection

   One dedicated protection LSP/span protects exactly one working
   LSP/span and the normal traffic is permanently duplicated at the
   ingress node on both the working and protection LSPs/spans. No extra
   traffic can be carried over the protection LSP/span.

   This type is applicable to LSP/span protection, but not to LSP/span
   restoration.

   B. 0:1 type: unprotected

   No specific recovery LSP/span protects the working LSP/span.
   However, the working LSP/span can potentially be restored through
   any alternate available route/span, with or without any pre-computed
   restoration route. Note that there are no resources pre-established
   for this recovery type.

   This type is applicable to LSP/span restoration, but not to LSP/span
   protection. Span restoration can be for instance achieved by moving
   all the LSPs transported over of a failed span to a dynamically
   selected span.

   C. 1:1 type: dedicated recovery with extra traffic


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          5

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   One specific recovery LSP/span protects exactly one specific working
   LSP/span but the normal traffic is transmitted only over one LSP
   (working or recovery) at a time. Extra traffic can be transported
   using the recovery LSP/span resources.

   This type is applicable to LSP/span protection and LSP restoration,
   but not to span restoration.

   D. 1:N (N>1) type: shared recovery with extra traffic

   A specific recovery LSP/span is dedicated to the protection of up to
   N working LSPs/spans. The set of working LSPs/spans is explicitly
   identified. Extra traffic can be transported over the recovery
   LSP/span. All these LSPs/spans must start and end at the same nodes.

   Sometimes, the working LSPs/spans are assumed to be resource
   disjoint in the network so that they do not share any failure
   probability, but this is not mandatory. Obviously, if more than one
   working LSP/span in the set of N are affected by some failure(s) at
   the same time, the traffic on only one of these failed LSPs/spans
   may be recovered over the recovery LSP/span. Note that N can be
   arbitrarily large (i.e. infinite). The choice of N is a policy
   decision.

   This type is applicable to LSP/span protection and LSP restoration,
   but not to span restoration.

   Note: a shared recovery where each recovery resource can be shared
   by a maximum of X LSPs/spans is not defined as a recovery type but
   as a recovery scheme. The choice of X is a network resource
   management policy decision.

   E. M:N (M, N > 1; M <= N) type:

   A set of M specific recovery LSPs/spans protects a set of up to N
   specific working LSPs/spans. The two sets are explicitly identified.
   Extra traffic can be transported over the M recovery LSPs/spans when
   available. All the LSPs/spans must start and end at the same nodes.

   Sometimes, the working LSPs/spans are assumed to be resource
   disjoint in the network so that they do not share any failure
   probability, but this is not mandatory. Obviously, if several
   working LSPs/spans in the set of N are concurrently affected by some
   failure(s), the traffic on only M of these failed LSPs/spans may be
   recovered. Note that N can be arbitrarily large (i.e. infinite). The
   choice of N and M is a policy decision.

   This type is applicable to LSP/span protection and LSP restoration,
   but not to span restoration.





E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          6

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


4.7 Bridge Types

   A bridge is the function that connects the normal traffic and extra
   traffic to the working and recovery LSP/span.

   A. Permanent bridge

   Under a 1+1 type, the bridge connects the normal traffic to both the
   working and protection LSPs/spans. This type of bridge is not
   applicable to restoration types. There is of course no extra traffic
   connected to the recovery LSP/span.

   B. Broadcast bridge

   For 1:N and M:N types, the bridge permanently connects the normal
   traffic to the working LSP/span. In the event of recovery switching,
   the normal traffic is additionally connected to the recovery
   LSP/span. Extra traffic is either not connected or connected to the
   recovery LSP/span.

   C. Selector bridge

   For 1:N and M:N types, the bridge connects the normal traffic to
   either the working or the recovery LSP/span. Extra traffic is either
   not connected or connected to the recovery LSP/span.

4.8 Selector Types

   A selector is the function that extracts the normal traffic either
   from the working or the recovery LSP/span. Extra traffic is either
   extracted from the recovery LSP/span, or is not extracted.

   A. Selective selector

   Is a selector that extracts the normal traffic from either the
   working LSP/span output or the recovery LSP/span output.

   B. Merging selector

   For 1:N and M:N protection types, the selector permanently extracts
   the normal traffic from both the working and recovery LSP/span
   outputs. This alternative works only in combination with a selector
   bridge.

4.9 Recovery GMPLS Nodes

   This section defines the GMPLS nodes involved during recovery.

   A. Ingress GMPLS node of an end-to-end LSP/segment LSP/span

   The ingress node of an end-to-end LSP/segment LSP/span is where the
   working traffic may be bridged to the recovery end-to-end


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          7

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   LSP/segment LSP/span. Also known as source node in the ITU-T
   terminology.

   B. Egress GMPLS node of an end-to-end LSP/segment LSP/span

   The egress node of an end-to-end LSP/segment LSP/span is where the
   working traffic may be selected from either the working or the
   recovery end-to-end LSP/segment LSP/span. Also known as sink node in
   the ITU-T terminology.

   C. Intermediate GMPLS node of an end-to-end LSP/segment LSP

   A node along either the working or recovery end-to-end LSP/segment
   LSP route between the corresponding ingress and egress nodes. Also
   known as intermediate node in the ITU-T terminology.

4.10 Switching Mechanism

   A switch is an action that can be performed at both the bridge and
   the selector. This action is as follows:

   A. For the selector:

   The action of selecting normal traffic from the recovery LSP/span
   rather than from the working LSP/span.

   B. For the bridge:

   In case of permanent connection to the working LSP/span, the action
   of connecting or disconnecting the normal traffic to the recovery
   LSP/span. In case of non-permanent connection to the working
   LSP/span, the action of connecting the normal traffic to the
   recovery LSP/span.

4.11 Reversion operations

   A revertive recovery operation refers to a recovery switching
   operation, where the traffic returns to (or remains on) the working
   LSP/span if the switch requests are terminated; i.e. when the
   working LSP/span has recovered from the failure.

   Therefore a non-revertive recovery switching operation is when the
   traffic does not return to the working LSP/span if the switch
   requests are terminated.

4.12 Failure Reporting

   This section gives (for information) several signal types commonly
   used in transport planes to report a failure condition. Note that
   fault reporting may require additional signaling mechanisms.

   A. Signal Degrade (SD): a signal indicating that the associated data
   has degraded.

E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          8

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002



   B. Signal Fail (SF): a signal indicating that the associated data
   has failed.

   C. Signal Degrade Group (SDG): a signal indicating that the
   associated group data has degraded (under discussion at the ITU-T).

   D. Signal Fail Group (SFG): a signal indicating that the associated
   group has failed (under discussion at the ITU-T).

4.13 External commands

   This section defines several external commands, typically issued by
   an operator through the NMS/EMS, which can be used to influence or
   command the recovery schemes.

   A. Lockout of recovery LSP/span:

   A configuration action initiated externally that results in the
   recovery LSP/span being temporarily unavailable to transport traffic
   (either normal or extra traffic).

   B. Lockout of normal traffic:

   A configuration action initiated externally that results in the
   normal traffic being temporarily not allowed to be routed over its
   recovery LSP/span.

   C. Freeze:

   A configuration action initiated externally that prevents any switch
   action to be taken, and as such freezes the current state.

   D. Forced switch for normal traffic:

   A switch action initiated externally that switches normal traffic to
   the recovery LSP/span, unless an equal or higher priority switch
   command is in effect.

   E. Manual switch for normal traffic:

   A switch action initiated externally that switches normal traffic to
   the recovery LSP/span, unless a fault condition exists on other
   LSPs/spans (including the recovery LSP/span) or an equal or higher
   priority switch command is in effect.

4.14 Unidirectional versus Bi-Directional Recovery Switching

   A. Unidirectional recovery switching:

   A recovery switching mode in which, for a unidirectional fault (i.e.
   a fault affecting only one direction of transmission), only the


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003          9

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   normal traffic transported in the affected direction (of the LSP or
   span) is switched to the recovery LSP/span.

   B. Bi-directional recovery switching:

   A recovery switching mode in which, for a unidirectional fault, the
   normal traffic in both directions (of the LSP or span), including
   the affected direction and the unaffected direction, are switched to
   the recovery LSP/span.

4.15 Full versus Partial Span Recovery Switching

   Bulk LSP recovery is initiated upon reception on either span failure
   notification or bulk failure notification of the S LSPs carried by
   this span. In either case, the corresponding recovery switching
   actions are performed at the LSP level such that the ratio between
   the number of recovery switching messages and the number of
   recovered LSP (in one given direction) is minimized. If this ratio
   equals 1, one refers to full span recovery, otherwise, if this ratio
   is greater than 1 one refers to partial span recovery.

   A. Full Span Recovery

   All the S LSP carried over a given span are recovered under span
   failure condition. Full span recovery is also referred to as ôbulk
   recoveryö.

   B. Partial Span Recovery

   Only a subset s of the S LSP carried over a given span are recovered
   under span failure condition. Both selection criteria of the
   entities belonging to this subset and the decision concerning the
   recovery of the remaining (Sûs) LSP are based on local policy.

4.16 Recovery Schemes Related Time and Durations

   This section gives several typical timing definitions that are of
   importance for recovery schemes.

   A. Detection time:

   The time between the occurrence of the fault or degradation and its
   detection. Note that this is a rather theoretical time since in
   practice this is difficult to measure.

   B. Correlation time:

   The time between detection of the fault or degradation and the
   reporting of the signal fail or degrade. This time is typically used
   in correlating related failures or degradations.

   C. Hold-off time:


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         10

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   The time between reporting of signal fail or degrade, and the
   initialization of the recovery switching algorithm. This is useful
   when multiple layers of recovery are being used.

   D. Wait To Restore time:

   A period of time that must elapse from a recovered fault before an
   LSP/span can be used again to transport the normal traffic and/or to
   select the normal traffic from.

   E. Switching time:

   The time between the initialization of the recovery switching
   algorithm and the moment the traffic is selected from the recovery
   LSP/span.

   F. Recovery time:

   The recovery time is defined as the sum of the detection,
   correlation, hold-off and switching times.

4.17 Impairment

   A defect or performance degradation, which may lead to SF or SD
   trigger.

4.18 Recovery Ratio

   The quotient of the actually recovery bandwidth divided by the
   traffic bandwidth which is intended to be protected.

4.19 Hitless Protection Switch

   Protection switch, which does not cause data loss, data duplication,
   data disorder, or bit errors upon recovery switching action.

4.20 Network Survivability

   The set of capabilities that allow a network to restore affected
   traffic in the event of a failure. The degree of survivability is
   determined by the networkÆs capability to survive single and
   multiple failures.

4.21 Survivable Network

   A network that is capable of restoring traffic in the event of a
   failure.

4.22 Escalation

   A network survivability action caused by the impossibility of the
   survivability function in lower layers.


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         11

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


5. Recovery Phases

   It is commonly accepted that recovery implies that the following
   generic operations need to be performed when an LSP/span or a node
   failure occurs:

   - Phase 1: Failure Detection

   TBD.

   - Phase 2: Failure Localization and Isolation

   TBD.

   - Phase 3: Failure Notification

   TBD.

   - Phase 4: Recovery (Protection or Restoration)

   See above.

   - Phase 5: Reversion (Normalization)

   See above.

   The combination of Failure Detection and Failure Localization and
   Notification is referred to as Fault Management.

5.1 Entities Involved During Recovery

   The entities involved during the recovery operations can be defined
   as follows; these entities are parts of ingress, egress and
   intermediate nodes as defined previously:

   A. Detecting Entity (Failure Detection):

   An entity that detects a failure or group of failures; providing
   thus a non-correlated list of failures.

   B. Reporting Entity (Failure Correlation and Notification):

   An entity that can make an intelligent decision on fault correlation
   and report the failure to the deciding entity. Fault reporting can
   be automatically performed by the deciding entity detecting the
   failure.

   C. Deciding Entity (part of the failure recovery decision process):

   An entity that makes the recovery decision or select the recovery
   resources. This entity communicates the decision to the impacted
   LSPs/spans with the recovery actions to be performed.


E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         12

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   D. Recovering Entity (part of the failure recovery activation
   process):

   An entity that participates in the recovery of the LSPs/spans.

   The process of moving failed LSPs from a failed (working) span to a
   protection span must be initiated by one of the nodes terminating
   the span, e.g. A or B. The deciding (and recovering) entity is
   referred to as the "master" while the other node is called the
   "slave" and corresponds to a recovering only entity.

   Note: The determination of the master and the slave may be based on
   configured information or protocol specific requirements.

6. Protection Schemes

   This section clarifies the multiple possible protection schemes and
   the specific terminology for the protection.

   To be completed with references to ITU-T protection schemes and a
   table summarizing the multiple ITU-T protection schemes.

7. Restoration Schemes

   This section clarifies the multiple possible restoration schemes and
   the specific terminology for the restoration.

   To be completed when an agreement on restoration scheme definitions
   and mechanisms has been achieved in other drafts.

8. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce or imply any specific security
   consideration.

9. References

   [RFC-2026]   Bradner, S., ôThe Internet Standards Process --
                Revision 3ö, BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC-2119]   Bradner, S., ôKey words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levelsö, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [G.707]      ITU-T, ôNetwork Node Interface for the Synchronous
                Digital Hierarchy (SDH)ö, Recommendation G.707, October
                2000.

   [G.783]      ITU-T, ôCharacteristics of Synchronous Digital
                Hierarchy (SDH) Equipment Functional Blocksö,
                Recommendation G.783, October 2000.




E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         13

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   [G.806]      ITU-T, ôCharacteristics of Transport Equipment û
                Description Methodology and Generic Functionalityö,
                Recommendation G.806, October 2000.

   [G.841]      ITU-T, ôTypes and Characteristics of SDH Network
                Protection Architecturesö, Recommendation G.841,
                October 1998.

   [G.842]      ITU-T, ôInterworking of SDH network protection
                architecturesö, Recommendation G.842, October 1998.

   [G.gps]      ITU-T ongoing work G.gps, "Generic Protection
                Switching", ITU-T Draft (April, 2002).

   [T1.105]     ANSI, "Synchronous Optical Network (SONET): Basic
                Description Including Multiplex Structure, Rates, and
                Formats", ANSI T1.105, January 2001.

   [BALA]       B.Rajagopalan et al, "Signaling for Protection and
                Restoration in Optical Mesh Networks", Internet Draft,
                Work in progress, draft-bala-protection-restoration-
                signaling-00.txt.

   [GMPLS-ARCH] E.Mannie, Editor, "Generalized MPLS Architecture",
                Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-
                gmpls-architecture-03.txt, August 2002.

   [TEWG]       W.S Lai, et al., "Network Hierarchy and Multilayer
                Survivability", Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-tewg-restore-hierarchy-01.txt, June 2002.

   [SUDHEER]    S.Dharanikota et al., "NNI Protection and restoration
                requirements," OIF Contribution 507, 2001.

10. Acknowledgments

   Valuable comments and input were received from many people.

11. Author's Addresses

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Rm. D1-3C22
   200 S. Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
   Email: dbrungard@att.com

   Sudheer Dharanikota (Consulting)
   Email: sudheer@ieee.org

   Jonathan P. Lang
   Calient Networks
   25 Castilian
   Goleta, CA 93117, USA

E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         14

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


   Email:  jplang@calient.net

   Guangzhi Li (AT&T)
   180 Park Avenue,
   Florham Park, NJ 07932
   Email: gli@research.att.com
   973-360-7376

   Eric Mannie (Consult)
   Email: eric_mannie@hotmail.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellesplein, 1
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-84-91
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Bala Rajagopalan (Tellium)
   2 Crescent Place
   P.O. Box 901
   Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901, USA
   Phone: +1 732 923 4237
   Email: braja@tellium.com

   Yakov Rekhter (Juniper)
   Email: yakov@juniper.net




























E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         15

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-01.txt           Nov. 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




























E.Mannie, D.Papadimitriou et al.- Internet Draft û May 2003         16
