Internet Engineering Task Force                       J÷rg Ottensmeyer
Internet Draft			                              Siemens AG
Category: Informational                                             
Date: 22 October 2002


          The set of Emergency Features provided in 
             Public Switched Telephone Networks
           <draft-otty-ieprep-pstn-features-00.txt>


Status of This Memo 
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts. 

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them in other than as "work in progress." 

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed a
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt. 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
 

Copyright 
Copyright (c) Internet Society 2002. All rights reserved.
Reproduction or translation of the complete documents, but not of
extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted.


Abstract
This document describes the set of emergency services provided in
Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN) and related features which
are needed to provide these services. This draft is aimed as input to
the discussion in the IEPREP working group to discuss further
emergency features may be required on top of GETS.


1. Introduction
Emergency Preparedness is an important factor for public
communication networks. The IEPREP WG is currently gathering the
pieces available in the Internet today into BCPs to document the
required emergency services. 

Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN) have features which enable
to provide several types of emergency services. And PSTN is still
evolving: e.g. based on E.106 [1], a new scheme for International
emergency support, methods are now being implemented in SS7 and BICC
signaling to convey a calling party category on an international
basis. This allows authorized users to have access to the
International Telephone Service while the service is restricted due
to damage, congestion and/or other faults.

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002


This document surveys the set of emergency services and related
features available in PSTN today. Hence, it is aimed as input to the
discussion in the IEPREP working group.

2. Emergency Call Services available in PSTN today
There are three main emergency services available. These are SOS
calls, service-based calls and user-based calls. In the following, we
give an informal description of these services rather than a formal
definition.

2.1. Emergency Calls (911..)
The "SOS call" is the classical emergency call service (e.g. 911, or
112 in Europe). It is a destination-dependent call service, i.e.
calls are authorized by dialing a publicly, well-known emergency
number(s), e.g. of the fire brigade, police, or ambulance, etc.

SOS calls are routed to the nearest emergency center. Nearest is
relative to the geographical location of the subscriber, which is
held in the database of the local exchange. The selection of the
region specific servicing center is done in the local exchange by
mapping the dialed number to the routable number of this center. 

Emergency calls are available in all states of the networks. They
can be placed from any subscriber line, even if the subscriber has a
service restriction in the outgoing direction, the subscriber has
selected an individual barring of outgoing calls, the credit limit of
the subscriber is reached or the account of the subscriber is
suspended. Emergency calls belong to the class of non-blockable calls.

When it takes some time until the emergency caller gets connected
with the emergency center, an announcement can be played to inform
the caller that the emergency call is being processed and he should
hold the line. Finally, emergency calls are non-chargeable calls.
This means there need to be provisions to allow placing emergency
calls from coinbox telephones without depositing coins.


2.2. Origin-dependent emergency calls
The origin-dependent call service is used to realize emergency calls
from special phones, for example calls from a police office or a fire
brigade center. Authorization to use this service is granted by
checking the properties of the subscriber line from which the call is
originated. These properties are included in a subscriber database at
the local exchange. 

This call service may be used during disaster recovery operations,
so that these calls must be placed under all network circumstances.
The call service is realized by associating a call preference with
this call, which allows a preferred routing of the call throughout
the network. Such calls might even preempt other calls, if the called
party is currently carrying out another, non-emergency call.

2.2. User-dependent/ authenticated emergency calls
The user-dependent call service is used to realize emergency calls
from specially authorized users, for example calls from polices
officers or fire fighters. Such call may originate form any terminal
in the public communication network. Thus, users must dial a special
access and authentication codes to gain access to the service. 

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002

An example for a national implementation of this call service in US
is GETS (the Government Emergency Telephony Service) [2]. The
international version is called International Emergency Preparedness
Scheme [1].

This calls must be placed under all network conditions. This call
service is realized by associating a call preference with this call.
This allows a preferred routing of the call throughout the network.
Such calls might even preempt other calls, if the called party is
currently carrying out another, non-emergency call.

3. Features needed to realize Emergency Call Services
This section lists the features required to realize the emergency
call services as described before. This includes features to enable
the services itself and features to fight congestion. Several
features are available at all time while others are activated during
exceptional network states.

Under normal operation of the network, the core idea is to enable
and route these calls, even if system configuration would prevent
other (normal) calls (e.g. if the subscriber account is suspended due
to overdue credit limit). 

In case of unexpected disaster situations, such as earthquakes,
storms, big fires and other types of catastrophes, networks can be
immensely affected or even damaged. The idea here is to fight
overload and prioritize emergency calls.

The first subsection covers system-based features. The second
subsection describes several other (hardware) features which are used
to increase availability of the emergency call services in the case
of various network failures.


3.1 System-based features
  o "Digit translation on the dialed number" means that the dialed
    number may be replaced by a new code and call preferences are added
    or altered. This is applied to convert a uniform emergency call
    number (e.g. 911) to the region specific servicing center number.

  o "Subscriber emergency override" means that it is possible, to
    override subscriber service restrictions for specific dialed numbers
    (e.g. emergency numbers). Thus subscribers with outgoing call
    restrictions can still place emergency calls.

  o "Disable Calling Line Identification Restriction". Originating
    subscribers may hide the presentation of the calling line
    identification on the called party's terminal. For emergency calls,
    it is possible to define categories for terminating subscribers (e.g.
    the emergency centers) to get the ability to override the
    presentation restriction and have the calling party's identity
    presented. 

  o "Preference category during catastrophe" means that the local
    exchanges will impose service restrictions when a catastrophe state
    is activated. Then, call admission is based on the following criteria:

     o the destination of the call. Call are classified as "regular
       calls" and "emergency calls" (e.g. 911 calls).

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002

     o the source of the call. All subscriber lines are administratively
       assigned a preference category (which are held within the local
       exchange). There are several possible levels. Normal subscribers get
       preference category 0 while e.g. the "red phone of the president"
       gets the highest category.
     o the identity of the caller. By means of a specific service, the
       identity of the caller is verified and if eligible, the preference
       category of the subscriber line is increased (for the call to be
       placed). 
     o the active level of service restriction in the local exchange.

    The administration can activate different levels of service
    restrictions in the local exchange; these are for example:
    o Level 0: Normal Operation of the Local Exchange
    o Level 1: Only subscribers with preference category 1 or 2 are
      permitted to originate calls. Subscribers without preference can
      place emergency calls. The terminating traffic is not restricted.
    o Level 2: Only subscribers with preference category 2 are permitted
      to originate calls. Emergency calls are accepted only if the calling
      subscriber has a preference category greater than zero. The
      terminating traffic is not restricted.


  o  "Priority Routing" means preferential treatment to calls
     originating from certain subscribers and their dial preferences in
     order to receive special path selection. 

  o  "Automatic Repeat Attempt" means that in case of congestion,
     repeated set-up attempts can be made on the last-choice route for
     priority subscribers or emergency traffic. The feature requires that
     the signaling system transmits the calling category information.

  o  "Last trunk reserved for special traffic" means that the last idle
     trunk within a trunk group can be reserved for special traffic, e.g.
     origin-dependent (priority calling category) or destination-dependent
     (e.g. emergency) traffic.

  o  "Authentication and authorization" means that a caller is
     authenticated (e.g. via an account number and a PIN) and is then
     authorized to receive a special service (e.g. a higher preference
     category). This is typically done in special service offices reached
     through a dialed access code (e.g. for GETS).

  o  "Hard-to-Reach Control (HTRC)" is a kind of congestion control
     which fights overloads resulting from catastrophes. In these cases,
     communication from outside with subscribers inside the catastrophe
     area is almost impossible. The number of call attempts to reach the
     affected area increase rapidly and the network is severely
     overloaded. Many call attempts fail because the called destination is
     congested. Additionally, calls to other areas (not affected by the
     catastrophe) cannot be successfully routed to their destinations due
     to the propagated congestion; hence the telecommunication companies
     are not able to provide their service effectively. Therefore, the
     networks run a Hard-to-Reach Control (HTRC). HTRC is based on the
     following functions:

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002

     - Automatic determination of HTR destinations
     - Automatic reduction of HTR traffic through network management
     controls (e.g. by means of trunk reservation)
     - Administration of destinations to be automatically detected, to be
     excluded from HTR determination, to be excluded from HTR reduction or
     even to be marked as HTR in order to benefit from HTR traffic
     reduction through network management controls.


3.2 Hardware-based features 
There are several features to increase the availability of emergency
call services in case of network or other hardware failures. Those
are for example:

   o Provision of backup lines for emergency calls
     If a remote part of the local exchange is in stand alone service
     (which means, all PCM-links from the remote part to the local
     exchange are out of service), calls to emergency numbers can be
     routed to subscriber ports, which are defined as emergency call
     ports. These emergency call ports can be connected via suitable
     transmission equipment to an emergency center.

   o Power Supply of User Terminals
     The interface S0 (between customer premise equipment and the local
     exchange) for analog and ISDN lines include power supply of the
     terminal equipment in normal and emergency operation. This means that
     appropriate terminals can be operated even without external power
     supply.

   o Power Supply for Network Elements
     Typically, regional regulators demand 48 hours of operation without
     external power supply. Therefore, reliable battery backup and/or fuel
     based generators are provided for exchanges, transmission equipment
     and other essential elements. 

4. Denial of Service Protection
PSTN provides denial of service protection through statistical and
other means. Thereby individual channels are supervised. There are
two major features.
   o "noisy port supervision" provides supervision of the subscriber
     line by comparing the actual usage pattern against the dialing
     characteristics of well-behaved subscribers. This feature detects
     attacks or malfunctions if the subscriber requests more than a
     certain number of incomplete, short, or faulty calls on that line in
     a given period of time.
   o "killer trunk supervision" works the same way as noisy port
     supervision, it just compares against the dialing characteristics on
     trunk lines.

5. PSTN Emergency Call Services and Features
In this section we give a brief listing which features are needed to
provide which emergency services. The aim is to make clear that not
all features are needed for each service.

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002


      Service   "Emergency  "origin-dependent        "user-dependent/
                 call"       emergency call service"  authenticated call 
                                                      emergency service"
Feature
- digit translation on 	  x          x                 x
  dialed number/ address 
  replacement
- subscriber emergency 	  x           
  override
- preference category     x          x                 x
  during catastrophe
- Disable calling line 	  x           
  identification restriction
- priority		                   x                 x
- automatic repeat 	             x                 x
  attempt
- last trunk reserved for x          x                 x
  special traffic
- authentication and 	                               x
  authorization

      Table 1: Mapping of Emergency Features and Services

6. Conclusions
PSTN systems offer features to aid all kind of catastrophe and
emergency state. This ranges from prioritization of personal
emergency calls under normal network operation up to blocking of
other than emergency calls during catastrophe state. Additionally,
parts of the network are protected from congestion by automatic
detection of hard-to-reach catastrophe areas. Thus, originating calls
from different areas can still reach emergency centers within this
catastrophe area.

This paper summarizes a set of services that may find their way into
the requirement sheets of the IEPREP working group. Of course, not
all of these services may be applicable in the Internet, but further
discussion is needed to select an appropriate subset of the above
described features.


Security Considerations
This draft is on security. Specific requirements to other security
functions may be derived if further considered.

IANA Considerations
Service and feature name spaces may be needed if further considered.

References
[1]	"International Emergency Preparedness Scheme", 
      ITU-T Recommendation E.106, March 2000
[2]	"Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony", 
      Internet Draft <draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-02.txt>, June 2002


Author's Address
J÷rg Ottensmeyer
Siemens AG
M’nchen, Germany
email: joerg.ottensmeyer@siemens.com

Internet Draft         PSTN Emergency Features               November 2002