 Internet Draft                               Hosei Matsuoka
 Date: October 20, 2004                       Takeshi Yoshimura
 Expires: April 2004                          NTT DoCoMo


      Problem Statement and Requirements for Multi-link Transport
             draft-matsuoka-multilink-transport-00.txt


 Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other 
     groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
     and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents at any 
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
     material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



 Abstract

     Multi-link transport can offer higher bandwidth and more robust 
     connections. Because of a wide variety of emerged wireless access 
     technologies, a mobile host can potentially have subscriptions and 
     access more than one wireless network simultaneously. This document 
     introduces example applications which use multiple links in a 
     connection simultaneously and illustrates the advantages of multi-link 
     transport. A problem with those applications is that the efficient 
     multi-link transport needs much more knowledge about each link 
     characteristics such as bandwidth, delay, reliability and robustness.
     This document defines the requirements for efficient and adaptive
     multi-link transport and also describes the link information that
     multi-stream senders can require.


 1. Introduction

     Because of a wide variety of emerged wireless access technologies, 
     a mobile host can potentially have subscriptions and access more 
     than one wireless network simultaneously. Combining different network 
     accesses, a mobile host can take advantage of each network's feature 
     such as higher bandwidth and robust connections. For example, 
     having both cellular network link and wireless LAN network link
     offers "always-on" Internet access and high-speed wireless LAN access 
     within wireless LAN coverage areas. 




 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 1]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


     With multiple streams, more advanced usages are possible. One of the 
     examples is the layered coded[1] video streaming. The video content 
     consists of the base layer and the enhancement layers. The base layer 
     data without which reconstruction fails completely is transmitted through 
     the most reliable and robust path and the enhancement layer data is 
     transmitted through the other path. In this case, the receiver which has 
     a cellular network access and a wireles LAN access can always receive the 
     base layer through the cellular network and also receive the enhancement 
     layer when being within wireless LAN coverage areas, thus improving the 
     video quality.

     To split data to multiple links correctly, multi-stream senders need
     much more knowledge about the receiver's links as well as their own
     ones. However there is no protocol which allows multi-stream senders
     to realize the characteristics of receiver's links sufficiently.
     Without such link information, the ability of multi-link transport
     can be limited.

     This document presents some example applications which illustrate 
     the advantage of multi-link transport, and then defines the requirements
     for efficient and adaptive multi-link transport. It also describes the 
     link information that multi-stream senders can require for efficient 
     data striping. Since different wireless links have their own specific 
     parameters and using these parameters at the upper layer may be the 
     layer violation, the link information needs abstraction.




 2. Example Applications

     This section presents some example multi-link transport applications
     and the scenarios.


  2.1 Bandwidth Aggregation

     A simple advantage of multipath transport is bandwidth aggregation. 
     It is achieved by striping data across the multiple interfaces of the 
     mobile host. The simplest striping scheme is round robin striping
     where the sender sends packets in round robin order on the paths.
     However, since different path has different characteristics in terms of 
     bandwidth, delay, and loss rates, most of data striping shemes are 
     performed in consideration of these parameters.

     Congestion control mechanisms based on the receiver's acknowledgement
     can adjust the appropriate data rate to the path condition and estimate
     the bandwidth. Striping data over multiple TCP connections needs the 
     resequencing to manage the buffer bundling multiple connections. 
     If one of the receiver's interfaces becomes disabled, the TCP connection 
     using this interface may stall the other TCP connections. Although 
     decoupling the loss recovery from congestion control avoid this stall[2], 
     the link up/down notification[3] from the receiver would be useful also.





 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 2]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


  2.2 Multiple Description and Layered Coding

     Video streaming applications may need a higher bandwidth and higher
     reliability connection than that provided by a single path. Two viable 
     multipath strategies for video coding are multiple desctiption(MD)
     coding[4] and layered coding[1]. Both coding techniques produce multiple 
     sub-streams that can be carried on different paths. 

     With MD coding, each sub-stream has equal importance and can be decoded 
     independently. One sub-stream can provide a basic level of reconstruction 
     quality and additional sub-streams can further improve the quality. 
     The loss of one sub-stream does not influence other sub-streams.

     With layered coding, there is one base layer stream which provides
     a basic level of quality. The other sub-streams are called enhancement
     layer, which serve to refine the base layer quality. Since the 
     reconstruction fails completely without the base layer stream, 
     the enhancement layers alone are not useful.

     For both video codings, the knowledge of each path condition can helps
     the efficient video coding. Obviously, the choice of the path for base 
     layer also depends on the path condition.


  2.3 IP Soft Handover (Bicasting)

     Some terminal mobility technologies such as Mobile IP offer IP handover. 
     However, until the sender is notified of the new address, packets can 
     still be dropped during handover. While retransmission can recover 
     missing packets, this is inadequate for real-time applications because 
     delays can seriously decrease the quality of applications.
     Simultaneous bindings in Mobile IP[5][6] enables the mobile node to
     register multiple care-of-addresses to the sender. This results in
     bicasting or n-casting of packets to all the care-of-addresses and
     reduces the packet loss duration to the time required by the Layer-2
     handover. This kind of techniques are useful for rapid back and forth 
     movement between two wireless access points. It can occur if radio 
     conditions for both access points are not enough to establish a good 
     connection.

     IP soft handover with multiple interfaces [7] eliminates the packet loss 
     doubling the connection's bandwidth during handover. A host can use more 
     than one IP network interface within a connection, and choose the source 
     and destination addresses with the highest signal strength.
     When the mobile node is in a cell-overlap region and both links have a
     weak signal strength, the correspondent node bicasts to both interfaces
     of the mobile host. If the signal strength of one link exceeds a certain
     threshold, then the correspondent node stops bicasting. 


 3. Problem Statement

     The example applications described above possess a common problem.
     While multi-homing allows hosts to use multiple source and destination
     addresses in a connection, multi-stream senders need much more knowledge 
     about each link of the receiver such as bandwidth, delay, reliability and 
     robustness in order for efficient multi-link transport.


 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 3]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


     When congestion control is performed at a certain layer, the end-to-end 
     bandwidth and round-trip delay can be estimated, but these parameters 
     cannot be realized until a certain amount of data is transmitted.
     And even if these parameters are realized, it may still not enough for 
     some multi-stream applications. The example applications like section 2.2 
     or section 2.3 may need much more knowledge about reliability and 
     robustness. Real-time constraint applications generally do not use the 
     congestion control mechanism. Those applications can get some statistics 
     of data transport by using RTCP receiver's report, but these statistics 
     also cannot be realized until a certain amount of data is transmitted. And 
     these parameters may not enough information for some multi-stream 
     applications.

     Without these parameters, the only thing multi-stream senders can do 
     is something sort of round-robin data striping. It is not useful when 
     the receiver has two or more different links that have the diverse 
     characteristics. For efficient and adaptive multi-link transport, 
     multi-stream senders need much more knowledge about the receiver's links.



 4. Requirements

     This section describes the requirements of multi-stream transport.


     o  Multi-stream senders can obtain the characteristics of the
        correspondent's links involved in the connection. 

        As described in the problem statement, efficient multi-link
        transport needs much more knowledge about correspondent's links.
        Multi-stream senders should note that depending on the last-hop 
        characteristics is suboptimal or even may cause the negative 
        impact adversely. 


     o  Data path can be selected based on the application data priority.

        Some multi-stream applications prioritize application data and intend
        to split high-prioritized data and low-prioritized data into different
        paths. Data path is determined by choosing a pair of source and 
        destination addresses.


     o  Multi-stream senders can detect status changes of the correspondent's 
        links involved in the connection as soon as they happen.

        Wireless link states are time-variant and come under the influence 
        of terminal movement. Status changes may affect the path selection 
        and multi-stream senders have to readjust the data path for each 
        application data.







 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 4]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


 5. Link Information

     This section describes the link information that multi-stream
     senders may require for multi-link transport. There are two types of
     link information. one is link property which is static information
     inherent to the link, and the other is link status which is dynamically
     changeable and time-variant.

     Using detail information specific to a particular link at the upper 
     layer may be layer violation and reduce the flexibility of the layer
     principle. Therefore, the link information has to be represented by 
     abstracted parameters for the upper layers.

 
  5.1 Link Property

    o  Link Bandwidth

     This information is necessary to realize the maximum data rate for
     each link. For striping data across multiple links, this information
     is primary hint for adjusting how much amount of data for each link.


    o  Link Delay

     This information helps delay-constraint multi-stream applications. 
     If some pieces of data are real-time constraints but others are not,
     real-time constraint data can be transmitted through the faster link,
     and the other data is transmitted through the slower link. For example,
     video and audio data is real-time constraint but timed-text data is
     not so real-time constraint. Another advantage is reordering the video 
     frame to be transmitted. For example, RTP payload format for H.264 
     video[8] has a DON (Decoding Order Number) field to provide flexibility 
     of transmission order. Sending important frame through the faster path 
     may allow for the retransmission of the lost frame. 


    o  Link Robustness

     This information indicates the robustness of the links against terminal
     movement. Wired links never suffer from the variation in quality
     as long as connected. Cellular links such as GPRS links cover
     large areas, so the short movement of the host does not really affect
     the link status. Small-cell wireless links such as wireless LAN links 
     covers the small areas (usually inside buildings) and even short 
     movement may affect the link status. 


    o  Link Reliability

     This information indicates whether the link layer provides reliability 
     through the use of retransmission. It is relevant to signal strength.
     When the link layer does not provide reliability, a low signal link may 
     suffer from the high loss rate. On the other hand, when a link layer 
     provides reliability, a low signal link may suffer from additional 
     link delay caused by retransmission. 


 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 5]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


  5.2 Link Status

    o  Signal Strength

     The signal strength parameter is specific to wireless link and mainly
     used for the handover mechanisms. For example, the mobile node which has 
     two wireless LAN links chooses the receiving interface with higher signal 
     strength. As introduced in section 2.3, when both links have a weak signal 
     strength, bicasting can be required. 



  6. Security Consideration

     To enable multi-link transport, a multi-link receiver needs to 
     tell the sender its IP address information and link information. 
     The message of IP address information to an existing association
     possesses a connection hijacking problem. If the attacker intercepts
     and alters the IP address information of the message, packets will
     be sent to the attacker. And also the link information modified
     by the attacker will cause service disruption. Therefore, a message 
     authentication mechanism is necessary to prevent these attacks. 

     For bicasting or n-casting, the receiver can request the same packet
     stream for another IP address, even the other host's IP address by
     falsifying the IP address information. Therefore, the valid host which
     is eligible to get a service can copy the service for non-valid users.

     Therefore, identity and message authentication functionalities are
     necessary. The receiver of messages about IP address and link 
     information will have to verify the validity of the messages.

     As another security problem with multi-link terminals, multi-wireless-link 
     host can become a wireless router and easily pretend to be the default 
     router in the wireless link by advertising routing information. The other 
     hosts in the same wireless link send packets through the wireless router, 
     and might suffer from the man-in-the-middle attack on the malicious 
     wireless router.


  7. Closing Statements     

     While this work is initially focusing on dual wireless terminals
     equipped with a cellular access link and a Wireless LAN access link,
     the draft does not limit the case and it needs solutions that can
     accomodate any combination of all kinds of links.









 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 6]

 Internet-Draft          Multi-link Transport          October 20, 2003


  8. References

  [1]  Sanguen Han and Bernd Girod "Robust and Efficient Scalable Video
       Coding with Leaky Prediction", InProceedings of ICIP 2002,
       September 2002.

  [2]  Hung-Yun Hsieh and Raghupathy Sivakumar "A Transport Layer Approach
       for Achieving Aggregate Bandwidths on Multi-homed Mobile Hosts",
       InProceedings of MOBICOM 2002, September 2002.

  [3]  Spencer Dawkins, Carl E. Williams and Alper E. Yegin "Problem Statement
       for Triggers for Transport(TRIGTRAN)" 
       draft-dawkins-trigtran-probstmt-01.txt

  [4]  Ali Begen, Yucel Altunbasak and Ozlem Ergun "Fast Heuristics for
       Multi-path Selection for Multiple Description Encoded Video Streaming",
       InProceedings of ICME 2003, July 2003.

  [5]  Karim El Malki, Hesham Soliman, "Simultaneous Bindings for Mobile IPv6 
       Fast Handovers", draft-elmalki-mobileip-bicasting-v6-03.txt, May 2003.

  [6]  C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC3220, January 2002.

  [7]  H.Matsuoka, T.Yoshimura and T.Ohya "A Robust Method for Soft IP
       Handover", IEEE Internet Computing Magazine, Vol.7 Num.2 pp.18-24,
       March/April 2003.

  [8]  S. Wenger, M.M. Hannuksela, T. Stockhammer, M. Westerlund, D. Singer
       "RTP payload Format for H.264 Video" draft-ietf-avt-rtp-h264-02.txt,
       June 2003.


  9. Contact Information                                   

  Hosei Matsuoka
  Multimedia Laboratories, NTT DoCoMo
  3-5, Hikarinooka Yokosuka        Phone: +81 468 40 3515
  Kanagawa 239-8536                Fax: +81 468 40 3788
  Japan                            E-mail: matsuoka@spg.yrp.nttdocomo.co.jp

  Takeshi Yoshimura
  Multimedia Laboratories, NTT DoCoMo
  3-5, Hikarinooka Yokosuka        Phone: +81 468 40 3515
  Kanagawa 239-8536                Fax: +81 468 40 3788
  Japan                            E-mail: yoshimura@spg.yrp.nttdocomo.co.jp





                      
                                                              
                                                             





 Hosei, et al.           Expires April, 2004                 [Page 7]
