
Network Working Group                                           A. Niemi
Internet-Draft                                          M. Garcia-Martin
Expires: April 20, 2005                                            Nokia
                                                        October 20, 2004


 Multi-party Message Sessions using the Message Session Relay Protocol
                                 (MSRP)
                       draft-niemi-simple-chat-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) defines a mechanism for
   sending session-based instant messages.  The session is negotiated
   using the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).  This document describes
   how MSRP can be used to create multi-party message sessions using the
   tightly coupled conferencing model.  It defines conventions and
   extensions for enabling features similar to many existing services in



Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   the Internet, e.g., Internet Relay Chat (IRC) based chat rooms, such
   as setting up nicknames, sending private messages to a subset of the
   multi-party conference, etc.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Multiparty Session Based Instant Messaging Conferencing  . . .  5
     5.1   Creating/deleting a chat room  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2   Sending instant messages within a chat room  . . . . . . .  6
     5.3   Procedures at the MSRP switch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.4   Procedures at the recipient  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Nicknames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1   Representation of a nickname . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2   Provision of nicknames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14


























Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
   [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions] defines a mechanism for sending a
   series of instant messages within a session.  The Session Initiation
   Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] allows for two peers to set up such a
   session.

   In another application of SIP, a user agent can join in a multi-party
   session or conference that is hosted by a specialized user agent
   called a conference focus [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework].
   Such a conference can naturally involve an MSRP session as media.
   The conference focus is responsible for relaying session-based
   instant messages received from one participant to all the other
   participants.

   A session-based instant messaging conference is sometimes also
   referred to as a chat room, and the conference focus is sometimes
   referred to as the chat room server.  Several of these types of
   systems already exist in the Internet.  Participants in a chat room
   can use a rich set of features, such as the ability of sending
   private instant messages to one or more participants, or to establish
   sub-conferences within the existing conference.

   The aim of this document is to define conventions, requirements and
   extensions for enabling features similar to many of these existing
   applications in the Internet, e.g., Internet Relay Chat (IRC) based
   chat rooms.  This memo uses the SIP Conferencing Framework
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework] as a design base to define
   a set of requirements for protocols such as SIP [RFC3261], SDP
   [RFC2327], and MSRP [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions] that enrich
   session based messaging conferences.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.

   This memo deals with a particular case of tightly coupled SIP
   conferences where the media exchanged consist of session-based
   instant messaging.  Unless otherwise noted, we use the terminology
   defined in the SIP Conferencing Framework
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework] applied to the scope of
   this document.  In addition to that terminology, we introduce some
   new terms:




Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   Nickname:  a descriptive name associated to a participant.  A
      nickname is non-routable pseudonym that the participant chooses
      for the purpose of additional identification towards the rest of
      the participants.

   Session-based instant messaging conference:  a particular case of a
      tightly coupled conference (as defined by the SIP Conferencing
      Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]) where the
      media exchanged between the participants consist of session based
      instant messages transported with MSRP
      [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions].  Typically a session based
      message conference is referred to as a chat room>.

   Chat room:  a session-based instant messaging conference.

   MSRP switch:  an MSRP endpoint that receives MSRP messages and
      redistributes them to each conference participant.  An MSRP switch
      has a similar role as a mixer (as defined by the SIP Conferencing
      Framework [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]), however an
      MSRP switch does not combine different input media streams; it
      merely distributes incoming MSRP messages to the conference
      participants.

   Private instant message:  a session based instant message whose
      intended list of destinations is explicitly signaled and is a
      subset of the conference participants, rather than all the
      participants of the conference.


3.  Motivation

   SIP already provides a Conferencing Framework
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework] that can be utilized in
   many types of conferencing applications, including session-based
   instant messaging conference.  It seems beneficial to provide a set
   of features that enhance the conference in order to compete in
   functionality with existing session-based instant messaging
   conference systems.

4.  Requirements

   A number of requirements that enrich the session based messaging
   conferences have already been described in Requirements for Instant
   Messaging in 3GPP Wireless Systems
   [I-D.niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs] or the Advanced Instant Messaging
   Requirements for the Session Initiation Protocol
   [I-D.rosenberg-simple-messaging-requirements].




Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   In addition, we define the following requirements:

   REQ-1:  A conference focus may be acting as the focus of a
           specialized conference where the media stream is composed of
           session-based instant messaging.
   REQ-2:  It must be possible that participants join or leave a
           particular session-based instant messaging conference.
   REQ-3:  The conference can host other medias than session based
           messaging.
   REQ-4:  It must be possible to inform the sender of a session based
           messaging about the acceptance of the message for
           distribution.
   REQ-5:  It must be possible to get the time-stamp at which the MSRP
           switch dispatched a message.
   REQ-6:  The message sequence witnessed by different endpoints must be
           identical across all the participants.
   REQ-7:  A conference participant must be able to determine the
           identity of the sender of the message.
   REQ-8:  A conference participant must be able to determine the target
           of the received message.  For instance, the message might be
           addressed to the whole conference, a sidebar conference or
           just the recipient of the message (private message).
   REQ-9:  It must be possible to set up a sidebar session with one or
           more participants of the conference.
   REQ-10: It must be possible to send a message to one or more
           participants of the conference (private instant message).
   REQ-11: A conference participant may have a nickname or pseudonym
           associated to him.
   REQ-12: It must be possible for a participant to change his nickname
           during the progress of the conference.
   REQ-13: It must be possible that a participant only reveals his
           nickname to the rest of the conference participants, but it
           does not reveal his SIP URI.
   REQ-14: On sending private messages, it might be possible that the
           sender sends private messages to participants who have only
           revealed their nickname, but not their routable SIP URI.
   REQ-15: It must be possible that the MSRP switch is a contributor
           that sends messages to the participants (e.g., message of the
           day, welcome message, server is shutting down, etc.)
   REQ-16: A session based instant messaging conference or sidebar
           conference can be characterized with a topic whose purpose is
           to identify the subject of conversation.
   REQ-17: A user with the appropriate privileges must be able to set
           and modify the topic of the conference or sidebar conference.

5.  Multiparty Session Based Instant Messaging Conferencing





Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


5.1  Creating/deleting a chat room

   Since we consider a chat room a particular type of conferences where
   the media happens to be session based instant messaging (MSRP), the
   methods defined by the SIP Conference Framework
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]to create and delete
   conferences are applicable to the chat room.

   Once a session based message conference is created, the conference is
   identified by a URI, like any other conference.  Participants are
   aware that the peer is a focus due to the presence of the "isfocus"
   feature tag in the Contact header field of the 2xx-class response to
   the INVITE request.  Participants are also aware that the mixer is an
   MSRP switch due to the presence of the 'message' media type and the
   MSRP [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions] in the SDP [RFC2327].

   In a one-to-one MSRP session, an instant message is identified by the
   transport connection on which they arrive and the resource
   identifier.  The endpoint can map the MSRP transport connection and
   resource identifier where the message was received to the SIP URI of
   the sender, through the SIP session that established the MSRP
   session.  In a chat room the problem becomes a bit more complicated.
   An endpoint has a single transport connection and resource identifier
   to the MSRP switch.  The MSRP switch is sending to the endpoint any
   instant message received from all of the other conference
   participants.  Therefore, an endpoint can only map the MSRP transport
   connection and resource identifier to the chat room URI, but the
   endpoint cannot identify the sender of the instant message.  It
   becomes necessary that each session-based instant message carries in
   it an identifier of the sender of the message.

   This is accomplished by wrapping each instant message in a
   'message/cpim' MIME type envelope, defined in RFC 3862 [RFC3862].
   The conference focus MUST use the 'message/cpim' as the top-level
   wrapper type in an SDP offer or answer, as defined in MSRP
   [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions].

5.2  Sending instant messages within a chat room

   MSRP provides for the existence of a SEND primitive that allows a
   sender to transport an instant message to the receiver.  The actual
   data is enclosed in a body.  MSRP mandates implementations to support
   the message/cpim format.  A conference-aware participant that sends
   an MSRP SEND request to an MSRP switch SHOULD enclose the contents of
   the actual message in a message/cpim MIME-type format.  The
   message/cpim format allows to wrap the actual instant message payload
   in other message formats such as text/plain, text/html, etc.




Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


      NOTE: Wrapping the actual contents into a message/cpim provides
      the session based messaging focus with better CPIM compatibility.
      Additionally, the focus may need to distribute copies of the
      messages to the rest of the participants in a message/cpim format,
      thus, if the sender sends the message already in message/cpim
      format the focus is relieved from the task of doing format
      conversion.

   A conference-aware participant that sends a session based instant
   message to an MSRP switch SHOULD populate the From header of the
   message/cpim wrapper with her nickname (see the nicknames discussion
   in Section Section 6.

   A conference-aware participant that sends a session based instant
   message addressed to the chat room or a sidebar chat room MUST set
   the To header of the message/cpim to the chat room URI or sidebar
   chat room, respectively.

   A conference-aware participant that sends a session based private
   instant message to one or more participants of the conference MUST
   include the nickname of the each of the intended receivers in either
   the To or Cc headers of the message/cpim.  SIP URIs might not be
   always available to the sender, e.g., if the participant decided not
   to expose her SIP URI for anonymity reasons, or there might not be
   means to bind the participant's SIP URI to his MSRP URI.

      OPEN ISSUE: the paragraph above assumes that the participant
      receives somehow the nicknames of each of the participants.  Is
      this assumption valid? Will the conference package have elements
      to include nicknames? Or shall we define that extension?

5.3  Procedures at the MSRP switch

   An MSRP switch can receive messages sent from either conference-aware
   participants or conference-unaware participants.  The former will
   follow the procedures indicated in this document and will send
   message/cpim wrapped messages.  It is not guaranteed that the latter
   will send a message/cpim message.

   On receiving an MSRP message, the MSRP switch MUST first inspect
   whether a message/cpim wrapper is inserted.  If it is, the MSRP
   switch then checks the From header of the message/cpim wrapper.  If
   the From header contains an IM URI scheme, then it is the nickname of
   the sender.  Then the MSRP switch checks the To and Cc headers of the
   message/cpim wrapper.  If the To or Cc headers contain a SIP URI,
   then the message is addressed to the whole chat room or a sidebar
   chat room.  The MSRP switch MUST determine the MSRP URIs of the
   participants of that chat room or sidebar SIP URI, and then the MSRP



Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   switch MUST generate a copy of the message/cpim message to each of
   those participants, including the sender of the message.  This
   message SHOULD contain a copy of the contents of the received
   message/cpim message, particularly the MSRP switch MUST preserve the
   contents of the From and To headers.  The MSRP switch SHOULD include
   a DateTime header in the message/cpim with an updated value of the
   date and time when the MSRP switch dispatched the message.  Once
   done, the MSRP switch SHOULD create a new MSRP SEND message request
   for each of the addressed participants and include the message/cpim
   message.

   If the From header of the message/cpim message does not include SIP
   URI, but an IM URI, then the MSRP switch determines that the message
   is a private message intended for a few recipients only.  The MSRP
   switch MUST examine the To and Cc headers of the message/cpim to find
   out the nicknames of all the intended recipients, and then the MSRP
   switch MUST determine from its table the MSRP URI of each of the IM
   URIs included in the To and Cc headers.  For each of the intended
   recipients, the MSRP switch MUST then the MSRP switch MUST generate a
   copy of the message/cpim message to each of those participants,
   including the sender of the message.  This message SHOULD contain a
   copy of the contents of the received message/cpim message,
   particularly the MSRP switch MUST preserve the contents of the From
   and To headers.  The MSRP switch SHOULD include a DateTime header in
   the message/cpim with an updated value of the date and time when the
   MSRP switch dispatched the message.  Once done, the MSRP switch
   SHOULD create a new MSRP SEND request for each of the addressed
   participants and include the message/cpim message.

   If the MSRP switch receives an MSRP SEND request that does not
   contain a message/cpim message, then it has been sent from a
   conference-unaware sender.  The MSRP switch shall wrap the contents
   of the message in a message/cpim message.  If The MSRP switch is
   aware of the sender's nickname somehow, it should populate it in the
   From header of message/cpim, otherwise it should populate the SIP URI
   of the sender.  The MSRP switch SHOULD set the To header to the SIP
   URI of the chat room.  Then the MSRP switch MUST create and send an
   MSRP SEND request containing the message/cpim to each of the
   participants of the conference, including the sender.

5.4  Procedures at the recipient

   Both conference-aware and conference-unaware participants will
   receive MSRP SEND requests that contains a message/cpim message from
   an MSRP switch.  The From header contains the nickname of the
   contributor.  The To and Cc headers contain the intended recipient
   list, which can either be the SIP URI of the chat room or sidebar
   chat room or sidebar chat room, o an IM URI containing the nickname



Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   of the intended recipient.

   If the recipient is subscribed to the conference event package at the
   focus, he can map the nickname of the sender or intended recipients
   with a SIP URI, providing that such participant didn't want to remain
   anonymous.

   The DateTime header of the message/cpim contains the date and time at
   which the MSRP switch dispatched the message.  This can be used to
   give an indication to the user.

   In other cases the received message was sent by the recipient itself.
   This gives the user an indication of the place in the sequence of
   messages where his message was inserted.

6.  Nicknames

   A common characteristic of existing chat room servers is that
   participants have the ability to identify themselves with a nickname
   to the rest of the participants in a conference.  This provides a
   layer of anonymity, whereby the user is authenticated and identified
   by the chat room server, but not by participants of the chat room.

   A nickname is a string of characters that serves for the purpose of
   identifying a participant to the rest of the participants of the
   conference.  A nickname can match the participant name, or identify
   any characteristic, but it can be any other string that is not
   associated with the participant at all.  A nickname can be also a
   collection of characters that do not make sense in any language, as a
   mechanism to provide some anonymity of the nickname.

   For the purpose of the chat room functionality, a nickname is also
   composed of a URI, which need not be a routable URI, nor it even need
   to be a SIP URI.  The MSRP switch needs to map this kind of URIs to
   the actual MSRP URI of a participant.  This allows to distribute
   private messages to participants that have not disclosed their SIP
   URI to the rest of the conference participants.

   Users are allowed to choose any nickname of their wish when they join
   the conference.  The only prerequisite is that the nickname is not
   already in used by another participant.  The nickname ought to be
   unique within the set of conference managed by the focus.  This
   property allows a participant to join several conferences hosted by
   the same focus and still keep the same nickname across all those
   conferences.  Note that we don't require a nickname to be globally
   unique, but just locally unique within the focus.

   Nicknames are non-routable identifiers.  A participant of a



Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   conference cannot derive the SIP or MSRP URI, or the IP address out
   of the nickname chosen by another participant.  Certainly the MSRP
   switch binds nicknames with their respective MSRP URIs, however, this
   binding exists only in the MSRP switch and is not visible to the
   participants of the chat room.  This property allows also a
   participant to send a private instant message to a second participant
   who is identified only by her nickname.

6.1  Representation of a nickname

   A nickname is syntactically defined as the combination of a display
   name and an IM URI.  The IM URI [RFC3860] may be a non-routable URI,
   since the purpose of the URI is not to identify a SIP or MSRP entity.
   This avoids routing based on the contents of a nickname.  A non
   routable URI may be created by appending ".invalid" to an existing
   domain name.

   We define conventions that allow to a sender to include a nickname in
   the From, To or Cc headers of a message/cpim document.  These headers
   are already defined in RFC 3862 [RFC3862] with the following syntax:

             From-header = "From" ": " [ Formal-name ] "<" URI ">"
             To-header   = "To"   ": " [ Formal-name ] "<" URI ">"
             Cc-header   = "cc"   ": " [ Formal-name ] "<" URI ">"

   A non-routable IM URI follows the format of a Network Access
   Identifier (NAI) (RFC 2486) [RFC2486].  Appending the domain
   ".invalid" to a NAI can make it non-routable.  We chose an IM URI
   rather than a SIP URI since the purpose of the URI is not to identify
   a SIP entity.

   Examples of nickname:

               "Prince of the snow" <im:johnny@example.com.invalid>

   A nickname is scoped to be valid in the focus address space.  The
   focus maintains a binding between nicknames and SIP URIs that allows
   to route private instant messages to the appropriate participant.
   However, this binding is not visible outside the focus, in
   particular, it is not visible to the participants of the conference.

   We represent nicknames in the From, To and Cc headers in the
   message/cpim.  If the message is a addressed to the whole chat room,
   the To header of the CPIM message contains the chat room SIP URI.  If
   the message is a private message addressed to a subset of the
   participants, To and Cc headers include the nicknames of each of the
   intended recipients.  The following examples shows a CPIM private
   message sent from a participant to a subset of the conference



Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   participants.

          Content-Type: message/cpim

          From: "Prince of the snow" <im:johnny@example.com.invalid>
          To: "Blue Arrow" <im:bluearrow@example.com.invalid>
          To: "Daisy" <im:daisy@example.com.invalid>
          Cc: "Hook" <im:doe@example.com.invalid>
          DateTime: 2004-01-28T15:43:00-02:00

          Content-Type: text/plain
          Content-ID: <092380923@foo.com>

          This is an example of a private instant message

   In any case, the sender of the instant message always follows the
   procedures defined in MSRP [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions] to
   compose an MSRP SEND request.

6.2  Provision of nicknames

   A participant of a conference controlled by a particular focus can
   setup his nickname by any means outside the scope of this document.
   For instance, the participant can log into a web page where he
   authenticates and sets up his nickname.

      OPEN ISSUE: Do we need to provide a mechanism with SIP to
      negotiate nicknames?

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not include any IANA considerations.

8.  Security Considerations

   In general, messages sent to a multi-party session based messaging
   focus are not deem to expose any security threat.  Nevertheless, if a
   participant wants to avoid eavesdropping from non authorized
   entities, it should send those messages a TLS [RFC2246] transport
   connection, as allowed by MSRP.

9.  References

9.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC2246]  Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0",
              RFC 2246, January 1999.

   [RFC2327]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
              Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [RFC2486]  Aboba, B. and M. Beadles, "The Network Access Identifier",
              RFC 2486, January 1999.

   [RFC2648]  Moats, R., "A URN Namespace for IETF Documents", RFC 2648,
              August 1999.

   [RFC3023]  Murata, M., St. Laurent, S. and D. Kohn, "XML Media
              Types", RFC 3023, January 2001.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler,
              "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [RFC3629]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [RFC3862]  Klyne, G. and D. Atkins, "Common Presence and Instant
              Messaging (CPIM): Message Format", RFC 3862, August 2004.

   [RFC3860]  Peterson, J., "Common Profile for Instant Messaging
              (CPIM)", RFC 3860, August 2004.

   [W3C.REC-xml-20001006]
              Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, C. and E. Maler,
              "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition)",
              W3C FirstEdition REC-xml-20001006, October 2000.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework]
              Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the
              Session Initiation Protocol",
              draft-ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework-03 (work in
              progress), October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-simple-message-sessions]
              Campbell, B., "The Message Session Relay Protocol",
              draft-ietf-simple-message-sessions-08 (work in progress),
              August 2004.






Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


9.2  Informative References

   [RFC3688]  Mealling, M., "The IETF XML Registry", BCP 81, RFC 3688,
              January 2004.

   [I-D.niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs]
              Niemi, A., "Requirements for Instant Messaging in 3GPP
              Wireless Systems", draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-02
              (work in progress), October 2003.

   [I-D.rosenberg-simple-messaging-requirements]
              Rosenberg, J., "Advanced Instant Messaging Requirements
              for the Session Initiation Protocol  (SIP)",
              draft-rosenberg-simple-messaging-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), February 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Aki Niemi
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 407
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN  00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 389 1644
   EMail: aki.niemi@nokia.com


   Miguel A. Garcia-Martin
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 407
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN  00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 480 4586
   EMail: miguel.an.garcia@nokia.com














Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Multiparty MSRP                 October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Niemi & Garcia-Martin    Expires April 20, 2005                [Page 14]

