





Internet Engineering Task Force
Internet Draft                                               Schulzrinne
                                                             Columbia U.
draft-schulzrinne-ieprep-resource-req-00.txt
April 21, 2002
Expires: October 2002


     Requirements for Resource Priority Mechanisms for the Session
                          Initiation Protocol

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document summarizes requirements for prioritizing access to PSTN
   and proxy resources for emergency preparedness communications using
   the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).


1 Introduction

   For voice-over-IP or, more generally, multimedia calls placed by
   authorized users during emergencies, there are four cases where
   certain calls may need to be treated with priority:

        1.   If PSTN gateway resources are scarce, authorized calls
             should be able to queue for resources and acquire outbound
             trunks with priority or, if local policy permits, preempt



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft              RP Requirements               April 21, 2002


             an existing call.

        2.   If a call originates from a circuit-switched network with
             multiple priority levels and traverses a VoIP network using
             SIP signaling on its way to another circuit-switched
             network with multiple priority levels, it is desirable that
             the priority information is not lost during transit.
             Similarly, calls originating on a VoIP terminal and
             terminating in the PSTN also need to be able to invoke the
             appropriate priority mechanism.

        3.   Resources in networks may be managed based on SIP calls.
             (This is not always desirable or feasible due to the
             divergence of media and signaling paths and the limited
             ability of session setup messages to express traffic
             characteristics, but it may be the only available mechanism
             absent a resource reservation protocol.) In such cases,
             policy may grant emergency preparedness or MLPP calls
             prioritized access.

        4.   In some circumstances, it may be appropriate to prioritize
             access to signaling resources (e.g., CPU cycles) in SIP
             proxies.

   Thus, SIP signaling requires a mechanism that allows the caller to
   indicate such priority.

   In the PSTN and certain private networks, such as those run by
   military organizations, calls are marked in various ways to indicate
   priorities.

   Below are some requirements for such a mechanism:

        Not specific to one domain: The mechanism should not be specific
             to one country or particular priority mechanism. For
             example, there are currently at least four priority schemes
             in widespread use: Q.735, with five levels, the U.S.
             defense network and NATO with five levels, the United
             States GETS (Government Emergency Telecommunications
             Systems) scheme with implied higher priority and the
             British GTPS system ???.

        Usage of existing namespaces: Since there are a number of
             existing resource priority schemes for both the PSTN and
             private networks, it is likely that hybrid or VoIP networks
             will inherit these naming schemes.

        Extensibility: New naming schemes may need to be defined as



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft              RP Requirements               April 21, 2002


             resource priority mechanism are applied in additional
             private networks, or if a VoIP-specific priority scheme is
             being defined.

        Separation of indication and policy: The indication should not
             request a particular detailed treatment, as it is likely
             that this depends on the nature of the resource and local
             policy.

        Default behavior: Network terminals configured to use priority
             scheme A may occasionally end up making calls in a network
             that does not support such a scheme or the terminal may
             have an older list of priorities in a namespace.

        Multiple simultaneous schemes: Some user agents will need to
             support multiple different priority schemes, as several
             will remain in use in networks run by different agencies
             and operators. (Not all user agents will have the means of
             authorizing callers using different schemes, and thus may
             be configured at run-time to only recognize certain
             namespaces.)

        Discovery: A terminal should be able to discover which priority
             name spaces are supported by a particular proxy or user
             agent (gateway).

   Priority mechanisms can be roughly categorized by whether they use a
   priority queue for resource attempts or whether they preempt existing
   resource uses (e.g., calls). The choice between these mechanisms
   depends on the operational needs and characteristics of the network,
   e.g., on the number of active requests in the system and the fraction
   of prioritized calls. Generally, if the number of prioritized calls
   is small compared to the system capacity and the system capacity is
   large, it is likely that another call will naturally terminate in
   short order when a higher-priority call arrives. Thus, it is
   conceivable that the system indication can sometimes cause
   preemption, while otherwise it just

   Some namespaces may inherently imply a preemption policy, while
   others may be silent on whether preemption is to be used or not,
   leaving this to local entity policy.

   Similarly, the precise relationships between labels, e.g., what
   fraction of capacity is set aside for each priority level, is also a
   matter of local policy. This is similar to how differentiated
   services labels are handled.

2 Relationship to Emergency Call Services



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft              RP Requirements               April 21, 2002


   The resource priority mechanisms are used to have selected
   individuals place calls with elevated priority during times when the
   network is suffering from an emergency-induced shortage of resources.
   Generally, calls for emergency help placed by non-officials (e.g.,
   "911" and "112" calls) don't need resource priority under normal
   circumstances.  If such emergency calls are placed during emergency-
   induced network resource shortages, the call identifier itself is
   sufficient to identify the emergency nature of the call. Adding an
   indication of resource priority may be less appropriate, as this
   would require that all such calls carry this indicator. Also, it
   opens another attack mechanism, where non-emergency calls are marked
   as emergency calls. (If the entity can recognize the request URI as
   an emergency call, it would not need the resource priority
   mechanism.)

3 Security Requirements

   Any resource priority mechanism can be abused to obtain resources and
   thus deny service to other users. While the indication itself does
   not have to provide separate authentication, any SIP request carrying
   such information has higher authentication requirements than regular
   requests.

4 Acknowledgements

   James Polk provided helpful comments.

5 Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Dept. of Computer Science
   Columbia University
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue
   New York, NY 10027
   USA
   electronic mail: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu















Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 4]

