
INTERNET-DRAFT          Expires February 1997             INTERNET-DRAFT

Network Working Group                                         M. Schultz
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                    NUMNet
Updates RFC 1591                                             August 1996
Category:  Informational


     Creation of and Registration in the ".NUM" Top Level Domain

                 <draft-rfced-info-schultz-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   "working draft" or "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the internet-drafts Shadow
   Directories on:

         ftp.is.co.za (Africa)
         nic.nordu.net (Europe)
         ds.internic.net (US East Coast)
         ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast)
         munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim)

Introduction

This Internet-Draft describes the creation, registration requirements,
and administration of the new top level domain (TLD) NUM.

Definition

NUM is the TLD provided for the registration of an individual's or
organization's in-service, assigned telephone number as the second
level domain (SLD).  Those numbers or letters are recognized as a
phone number by the NUM extension.  It is international in nature.

Creation

The NUM TLD has been created to meet the growing demand in the
Internet community for more top level domain name options.  The
creation of this new TLD is supported by the assertion that the
impetus for designing the domain name system (DNS) was to accommodate
growth on the Internet and designed to be "intentionally extensible"
(RFC 1034).  Therefore, NUM was created to serve as an additional
choice for any entity that chooses to be classified by its in-service,
assigned telephone number.

The original goal for the DNS system was for a more clear, concise
classification system (RFC 1591), giving each individual or
organization a unique, easily identifiable domain.  NUM will fit
within these parameters, while creating a new way to be classified.
Using an in-service, assigned telephone number as a second level
domain will greatly reduce instances of trademark infringement
conflict, as well as reduce the unnecessary registering of prospective
domain names, i.e. "domain name hoarding".  It will also provide
organizations the opportunity to have a unified corporate identity to
facilitate phone number recognition through printed materials.



Schultz                                                         [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            NUM Top Level Domain               August 1996


Registration Requirements.

       1. The SLD must be the registering party's telephone number
              assigned to them by their servicing telephone company.
       2. The telephone number must be in working order at the time
              of registration and must remain in working order while
              registered to the holding individual or organization.
       3. The SLDs in the US must contain the area code and seven
              digit telephone number, e.g. 123-456-7890.
       4. The SLDs outside the US must contain the country code and
              the telephone number, e.g. country-city-telephone
              number.=20
       5. The telephone number may be represented by numerals or
              letters if the letters directly correspond to the
              numerical telephone number, e.g. "800-555-CARS.NUM",
              on the standard telephone key pad.

Administration

The administration of NUM will be provided by NUMNet of Fairfax,
Virginia, in accordance with the requirements set forth in RFC 1591.
This Internet-Draft updates 1591 in the categories which list the
other TLDs and their designated managers.

Security Considerations

Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

References

	[1]  Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and
        Delegation", RFC 1591, USC/Information Sciences Institute,
        March 1994.

	[2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names-Concepts and
        Facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034, USC/Information Sciences
        Institutes, November 1987.


Author's Address

	Mark Schultz
	NUMNet
	12817 Shadow Oak Lane
	Fairfax, VA  22033
        Phone:  703-391-1946
	Fax:  703-620-5472=20
	Email:  Schultz@num.net=20



Schultz                                                         [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Expires February 1997             INTERNET-DRAFT
