


Geopriv Working Group                                           A. Busin
Internet-Draft                                                    Y. Jin
Intended status: Standards Track                            M. Mosmondor
Expires: May 22, 2008                                          S. Loreto
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            Nov 19, 2007


Requirements for a Location Quality of Service (QoS) Information Object
                draft-busin-geopriv-location-qos-req-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes requirements for Location Quality of Service
   (QoS) Information that may be carried both in the Geopriv Layer 7
   Location Configuration Protocol (L7 LPC) and in the Location
   Dereference Protocol (LDP) requests.  The Location QoS Information is
   used for expressing the required or desired level of quality,
   accuracy, response time, and age of requested Location Information.



Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   The resulting Location Information is conveyed in existing location
   formats wrapped in GEOPRIV privacy extensions to the Presence
   Information Document Format (PIDF-LO) [RFC4119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Location QoS Information benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Location QoS Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Horizontal accuracy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Vertical accuracy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  Age of the Location Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Response Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.5.  QoS class  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Location QoS Information Object Requirements . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11


























Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


1.  Introduction

   GEOPRIV working group is standardizing the transmission of the
   Location Information through a direct, or indirect mechanisms.

   o  A Geopriv Layer 7 Location Configuration Protocol (L7 LPC) is used
      by a device or middlebox to acquire a location information which
      already exist from a server within an access network.  The
      requirements for a Location Configuration Protocol are listed in
      [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps].
   o  A Location Dereference Protocol (LPD) is used by a client to query
      a location dereference server (e.g.  LIS), based on location URI
      input and which returns location information (e.g., a PIDF-LO).
      The requirements for a Location Dereference Protocol (LDP) are
      listed in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements].

   Location QoS is described with a set of location QoS parameters
   (i.e., positioning accuracy, location response time, etc.) and
   corresponding values.

   Different services and applications that use Location Information may
   require different location QoS.  For example, the positioning
   accuracy may be an important parameter for some services/
   applications.  The minimum acceptable positioning accuracy for
   various services/applications may vary from meters (e.g., in
   navigation) to kilometers (e.g., in local weather reports).  In such
   a context it should be possible to specify required location QoS in
   terms of defining an acceptable set of parameters and their values to
   provide a valid response to the location request.  A valid location
   response is considered as a response that fulfills the location QoS
   requirements specified in the location request.

   Both the [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps] and the
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements] do not identify requirements for
   Location QoS.

   This document defines requirements for a Location QoS Information
   needed for expressing the required level of location QoS.  This is
   achieved by defining a required set of location QoS parameters that
   are of relevance to the recipient of Location Information (Location
   Recipient).

1.1.  Location QoS Information benefits

   The purpose of Location QoS Information is "for expressing the
   required level of Location QoS".  This has two main benefits:





Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   1.  The recipient will not receive (and pay for) Location Information
       that it is useless to him.  For example, the parent seeking his
       children; if parent is unable to specify what accuracy it needs,
       it may receive Location Information that states "child is in
       somewhere in the circle area of 200 km in radius".  This
       information is clearly quite useless for the parent.
       Nevertheless, the recipient (parent) will probably have to pay
       for this information.
   2.  It allows Location Server to decide which source (or technique)
       for location/position determination to use.  For example, should
       it use more accurate positioning that will take long time to
       respond, or lower (but satisfying) accuracy with quicker
       response?


2.  Requirements Terminology

   The capitalized key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL",
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
   interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Terminology

   This document reuses the terminology of [RFC3693] such as Location
   Information (LS), Target, Location Server (LS), and Location
   Recipient (LR).

3.1.  Terms

   Location QoS :  the required or desired level of quality, accuracy,
      response time, and age of requested Location Information.
   Location QoS Information :  A parameter conveying required or desired
      location QoS information.


4.  Location QoS Information

   This section of the document describes location QoS information that
   is used to express a required or desired level of location service
   quality, in terms of minimum horizontal and vertical accuracy,
   maximum response time, and maximum age of requested Location
   Information.

   This document defines the following as the list of location QoS
   parameters:




Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   o  horizontal accuracy
   o  vertical accuracy
   o  age
   o  response time
   o  QoS class

4.1.  Horizontal accuracy

   Usually the position of a Target is expressed as a point (either in
   two or three dimensions) and an area or volume of positioning
   uncertainty around that point.  The size of positioning uncertainty
   area/volume can be used as a measure of positioning accuracy.  If the
   uncertainty area/volume is smaller, the positioning accuracy is
   higher.

   The horizontal accuracy of Location Information is described with
   maximum horizontal size of a positioning uncertainty area/volume.

   The horizontal accuracy parameter specifies maximum acceptable
   horizontal size of a positioning uncertainty area/volume.

   If this parameter is not present, the Location Server may include
   Location Information with any horizontal accuracy as long as
   requirements defined with other QoS parameters are fulfilled.

   The Location Server shall normally attempt to satisfy or approach as
   closely as possible the requested horizontal accuracy when other
   location QoS parameters are not in conflict.  The achieved accuracy
   level of Location Information shall be indicated using the shapes and
   uncertainty areas as described in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile].

4.2.  Vertical accuracy

   The vertical accuracy of Location Information is described with
   maximum vertical size of a positioning uncertainty area/volume.

   The vertical accuracy parameter specifies maximum acceptable vertical
   size of a positioning uncertainty area/volume.

   If this parameter is not present, the Location Server may include
   Location Information with any vertical accuracy as long as
   requirements defined with other QoS parameters are fulfilled.

   The Location Server shall normally attempt to satisfy or approach as
   closely as possible the requested vertical accuracy when other
   location QoS parameters are not in conflict.





Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


4.3.  Age of the Location Information

   The age parameter states the maximum allowable age of the Location
   Information that is being sent in a response to a Location Recipient.
   This Location Information may have been cached in the system from a
   previous location query.

   If this parameter is not present, the Location Server may include
   Location Information of any age as long as requirements defined with
   other QoS parameters are fulfilled.

   The Location Server shall normally attempt to satisfy or approach as
   closely as possible the requested age when other location QoS
   parameters are not in conflict.

4.4.  Response Time

   Response time is defined as the time needed for the Location Server
   to send a response with the Location Information after having
   received a location request.  Different Location Recipients may have
   different requirements for the response time.  In some cases the
   response time may depend on the positioning accuracy and on age of
   the Location Information.  This relation may be dependent on the
   positioning technique that is used to determine a Target's position.
   The Location Server may need to make trade-offs between these three
   parameters.

   The response time parameter defines maximum allowable time needed for
   the Location Server to send a response with the Location Information
   after having received a location request.

   If this parameter is not present, the Location Server may respond
   with Location Information at any time as long as requirements defined
   with other QoS parameters are fulfilled.

   The Location Server shall normally attempt to satisfy or approach as
   closely as possible the requested response time when other location
   QoS parameters are not in conflict.

4.5.  QoS class

   The QoS class defines the degree of adherence of the location service
   to given QoS parameters: horizontal and vertical accuracy, response
   time, and age of Location Information.

   There are two location QoS classes defined: "Assured" and "Best
   effort" [3GPP.22.071].




Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   The "Assured" location QoS class presumes strict adherence to given
   QoS parameters.  The Location Server must obtain Location Information
   while fulfilling the requirements set by the other QoS parameters
   (horizontal and vertical accuracy, age, and response time).  If the
   location response does not satisfy QoS parameters, the response will
   be discarded by the Location Server.

   The "Best effort" location QoS class presumes that QoS parameters are
   not adhered to strictly.  The Location Server shall obtain Location
   Information while fulfilling the requirements set by the other QoS
   parameters, but it will not discard the response if other QoS
   parameters are not satisfied.

   The "Best effort" class is considered as the default QoS class in the
   case that there is no location QoS class parameter definition
   provided in the request.


5.  Location QoS Information Object Requirements

   The Location Recipient may request that the Location Server provides
   it with the GEOPRIV location information concerning a particular
   Target [RFC3693].  In a location request, the Location Recipient MAY
   optionally include one or more Location QoS Information parameters
   that defines required location QoS.  The using protocol for the
   exchange of Location QoS Information is out of the scope of this
   document.

   Req. 1.(Location QoS Information generalities):

   1.1)  Geopriv MUST specify Location QoS Information, both in syntax
      and semantics, that SHOULD be insert in the LCP and LDP request;
      the Location QoS information MUST be supported and understood by
      the Location Recipient and the Location Server.
   1.2)  The Location QoS Information MAY be optional.  This means that
      a Location QoS Information MAY not be present in a LCP or DLP
      request.
   1.3)  Some of the Location QoS Information MAY be defined as
      "extensions".  This means that the syntax or semantics of these
      QoS Information is not fully defined in the basic Location QoS
      Information definition, but their use may be limited to one or
      more of the using protocols.
   1.4)  The Location QoS Information MUST be extensible, allowing the
      definition of new parameters or attributes.







Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   1.5)  The Location QoS Information SHOULD be usable in a variety of
      protocols, such as HTTP and SIP.

   Req. 2.(Location QoS Information Object fields) The Location QoS
   Information Object definition MUST contain the following fields,
   which MAY be optional to use:

   2.1)  horizontal accuracy parameter
   2.2)  vertical accuracy parameter
   2.3)  age parameter
   2.4)  response time parameter
   2.5)  QoS class parameter


6.  Security Considerations

   Privacy and security considerations related to Location Information
   are discussed in detail in [RFC3693].


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by the IANA.


8.  Acknowledgments


9.  Normative References

   [3GPP.22.071]
              3GPP, "Location Services (LCS); Service description; Stage
              1", 3GPP TS 22.071 3.5.0, March 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps]
              Tschofenig, H. and H. Schulzrinne, "GEOPRIV Layer 7
              Location Configuration Protocol; Problem Statement and
              Requirements", draft-ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps-05 (work in
              progress), September 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements]
              Marshall, R., "Requirements for a Location-by-Reference
              Mechanism", draft-ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements-01 (work
              in progress), October 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile]
              Winterbottom, J., Thomson, M., and H. Tschofenig, "GEOPRIV
              PIDF-LO Usage Clarification, Considerations and



Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


              Recommendations", draft-ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile-10
              (work in progress), October 2007.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC3693]  Cuellar, J., Morris, J., Mulligan, D., Peterson, J., and
              J. Polk, "Geopriv Requirements", RFC 3693, February 2004.

   [RFC4119]  Peterson, J., "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object
              Format", RFC 4119, December 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Aeke Busin
   Ericsson
   Stockholm
   Sweeden

   Email: ake.busin@ericsson.com


   Yufeng Jin
   Ericsson
   Shanghai
   China

   Email: yufeng.jin@ericsson.com


   Miran Mosmondor
   Ericsson
   Krapinska 45
   Zagreb  10000
   Croatia

   Email: miran.mosmondor@ericsson.com










Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


   Salvatore Loreto
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: Salvatore.Loreto@ericsson.com












































Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for QoS Location Filtering        Nov 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Busin, et al.             Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 11]


