



Network Working Group                                         I. Bryskin
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                                    X. Liu
Expires: April 19, 2018                                            Jabil
                                                                A. Clemm
                                                                  Huawei
                                                             H. Birkholz
                                                          Fraunhofer SIT
                                                                 T. Zhou
                                                                  Huawei
                                                        October 16, 2017


YANG PUSH Based Generalized Network Control Automation Problem Statement
             draft-bryskin-netconf-automation-framework-00

Abstract

   This document describes the objective of the YANG PUSH based
   generalized network control automation framework.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Network Control Automation           October 2017


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   YANG "Custom Subscription to Event Notifications" model
   [I-D.ietf-netconf-subscribed-notifications] allows for a network
   client automation of network remote monitoring.  Specifically, using
   this model, a network client can subscribe on and receive one or more
   data streams, each associated with one or more events defined by YANG
   model(s) governing the network's YANG data store(s).  The client can
   also tailor said streams to its needs by specifying filters on the
   streams contents, but, otherwise, the client has no control on the
   stream contents.  For example, the client has no way of expanding a
   stream to carry additional information that was not defined to be a
   part of said stream.

   YANG "Subscribing to YANG datastore push updates" model
   [I-D.ietf-netconf-yang-push], which is an augmentation of the "Custom
   Subscription to Event Notifications" model, defines a higher level of
   network remote monitoring automation - it allows for the client
   itself to define the origins, trigger/maintain conditions and
   contents of data streams to be sent by the network to the client.
   This capability is modeled via target-trigger-notify constructs,
   which allow for the client to specify data store nodes of interest
   and, possibly, sub-trees rooted by them (targets), conditions to
   trigger and maintain associated with them streams (e.g. particular
   change(s) in one or more of the nodes attributes), the contents of
   the streams and filters to further fine-tune the streams according to
   the client's needs.

   It could be observed that the notify part of the target-trigger-
   notify construct stands for "send me notification', which is one of,
   generally speaking, many actions the client might want the network to



Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Network Control Automation           October 2017


   perform, provided that the target-trigger condition holds.  For
   example, instead of sending a notification with some pre-denied
   content, the client might want the network to perform:

   a.  immediate network re-configuration (e.g. modification of one or
       more attributes of one or more CONFIG=TRUE data store nodes);

   b.  scheduling one time or periodic such reconfigurations in the
       future;

   c.  calling an RPC defined by one of the YANG models supported by the
       network ( e.g. calling network's path computer to evaluate
       whether an alternative/more optimal path is available for a given
       connection);

   d.  Dynamic linking/unlinking parent and child data stores supported
       by the network;

   e.  etc.

   It could also be observed that "periodic" and "on-change" are two of
   the conditions that the client might want.  The conditions can be
   expanded to be a logical expression of other event states and some
   operational data states of the network., as well, as outputs of RPCs.

2.  Objective

   The main objective of the YANG PUSH Based Generalized Network Control
   Automation framework is to generalize the target-trigger-notify
   construct into event-condition-action construct, where:

   event
      a particular change in the network state explicitly defined by one
      of the YANG models supported by the network or implicitly defined
      by the client, which is constantly monitored by the network;

   condition
      a logical expression that is evaluated only once after the
      associated event is detected;

   action
      an operation (non-exhaustive list of which is described above) to
      be carried out by the network when the associated event is
      detected and the associated condition is met.

   The client will be able to describe the desired network behavior by
   configuring with the network event-condition-action triplets as rules
   prior to any services provided by the network to the client.  Such an



Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Network Control Automation           October 2017


   approach will take the client out of the network control loop, thus,
   changing the client's role from being network's "micro-manager" to
   being network's "police officer", which interferes into network
   operations only in exceptional/unpredicted situations.

   There are numerous benefits to such paradigm, including:

   o  lower latency, faster responsiveness of the network to various
      events/conditions;

   o  better scale (e.g. the client may control more networks because it
      does not have to monitor/micro-manage any of them);

   o  CPU and bandwidth savings due to the reduced amount of
      communication between the client and the network.

   It is envisioned that the YANG PUSH Based Generalized Network Control
   Automation framework will fit well within "SUPA Policy-based
   Management Framework"
   [I-D.ietf-supa-policy-based-management-framework], which will
   inherently provide a higher level of automation, for example, by:

   a.  combining multiple micro-conditions into a single macro-condition
       via a number of logical operations;

   b.  combining multiple micro-actions into a single transaction with a
       possibility of specifying policies with respect to handling
       errors/exceptions of each of the transaction components.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not define networking protocols and data, hence
   are not directly responsible for security risks.

5.  Acknowledgements

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References








Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Network Control Automation           October 2017


   [I-D.ietf-netconf-subscribed-notifications]
              Voit, E., Clemm, A., Prieto, A., Nilsen-Nygaard, E., and
              A. Tripathy, "Custom Subscription to Event Notifications",
              draft-ietf-netconf-subscribed-notifications-05 (work in
              progress), October 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-netconf-yang-push]
              Clemm, A., Voit, E., Prieto, A., Tripathy, A., Nilsen-
              Nygaard, E., Bierman, A., and B. Lengyel, "Subscribing to
              YANG datastore push updates", draft-ietf-netconf-yang-
              push-10 (work in progress), October 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-supa-policy-based-management-framework]
              LIU, W., Xie, C., Strassner, J., Karagiannis, G., Klyus,
              M., and J. Bi, "SUPA Policy-based Management Framework",
              draft-ietf-supa-policy-based-management-framework-03 (work
              in progress), July 2017.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>.

   [I-D.ietf-supa-generic-policy-data-model]
              Halpern, J. and J. Strassner, "Generic Policy Data Model
              for Simplified Use of Policy Abstractions (SUPA)", draft-
              ietf-supa-generic-policy-data-model-04 (work in progress),
              June 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-supa-generic-policy-info-model]
              Strassner, J., Halpern, J., and S. Meer, "Generic Policy
              Information Model for Simplified Use of Policy
              Abstractions (SUPA)", draft-ietf-supa-generic-policy-info-
              model-03 (work in progress), May 2017.

Authors' Addresses

   Igor Bryskin
   Huawei Technologies

   EMail: Igor.Bryskin@huawei.com


   Xufeng Liu
   Jabil

   EMail: Xufeng_Liu@jabil.com



Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Network Control Automation           October 2017


   Alexander Clemm
   Huawei

   EMail: ludwig@clemm.org


   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT

   EMail: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


   Tianran Zhou
   Huawei

   EMail: zhoutianran@huawei.com



































Bryskin, et al.          Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 6]
