Network Working Group                                    Praveen Muley 
Internet Draft                                       Mustapha Aissaoui 
Expires: May 2008                                        Matthew Bocci 
                                                    Pranjal Kumar Dutta 
                                                          Marc Lasserre 
                                                         Alcatel-Lucent  
                                                          
                                                        Jonathan Newton 
                                                       Cable & Wireless 
                                                                       
                                                            Olen Stokes 
                                                       Extreme Networks 
                                                                       
                                                      Hamid Ould-Brahim 
                                                                 Nortel 
                                                                       
                                                           Luca Martini 
                                                     Cisco Systems Inc. 
 
                                   
                                                      November 19, 2007 
                                      
               Preferential Forwarding Status bit definition 
               draft-muley-dutta-pwe3-redundancy-bit-02.txt 


Status of this Memo 

    

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 19, 2008. 

Abstract 

   This document describes a mechanism for standby status signaling of 
   redundant PWs between their termination points. A set of redundant 
   PWs is configured between PE nodes in SS-PW applications, or between 
   T-PE nodes in MS-PW applications.  

   In order for the PE/T-PE nodes to indicate the preferred PW path to 
   forward to one another, a new status bit is needed to indicate a 
   preferential forwarding status of active or standby for each PW in 
   the redundancy set.  

   In addition, a second status bit is defined to allow peer PE/T-PE 
   nodes to coordinate a switchover operation of the PW/MS-PW path. 

    

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction................................................3 
   2. Motivation..................................................4 
   3. Terminology.................................................5 
   4. Modes of Operation..........................................5 
      4.1. Independent Mode:.......................................5 
      4.2. Master/Slave Mode:......................................6 
   5. Signaling procedures of PW State Transition..................7 
      5.1. PW Standby notification procedures in Independent mode...8 
      5.2. PW Standby notification procedures in Master/Slave mode..8 
         5.2.1. PW State Machine...................................9 
      5.3. Coordination of PW Path Switchover.....................11 
         5.3.1. Procedures at the requesting endpoint.............12 
         5.3.2. Procedures at the receiving endpoint..............13 
   6. Applicability and Backward Compatibility....................14 
   7. Security Considerations.....................................14 
   8. IANA Considerations........................................14 
      8.1. Status Code for PW Preferential Forwarding Status.......14 
      8.2. Status Code for PW Request Switchover Status...........15 
   9. Acknowledgments............................................15 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   10. References................................................15 
   Author's Addresses............................................15 
   Full Copyright Statement.......................................16 
   Intellectual Property Statement................................17 
   Acknowledgment................................................17 
    
1. Introduction 

   In single-segment PW (SS-PW) services such as VPWS and VPLS, 
   protection for the PW is provided by the PSN layer. This may be an 
   RSVP LSP with a FRR backup and/or an end-to-end backup LSP. There are 
   however applications where PSN protection is insufficient to fully 
   protect the PWE3 service and pseudowire redundancy is required. These 
   scenarios are described in [5]. 

   In a VPWS service, this is used to provide access AC redundancy to a 
   CE device which is dual-homed to target PE nodes. In a HVPLS service, 
   this is used to provide access PW redundancy to the MTU device which 
   is dual-homed to two PE-r devices. PSN protection mechanisms cannot 
   protect against failure of the target PE node or the failure of the 
   remote AC. These scenarios rely on a set of two or more pseudowires 
   to protect a given PWE3 service. Only one of these pseudowires is 
   used by the PEs to forward user traffic on at any given time. This is 
   the active PW. The other PWs in the set are considered standby and 
   are not used for forwarding unless they become active. 

   In order to support access AC or access PW redundancy, at least one 
   of the PEs on which a PW terminates must be different from that on 
   which the primary PW terminates, as described in [5]. Figure 1 
   illustrates an application of Active and Standby PWs.  

        

        |<-------------- Emulated Service ---------------->| 
         |                                                  | 
         |          |<------- Pseudo Wire ------>|          | 
         |          |                            |          | 
         |          |    |<-- PSN Tunnels-->|    |          | 
         |          V    V                  V    V          | 
         V    AC    +----+                  +----+     AC   V 
   +-----+    |     | PE1|==================|    |     |    +-----+ 
   |     |----------|....|...PW1.(active)...|....|----------|     | 
   |     |          |    |==================|    |          | CE2 | 
   | CE1 |          +----+                  |PE2 |          |     | 
   |     |          +----+                  |    |          +-----+ 
   |     |          |    |==================|    | 
   |     |----------|....|...PW2.(standby)..|    | 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   +-----+    |     | PE3|==================|    | 
              AC    +----+                  +----+ 
 
 
                   Figure 1: Reference Model for PW Redundancy 

   In multi-segment PW (MS-PW) applications, multiple MS-PWs are 
   configured between a pair of T-PE nodes. The paths of these MS-PWs 
   are diverse and are switched at different S-PE nodes. Only one of 
   these MS-PWs is active at any given time. The others are put in 
   standby. In these applications, PW redundancy is important to provide 
   resilience in the event of failure of S-PE node since PSN protection 
   mechanisms cannot.  

   This document specifies a new PW status bit to indicate the 
   preferential forwarding status of the PW for the purpose of notifying 
   the remote PE of the active/standby state of each PW in the 
   redundancy set. This status bit is different from the operational 
   status bits already defined in the PWE3 control protocol [2]. In 
   addition, a second status bit is defined to allow peer PE/T-PE nodes 
   to coordinate a switchover operation of the PW/MS-PW path.  

2. Motivation    

   The PWE3 control protocol [2] defines the following status codes to 
   indicate the operational state for an AC and a PW: 

   0x00000000 - Pseudowire forwarding (clear all failures) 

   0x00000001 - Pseudowire Not Forwarding 

   0x00000002 - Local Attachment Circuit (ingress) Receive Fault 

   0x00000004 - Local Attachment Circuit (egress) Transmit Fault 

   0x00000008 - Local PSN-facing PW (ingress) Receive Fault 

   0x00000010 - Local PSN-facing PW (egress) Transmit Fault 

   The scenarios defined in [5] allow the provisioning of a primary PW 
   and one or many secondary PWs in the same VPWS or VPLS service. 

   A PE node makes a selection of which PW to activate at any given time 
   for the purpose of forwarding user packets. This selection takes into 
   account the local operational state of the PW as well as the remote 
   operational state of the PW as indicated in the status bits of the PW 
   it received from the peer PE node.  
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   In the absence of faults, all PWs are operationally UP both locally 
   and remotely and a PE node needs to select a single PW to forward 
   user packets to. This is referred to as the active PW. All other PWs 
   will be in standby and must not be used to forward user packets.  

   In order for both ends of the service to select the same PW for 
   forwarding user packets, it is proposed that a PE node communicates a 
   new status bit to indicate the forwarding state of a PW to its peer 
   PE node.  

   In addition, a second status bit is defined to allow peer PE/T-PE 
   nodes to coordinate a switchover operation of the PW/MS-PW path if 
   required by the application..  

3. Terminology 

   UP PW:  A PW which has been configured (label mapping exchanged 
             between PEs) and is not in any of the PW defect states 
             specified in [2]. Such a PW is available for forwarding 
             traffic. 

   DOWN PW: A PW that has either not been fully configured or has been 
             and is in any of the PW defect states specified in [2]. 
             Such a PW is not available for forwarding traffic.  

   Active PW: An UP PW used for forwarding user traffic. 

   Standby PW: An UP PW that is not used for forwarding user traffic. 

   PW Endpoint: A PE where a PW terminates on an NSP e.g. A SS-PW PE, an 
           MS-PW T-PE, or a VPLS MTU or PE-r. 

4. Modes of Operation    

   There are two modes of operation for the use of the PW preferential 
   forwarding status bits:  

   o Independent mode  

   o Master/Slave mode. 

4.1. Independent Mode: 

   PW endpoint nodes independently select which PW they intend to make 
   active and which PWs they intend to make standby. They advertise the 
   corresponding Active/Standby forwarding state for each PW. Each PW 
   endpoint compares local and remote status and uses the PW that is 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   operationally UP at both endpoints and that shows Active states at 
   both the local and remote endpoint.  

   In steady state, a PE will always find an Active PW. However, it is 
   possible that due to a misconfiguration, such a PW is not found. The 
   behavior of a PE in this case is outside the scope of this document. 

   There may also be transient conditions where endpoints do not share a 
   common view of the active/standby state of the PWs. This could be 
   caused by propagation delay of the T-LDP status messages between 
   endpoints. In this case, the behavior of the receiving endpoint is 
   outside the scope of this document. 

   Thus, in this mode of operation, the following definition of Active 
   and Standby PW states apply: 

   o Active State                                                  

   A PW is considered to be in Active state when the PW labels are 
   exchanged between its two endpoints in control plane, and the status 
   bits exchanged between the endpoints indicate the PW is UP and Active 
   at both endpoints. In this state user traffic can flow over the PW in 
   both directions. 

   o Standby State 

   A PW is considered to be in Standby state when the PW labels are 
   exchanged between its two endpoints in the control plane, but the 
   status bits exchanged indicate the PW is in Standby state at one or 
   both endpoints. In this state the endpoints MUST NOT forward data 
   traffic over the PW but MAY allow PW OAM packets, e.g., VCCV, to be 
   sent and received in order to test the liveliness of standby PWs. 

4.2. Master/Slave Mode: 

   One endpoint node of the redundant set of PWs is designated the 
   Master and is responsible for selecting which PW both endpoints must 
   use to forward user traffic. 

   The Master indicates the forwarding state in the Active/Standby 
   status bit. The other endpoint node, the Slave, MUST follow the 
   decision of the Master node based on the received status bits.   

   One endpoint of the PW, the Master, actively selects which PW to 
   activate and uses it for forwarding user traffic. This status is 
   indicated to the Slave node by setting the preferential forwarding 
   status bit in the status bit TLV to Active. It does forward user 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   traffic to any other of the PW's in the redundant set to the slave 
   node and indicates this by setting the preferential forwarding status 
   bit in the status bit TLV to Standby for those PWs. The master node 
   MUST ignore any Active/Standby status bits received from the Slave 
   nodes.  

   The Slave endpoint(s) are required to act on the status bits received 
   from the Master. When the received status bit transitions from Active 
   to Standby, a Slave node MUST stop forwarding over the previously 
   active PW. When the received status bit transitions from Standby to 
   Active for a given PW, the Slave node MUST start forwarding user 
   traffic over this PW.  

   There is a single PE/T-PE Master PW endpoint node and one or many 
   PE/T-PE PW endpoint Slave nodes. The assignment of Master/Slave roles 
   to the PW endpoints is performed by local configuration. 

   In this mode of operation, the following definition of Active and 
   Standby PW states apply: 

   o Active State                                                  

   A PW is considered to be in Active state when the PW labels are 
   exchanged between its two endpoints in control plane, and the status 
   bits exchanged between the endpoints indicate the PW is UP at both 
   endpoints, and the forwarding status sent by the Master endpoint 
   indicates Active state. In this state user traffic can flow over the 
   PW in both directions. 

   o Standby State 

   A PW is considered to be in Standby state when the PW labels are 
   exchanged between its two endpoints in the control plane, but the 
   status bits sent by the Master endpoint indicate the PW is in Standby 
   state. In this state the endpoints MUST NOT forward data traffic over 
   the PW but MAY allow PW OAM packets, e.g., VCCV, to be sent and 
   received. 

5. Signaling procedures of PW State Transition 

   This section describes the extensions proposed and the processing 
   rules for the extensions. It defines a new "PW preferential 
   forwarding" bit in Status Code that is to be used with PW Status TLV 
   proposed in RFC 4447 [2]. The PW preferential forwarding bit when set 
   is used to signal Standby state of PW by one terminating point to the 
   other end. 

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

5.1. PW Standby notification procedures in Independent mode 

   PW endpoint nodes independently select which PW they intend to use 
   for forwarding, and which PWs they do not, based on the specific 
   application. They advertise the corresponding Active/Standby 
   forwarding state for each PW. This advertisement occurs in both the 
   initial label mapping message and in a subsequent notification 
   message when the forwarding state transitions as a result of a state 
   change in the specific application. 

   Each endpoint compares the updated local and remote status and 
   effectively activates the PW which is operationally UP at both 
   endpoints and which shows both local Active and remote Active states.  

   When a PW is in active state, the endpoints can forward both user 
   packets and OAM packets.  

   When a PW is in standby state, the endpoints MUST NOT forward user 
   packets over the PW but MAY forward PW OAM packets. 

   For MS-PWs, S-PEs MUST relay the PW status notification containing 
   both the operational and preferential forwarding status bits between 
   ingress and egress PWs. 

5.2. PW Standby notification procedures in Master/Slave mode 

   Whenever the Master PW endpoint "actively" selects or deselects a PW 
   for forwarding user traffic at its end, it explicitly notifies the 
   event to the remote Slave endpoint.  The slave endpoint carries out 
   the corresponding action on receiving the PW state change 
   notification.  

   If the PW preferential forwarding bit in PW Status TLV received by 
   the slave is set, it indicates that the PW at the Master end is not 
   used for forwarding and is thus kept in the Standby state, the PW 
   MUST also not be used for forwarding at Slave endpoint. Clearance of 
   the PW Preferential Forwarding bit in PW Status TLV indicates that 
   the PW at the Master endpoint is used for forwarding and is in Active 
   state, and the receiving Slave endpoint MUST activate the PW if it 
   was previously not used for forwarding.   

   This mechanism is RECOMMENDED to be used with PWs signaled in groups 
   with common group-id in PWid FEC Element or Grouping TLV in 
   Generalized PWid FEC Element defined in [2]. When PWs are provisioned 
   with such grouping a termination point sends a single "wildcard" 
   Notification message using a PW FEC TLV with only the group ID set, 
   to denote this change in status for all affected PW connections. This 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   status message contains either the PW FEC TLV with only the Group ID 
   set, or else it contains the PW Generalized FEC TLV with only the PW 
   Grouping ID TLV. As mentioned in [2], the Group ID field of the PWid 
   FEC Element, or the PW Grouping TLV used with the Generalized ID FEC 
   Element, can be used to send status notification for all arbitrary 
   set of PWs. For example, Group-ID in PWiD may be used to send 
   wildcard status notification message for a group of PWs when PWid FEC 
   element is used for PW state signaling. When Generalized PWiD FEC 
   Element defined is used in PW state signaling, PW Grouping TLV may be 
   used for wildcard status notification for a group of PWs. 

   For MS-PWs, S-PEs MUST relay the PW status notification containing 
   both the operational and preferential forwarding status bits between 
   ingress and egress PW segments. 

5.2.1. PW State Machine  

   It is convenient to describe the PW state change behavior in terms of 
   a state machine. The PW state machine is explained in detail in the 
   two defined states and the behavior is presented as a state 
   transition table. The same state machine is seamlessly applicable to 
   PW Groups.  

    

                     PW State Transition State Table 

    

      STATE         EVENT                                 NEW STATE 

       

      ACTIVE        PW put in Standby (master)             STANDBY 

                    Action: Transmit PW preferential forwarding bit set 

    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding    STANDBY   

               bit set   

                    Action: Stop forwarding over PW  

    

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding    ACTIVE 

                    bit set but bit not supported  

                    Action: None 

    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding      ACTIVE       

               bit clear  

                    Action: None. 

    

    

      STANDBY       PW activated (master)              ACTIVE 

                    Action: Transmit PW preferential forwarding bit   
               clear 

    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding      ACTIVE              

               bit clear  

                    Action: Activate PW  

    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding      STANDBY             

               bit clear but bit not supported 

                    Action: None 

    

                    Receive PW preferential forwarding      STANDBY  

               bit set 

                    Action: No action 

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

5.3. Coordination of PW Path Switchover 

   There are PW redundancy applications which require that PE/T-PE nodes 
   coordinate the switchover to a PW/MS-PW path such that both endpoints 
   will be forwarding over the same path at any given time. One such 
   application of redundant MS-PW paths is identified in [5]. Multiple 
   MS-PWs are configured between a pair of T-PE nodes. The paths of 
   these MS-PWs are diverse and are switched at different S-PE nodes. 
   Only one of these MS-PWs is active at any given time. The others are 
   put in standby. The endpoints follow the Independent Mode procedures 
   to activate the PW which is UP and advertised Active 'preferential 
   forwarding' status bit by both endpoints. 

   The trigger for sending a request to switchover of the path of the 
   MS-PW by one endpoint can be due to an operational event, example a 
   failure, which caused the endpoints to not be able to match the 
   Active 'preferential forwarding' status bit. The other trigger is the 
   execution of an administrative maintenance operation by the network 
   operator in order to move the traffic away from the node/links to be 
   serviced. 

   Unlike the case of a Master/Slave mode of operation, the endpoint 
   requesting the switchover requires explicit acknowledgement from the 
   peer endpoint that the request is honored before it switches the path 
   of the PW. Furthermore, any of the endpoints can make the request to 
   switchover. 

   A new status bit is proposed to have a PE/T-PE node request the 
   switchover to its peer. This bit will be referred to as 'request PW 
   switchover' status bit. The 'preferential forwarding' status bit 
   continues to be used by each endpoint to indicate its current local 
   settings of the active/standby state of each PW in the redundancy 
   set. In other words, like in the Independent mode, it indicates to 
   the far-end which of the PWs is being used to forward packets and 
   which is being put in standby. It can thus be used as a way for the 
   far-end to acknowledge the requested switchover operation. 

   The following procedures must be followed by both endpoints of a 
   PW/MS-PW to coordinate the switchover of the PW/MS-PW path. These 
   procedures are enabled only when the user configured the use of the 
   'request switchover' status bit at both endpoints.  

   S-PEs nodes MUST relay the PW status notification containing the 
   operational status bits, as well as the 'preferential forwarding' and 
   'request switchover' status bits between ingress and egress PW 
   segments. 

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

5.3.1. Procedures at the requesting endpoint  

   a. The requesting endpoint sends a LDP status notification message 
      with the 'request switchover' bit set on the PW it desires to 
      switch to.  

   b. The endpoint does not activate forwarding on that PW/MS-PW at 
      this point in time. It may however enable receiving on that 
      PW/MS-PW. Thus the 'preferential forwarding' status bit still 
      reflects the currently used PW path. 

   c. The requesting endpoint starts a timer while waiting the remote 
      endpoint to acknowledge the request. 

   d. If while waiting for the acknowledgment, the requesting endpoint 
      receives a request from its peer to switchover to the same or a 
      different PW path, it must perform the following: 

            i. If its system IP address is higher than that of the peer, 
               this endpoint ignores the request and continues to wait 
               for the acknowledgement from its peer. 

           ii. If its system IP address is lower than that of its peer, 
               it aborts the timer and immediately starts the 
               procedures of the receiving endpoint in Section 5.3.2.  

   e. If while waiting for the acknowledgment, the requesting endpoint 
      receives a status notification message from its peer with the 
      'preferential forwarding' status bit set in the requested PW, it 
      must treat this as an explicit acknowledgment of the request and 
      must perform the following: 

            i. Abort the timer. 

           ii. Activate the PW path.  

          iii. Send an update status notification message with the 
               'preferential forwarding' status bit set to the newly 
               active PW and the 'request switchover' bit reset in all 
               PWs in the redundancy set.  

   f. If while waiting for the acknowledgment, the requesting endpoint 
      detects that the requested PW went into operational Down state 
      locally, and could use an alternate PW which is operationally UP, 
      it must perform the following: 

            i. Abort the timer. 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

           ii. Issue a new request to switchover to the alternate PW. 

          iii. Re-start the timer. 

   g. If while waiting for the acknowledgment, the requesting endpoint 
      detects that the requested PW went into operational Down state 
      locally, and could not use an alternate PW which is operationally 
      UP, it must perform the following: 

            i. Abort the timer. 

           ii. Send an update status notification message with the 
               'preferential forwarding' status bit unchanged and the 
               'request switchover' bit reset in all PWs in the 
               redundancy set. 

   h. If while waiting for the acknowledgment, the timer expired, the 
      requesting endpoint assumes the request is rejected and will 
      either issue a new request or do nothing. 

   i. If the requesting node receives the acknowledgment after the 
      request expired, it will treat it as if the remote endpoint 
      unilaterally switched the path of the PW without issuing a 
      request. In that case, it may issue a new request and follow the 
      requesting endpoint procedures to synchronize transmit and 
      receive paths of the PW. 

5.3.2. Procedures at the receiving endpoint 

   a. Upon receiving a status notification message with the 'request 
      switchover' bit set on a PW different from the currently active 
      one, and the requested PW is operationally UP, the receiving 
      endpoint must perform the following: 

            i. Activate the PW.  

           ii. Send an update status notification message with the 
               'preferential forwarding' status bit set to the newly 
               active PW and the 'request switchover' bit reset in all 
               PWs in the redundancy set. 

   b. Upon receiving a status notification message with the 'request 
      switchover' bit set on a PW different from the currently active 
      one, and the requested PW is operationally Down, the receiving 
      endpoint must perform the following: 

            i. Ignore the request and do nothing. 
 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

6. Applicability and Backward Compatibility 

   The mechanism defined in this document is OPTIONAL and is applicable 
   to PWE3 applications where standby state signaling of PW or PW group 
   is required.  

   A PE implementation that uses the mechanisms described in this 
   document MUST negotiate the use of PW status TLV between its T-LDP 
   peers as per RFC 4447 [2]. If PW Status TLV is found to be not 
   supported by either of its endpoint after status negotiation 
   procedures, then the mechanisms specified in this document cannot be 
   used. 

   A PE implementation compliant to RFC 4447 [2], and which does not 
   support the generation or processing of the 'preferential forwarding' 
   status bit or of  the 'request switchover'status bit, will not set 
   these bits in the status bits transmitted to a peer PE and will not 
   examine them in the received status bits from a peer PE. The 
   mechanisms specified in this document cannot be used. 

7. Security Considerations  

   This document uses the LDP extensions that are needed for protecting 
   pseudo-wires. It will have the same security properties as in the 
   PWE3 control protocol [2]. 

8. IANA Considerations   

    

   We have defined the following codes for the pseudo-wire redundancy 
   application.  

    

8.1. Status Code for PW Preferential Forwarding Status  

    

   0x00000020 When the bit is set, it indicates "PW forwarding  

              standby".  

              When the bit is cleared, it indicates "PW forwarding  

              active". 

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

8.2. Status Code for PW Request Switchover Status  

    

   0x00000040  When the bit is set, it represents "Request switchover to 
           this PW". 

           When the bit is cleared, it represents no specific    
           action. 

9. Acknowledgments  

   The authors would like to thank Vach Kompella, Kendall Harvey, 
   Tiberiu Grigoriu, John Rigby, Prashanth Ishwar, Neil Hart, Kajal 
   Saha, Florin Balus and Philippe Niger for their valuable comments and 
   suggestions. 

10. References  

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2]  Martini, L., et al., "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance using 
         LDP", RFC 4447, April 2006.  

   [3]  Martini, L., et al., "Segmented Pseudo Wire", draft-ietf-pwe3-
         segmented-pw-05.txt, July 2007. 

   [4]  Bryant, S., et al., " Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) 
         Architecture", RFC 3985, March 2005 

   [5]  Praveen, Pranjal et al., "draft-muley-pwe3-redundancy-01.txt", 
         March 2007.  

    

Author's Addresses 

   Praveen Muley 
   Alcatel-lucent 
   701 E. Middlefiled Road  
   Mountain View, CA, USA  
   Email: Praveen.muley@alcatel-lucent.com 
    



 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   Mustapha Aissaoui   
   Alcatel-lucent   
   600 March Rd   
   Kanata, ON, Canada K2K 2E6   
   Email: mustapha.aissaoui@alcatel-lucent.com   
    

   Matthew Bocci 
   Alcatel-Lucent 
   Voyager Place, Shoppenhangers Rd 
   Maidenhead, Berks, UK SL6 2PJ 
   Email: matthew.bocci@alcatel-lucent.co.uk 
    
   Pranjal Kumar Dutta  
   Alcatel-Lucent   
   Email: pdutta@alcatel-lucent.com  
        
   Marc Lasserre  
   Alcatel-Lucent  
   Email: mlasserre@alcatel-lucent.com  
    
   Jonathan Newton 
   Cable & Wireless 
   Email: Jonathan.Newton@cw.com 
    
   Olen Stokes  
   Extreme Networks  
   Email: ostokes@extremenetworks.com   
        
   Hamid Ould-Brahim   
   Nortel  
   Email: hbrahim@nortel.com    
    
   Luca Martini 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   9155 East Nichols Avenue, Suite 400 
   Englewood, CO, 80112 
   Email: lmartini@cisco.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.  

 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft   Preferential Forwarding Status Bit      November 2007 
    

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

       

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    




 
 
Muley et al.            Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 17] 

