



INTAREA Working Group                                          S. Bryant
Internet-Draft                                               U. Chunduri
Intended status: Informational                                 T. Eckert
Expires: September 10, 2020                                     A. Clemm
                                             Futurewei Technologies Inc.
                                                          March 09, 2020


                   Forwarding Layer Problem Statement
                   draft-bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps-00

Abstract

   This document considers the new use cases for IP together with the
   network capabilities and services that will be needed to address
   those use cases.  It then looks at the underlying packet requirements
   and considers the changing deployment models and the issues with
   existing packet designs that need to be addressed.  It concludes by
   looking at some parameters of a solution.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 10, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Forwarding Layer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  New Use Cases for packet networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Video and AR/VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Role of Fixed Networks in 5G and Beyond 5G  . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  New Network Capabilities and Services . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  New Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2.  New Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Underlying New Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.1.  Better than Best Effort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2.  Efficient Packet Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.3.  Forwarding Identifiers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.4.  Operational visibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.5.  Holistic solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Deployment Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.1.  Edge-2-Edge Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2.  End-2-End Model Single Provider . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.3.  End-2-End Model with multiple Providers . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.4.  Embedded Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.5.  Embedded Global Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   6.  Existing Protocol and Layering Challenges and Gaps  . . . . .  17
     6.1.  Challenges with IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       6.1.1.  The End-to-End Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       6.1.2.  Fixed Address Length  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     6.2.  Better Than Best Effort E2E Network Services  . . . . . .  22
     6.3.  Adaptive Bit-rate Video streaming . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.4.  DetNet and Higher Precision Networking Service  . . . . .  24
     6.5.  Forwarding Plane vs. Control Plane  . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     6.6.  User-Network/Network-User Interface Signaling . . . . . .  26
   7.  Candidate Solution Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     7.1.  Variable Length Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     7.2.  Address Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     7.3.  Multiple Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     7.4.  Node and Path Specific Processing Instructions  . . . . .  28
     7.5.  Integrated Assurance and Verification . . . . . . . . . .  28
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   10. Appendix 1: Expanded Summary of Sub-G1 Use Cases  . . . . . .  29
     10.1.  Holographic-type communications  . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     10.2.  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations . . . . . . . . .  30
     10.3.  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks  . . . . . . . . .  30



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


     10.4.  ManyNets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   11. Appendix 2: Expanded Summary of Sub-G2 New Network
       Capabilities and Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
     11.1.  New Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
       11.1.1.  High-Precision Communications Services . . . . . . .  32
       11.1.2.  In-time Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
       11.1.3.  On-time Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
       11.1.4.  Coordinated Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
       11.1.5.  Qualitative Communication Services . . . . . . . . .  34
     11.2.  New Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
       11.2.1.  Manageability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
       11.2.2.  High Programmability and Agile Lifecycle . . . . . .  35
       11.2.3.  Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
       11.2.4.  Trustworthiness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
       11.2.5.  Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
       11.2.6.  Privacy-Sensitive  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
       11.2.7.  Accountability and Verifiability . . . . . . . . . .  39
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45

1.  Introduction

   There is an emerging set of new requirements that exceed the network
   and transport services of the current Internet, which only delivers
   "best effort" service.  While many controlled or private networks
   include further services, such as other DiffServ QoS in addition to
   best effort and traffic engineering with bandwidth guarantees, the
   solutions used today only support walled gardens and are thus not
   available to application service providers and consumers across the
   Internet.

   The purpose of this document is to look at current, evolving and
   future use cases and to examine the shortcomings that the existing
   network and transport layer protocols a well as their associated
   control plane need to overcome to meet these needs.

   The IETF is the body responsible for the long term evolution of the
   IP protocol suit, but is missing a work track to discuss the long-
   term Internet network architecture evolution.  In particular it lacks
   a programme for the long term evolution of IP itself.

   Approximately 30 years ago, the IETF started a process to
   revolutionize the IPv4 [RFC0791] Internet Protocol.  In this process,
   researchers, industry, and service providers got together, and
   brought up a number of new proposals, and worked toward a successor
   to IPv4, which became IPv6 [RFC2460] and later [RFC8200].



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   30 years later, there is heavy resistance to anything more than minor
   incremental evolutions to IPv6.  There are a number of reasons for
   this ranging from opinions that all future IP needs can be met
   through minor incremental evolutions to fears that major proposals
   for innovation at the IP would be an unwelcome disrupter to the
   current business of the vendors or the service providers.

   The authors take no position on the scale of the problem or the
   difficulties of deploying any solutions at scale in the Internet.
   What we seek to do is to establish the scope and nature of the
   problem.  A decision on which aspects of the problem are economically
   tractable is out of scope of this text, but technologies to support
   monetization are not.

   As a problem statement, this documents goal is to not propose or
   promote specific solutions to the problems raised.  Instead it uses
   references to not Internet adopted, but proposed or existing
   solutions only as example evidence that the described problem can
   actually be solved.

   Because the document does not propose specific solutions, it also
   does not attempt to structure the problem description in a way that
   would identify sub-set of problems to be resolved by specific
   solution components.

   The purpose of this text is thus to stimulate discussion on the
   emerging needs of the forwarding layer and to start the process of
   determining how they are best satisfied within the IETF protocol
   suite.

1.1.  Forwarding Layer

   The term "forwarding layer" is used in this document because none of
   the standard terms encompass the parts of the network stack that need
   attention to address the needs of the applications that are foreseen.

   It is possible that development work will need to reach down to layer
   2.5 in order to ensure that packets are handled correctly down to the
   physical layer.  The MAC layer is quite sophisticated and includes
   its own switching function so we need to be sure that the good work
   done in the network layer is not undone lower down the stack.
   Equally it is possible that development work will need to reach into
   the transport layer to address new approaches to congestion and to
   ensure that the network layer understands the requirements placed on
   it by the application.  An open mind is needed on the boundaries of
   the layers as they exist today when analyzing the consequential
   network changes needed to support the evolving application space.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   In the network layer itself, this document is only concerned with the
   forwarding component, not path selection or the other components of
   routing.

   Thus we use the term forwarding layer to describe the scope of the
   stack that this document addresses.

2.  New Use Cases for packet networks

   This section summarizes the use case areas that have been observed by
   the authors and are considered relevant to the following analysis of
   gaps.

   This section is structured into sub-sections discussing either group
   of use cases directly or the work of specific groups that are
   identifying use cases and that may also work on identifying issues
   and or proposed architectures or solutions for them.

   Subsections are ordered from what might be considered to be the most
   near-term use cases to the potentially most far reaching ones.

2.1.  Video and AR/VR

   Audio/Video streaming for production, entertainment, surveillance and
   other purposes, and interactive audio/video are the most ubiquitous
   applications on the Internet and private IP networks after web-
   services.  They have grown primarily through an evolution of the
   applications to work with the constraints of todays Internet and
   adopting pre-existing infrastructure such as content caches: best-
   effort streaming with adaptive video, no service guaranteees for most
   services, and co-location of caches with large user communities.  In
   environments where more than best-effort services for these
   applications are required and deployment of current technologies to
   support them is feasible, it is done.  Examples include DiffServ or
   even on or offpath bandwidth reservations in controlled networks.

   Networked AR/VR is a very near term set of use cases, where solution
   models are very much attempting to use and expand existing solution
   approaches for video network streaming but where the limits of above
   current best practices are also amplified by the larger bandwidth
   requirements and stricter latency and jitter requirements of AR/VR.

   To ensure a good user experience, for live Virtual Reality (VR), a
   much higher resolution than 8K video is required.  In addition to the
   high bandwidth requirements of VR, there needs to be a supporting
   transmission network to provide a communications path with bounded
   low latency as well.  This stringent VR latency requirement is a
   challenge to existing networks.



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   In cellular networks, even though the the air interface link latency
   needed is significantly reduced e.g. with New Radio (5GNR), the end-
   to-end (E2E) requirements for live VR is harder to meet.  This is
   because of the fixed L2/IP/MPLS networks in front/mid/backhaul
   components, and because of the best effort nature of the packet
   delivery systems in these networks.

2.2.  Role of Fixed Networks in 5G and Beyond 5G

   The 5G and beyond 5G (B5G) services are not meant to be limited to
   the 5G-NR (new-radio).  In fact for those services relating to uRLLC,
   mMTC and eMBB packet networks have evolve along with the radio
   technologies.  While 5G-NR protocol stack has evolved to provide per-
   frame reliability and latency guarantees, the IP/MPLS transport
   network by and large remains best-effort.  It is no longer possible
   to solve network problems simply by increasing the capacity.  The
   expectations 5G devices have of 5G networks, can not be met without
   improving IP/MPLS based backhaul networks.  For example, the 5G based
   systems involve machine to machine communications, generally using
   command-based smaller payloads.  In this case the overheads of packet
   headers and overlays become apparent when computing latency budget of
   such packets.

   The IETF has produced a large body of work on the deterministic needs
   of network applications [RFC8578].  These range from refinements and
   expansions of above summarized Audio/Video and AR/VR use cases over
   gaming into many more "industrial" use cases.  Industrial use cases
   generally involve industrial controllers for high-precision machinery
   and equipment, such as robotic arms, centrifuges, or manufacturing
   equipment for the assembly of electronic components.
   These use cases have in common that they require delivery of packets
   with very precise and "deterministic" performance characteristics, as
   the controlled equipment and the control loops involved have very
   exact timing requirements and are not tolerant of any latency
   variations, as otherwise control loop issues and other undesired
   effects may occur.
   Specifically, the use cases involve curtailing maximum latency that
   could be incurred.  However, deterministic networking, by itself,
   does not appear to be sufficient to meet all of the emerging needs.

2.3.  ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030

   The ITU-T has been running a Focus Group (FG) Network-2030
   [FGNETWORK2030] to analyze the needs of networks in the period post
   2030.  This work started in July 2018 and has been an open process
   with contribution by a cross-section of the networking industry.
   Because this is non-IETF work, this section summarizes the currently
   finalied key findings of the ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030 to make



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   it easier for the reader to better undersstand the work.  Note that
   this work is still ongoing and additional findings may be published.

   The Focus Group Network 2030 considered a number of use cases that it
   was postulated would need to be addressed in the 2030 time-frame and
   the technology gaps that need to be bridged in order to address these
   needs.  It then considered a number of new network services that
   would be needed to support these services.

   An ongoing piece of work on the architecture of the network post 2030
   has not yet been completed at the time of writing and is only
   partially discussed in this document.

   The reader is referred to [WP], [NET2030SubG2], [UC] for information
   beyond that provided in this summary.

   ITU-T FG NET2030 Sub-group Sub-G1 (Sub-G1) considered a number of use
   cases that it considered to be representative of the network needs
   post 2030.  These needs are legitimate needs in their own right, but
   as is always the case act as poster-children for new applications
   that will inevitable conceived in the light of the new network
   capabilities that we postulate to be necessary.

   o  Holographic-type communications (HCT)

   o  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations (TIRO)

   o  Network and Computing Convergence (NCC)

   o  Digital Twin (DT)

   o  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks (STIN)

   o  ManyNets

   o  Industrial IoT (IIoT) with cloudification.

   Further information on these use cases is provided in Section 10, and
   in the ITU documents [UC] and [WP].

   Note to the reader: Unlike ITU-T Study Groups which are restricted to
   members, ITU-T Focus Groups are open to anyone without payment.  At
   the time of writing, ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030 material that is
   not available for anonymous download, is accessible for free by
   joining the Study Group.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


3.  New Network Capabilities and Services

   In order to support the use cases presented in Section 2, a number of
   new network services will be needed.  Likewise, a number of
   additional more general network capabilities will becoming
   increasingly important.  Neither services nor capabilities are
   sufficiently supported to the degree that will be required by
   Internet technology in use today.

   This section describes these services and capabilities at a high
   level.  It builds on a corresponding analysis that was conducted at
   ITU-T FG-NET2030; readers are referred Section 11 for further detail
   and, of course, to output produced by that group [NET2030SubG2] for a
   more complete explanation of their considerations.

3.1.  New Services

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies a number of network services that will be
   needed to support many of the new use cases.  These network services
   are divided into two categories:

   o  Foundational Services (FS) require which dedicated support on some
      or all network system nodes which are delivering the service
      between two or more application system nodes.

   o  Compound Services (CS) are composed of one or more foundational
      services, and are used to make network services easier to consume
      by certain applications or categories of use cases.  An example of
      a CS would be a Tactile Internet Service which consisted of
      tactile control channel and a haptic feedback channel.

   The following are a set of Foundational Services :

   o  High-Precision Communications Services: services with precisely
      defined service level objectives related to end-to-end latency.
      Three high-precision communications services that have so far been
      proposed:

      *  In-time Services: services that require end-to-end latency
         within a quantifiable limit.  This service is similar to the
         service provided by DetNet [RFC8655] but with more demanding
         applications which need to be satisfied over IP.

      *  On-time Services: services require end-to-end-latency to be of
         an exact duration.

      *  Coordinated Services: Coordinated services require multiple
         interdependent flows to be delivered with the same end-to-end



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


         latency, regardless of any (potential additional) service level
         objective.

   o  Qualitative Communication Services: services that are able to
      suppress retransmission of less relevant portions of the payload
      in order to meet requirements on latency by applications that are
      tolerant to this.

   These are described in more detain in Section 11.1.

3.2.  New Capabilities

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies also a number of network capabilities that
   will become increasingly important going forward, in addition to the
   support for any particular services.
   A number of those need to be taken into consideration from the very
   beginning when thinking about how future data-planes need to evolve.
   These capabilities are described in more detail in Section 11.2.

   o  Manageability: Many of the services that need to be supported in
      the future will require advances in measurements and telemetry
      will be required in order to monitor and validate that promised
      service levels are indeed being delivered.  These will requires
      advanced instrumentation that is ideally built.

   o  High Programmability and Agile Life-cycle: Methods to provide
      operators need to be able to rapidly nd easily introduce new
      network services and adapt to new contexts and application needs.

   o  Security and Trustworthiness: New mechanisms are needed to
      authorize packets to enter the network from a host or from another
      network, and for them to then receive the required premium service
      that can operate.  This must operate without impacting the latency
      and MTU requirements.  This security mechanism has to protect both
      the network, the user data and the user privacy, but still expose
      sufficient information to the network that the correct premium
      service can be delivered.

   o  Resilience: Ultra-low-latency requirements and the huge increase
      of bandwidth demands of new services such as holographic type
      communication services make retransmission as a mechanism to
      recover data that was lost in transit increasingly less feasible.
      Therefore, network resilience and avoidance of loss becomes more
      importance that it is for best effort networks.

   o  Privacy-Sensitive: There is a growing awareness of the lack of
      privacy in the Internet and its implications.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


      New network services have to be sensitive to and comply with
      heightened user privacy expectations.
      At the same time, the need for privacy needs to be balanced with
      legitimate needs of network providers to operate and maintain
      their networks, which requires some visibility into what is
      happening on the network and how it is being used.  There are a
      variety of privacy-related requirements that ensue, such as:

      *  Anonymization

      *  Opaque User data

      *  Secured Storage

      *  Flow anonymization

   o  Accountability and Verifiability: Provision of the methods to
      account for an verify delivery of premium services.

4.  Underlying New Requirements

4.1.  Better than Best Effort

   The current Internet is essentially of best-effort system, but future
   applications require high-precision KPIs on throughput, latency and
   packet loss for industrial manufacturing, control, automation, and
   machine-to-machine communications.

   With upcoming Cellular technologies (5G/B5G) there is a need for
   Service Providers to expand the type of customers for metropolitan
   size networks to address their better than best-effort traffic needs.

   DetNet has been proposed to support this, however:

   o  Only some aspects of DetNet currently only run on top of current
      IP/IPv6.

   o  DetNet service is too constrained: It only supports constant bit
      rate (CBR), reserved bandwidth.  It does not support flexible
      bandwidth.  The notion of contracts in a future development of the
      forwarding layer will support more flexible managed bandwidth and
      managed latency contracts for traffic.

4.2.  Efficient Packet Design

   The ratio of useful data in the payload to overhead has a direct
   financial impact on communication links; these links are of finite
   capacity and hence have a finite cost-per-unit-data that can be



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   calculated.  The capacity used to transport information as compared
   to the overhead which is unavailable for use by a customer, but
   required to transmit is often expresses as a good-put efficiency and
   can be related to cost to transmit payload data.

   o  There is a need to support large number of low power user
      equipment (UE) devices (low-power IoTs) connecting through various
      radio networks (LTE/5G/B5G) where spectral efficiency is needed.
      This needs to be achieved without header compression techniques
      like as [RFC6282] since, compression can result in additional
      processing and energy consumption overhead.

   o  The handling network protocol headers, requires that portions of
      each packet be held in memory or buffer structures; the more
      levels of information which need to be held for processing by
      network nodes, the more memory space will be required, and this
      directly effects the cost of operation and cost of manufacture/
      provision of such equipment.

   On the other hand, in various non-constrained environments where
   various network layer functionalities are desired, there are
   different set of requirements.  For example:

   o  Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6) parameter encoding
      [I-D.filsfils-spring-srv6-network-programming] in the SRv6 SID
      [I-D.ietf-6man-segment-routing-header] is limited by the prefix
      portion of the IPv6 address.

   o  In Identifier Locator Addressing (ILA), the identifier (ID)
      portion of the address length is limited because of 128 bits
      limit.

4.3.  Forwarding Identifiers

   Developments in IPv6 [I-D.filsfils-spring-srv6-network-programming]
   formalize a trend that has been happening for a long time: the
   morphing of network layer addresses into forwarding identifiers (FI).
   However, constraining FIs to a fixed size ill serves the development
   of the forwarding layer.  There are clear cases as illustrated above
   where it would be useful to have shorter network layer addresses.
   Equally we can see that there will be future cases where 128 bits may
   be insufficient to specify a forwarding operation.  The requirement
   is thus to formally introduce the concept of forwarding identifiers
   in place of network layer addresses, and use a forwarding identifier
   construct that supports multiple semantics and multiple, possibly
   fully variable, lengths.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


4.4.  Operational visibility

   Network operators crave facilities that let them better understand
   and fine tune detailed network behavior, which are hard to retrofit
   with current IP/IPv6.

   The rise of machine learning has led to the expectation of being able
   to better optimize networks This in turn leads to the increase of
   network telemetry as a source of data to base these systems on.  In-
   Situ OAM (IOAM) [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data] represents one of the
   latest developments in that space, allowing the data plane to piggy-
   back telemetry data onto individual packets in order to diagnose and
   fine-tune service levels such as latency or jitter.  However, there
   are several issues with this approach:

   o  MTU issues limit amount of data that can be obtained.  With IOAM
      packet size increases with number of data items and number of
      hops.

   o  The data that can be obtained is very limited.

   o  The OAM data volume can easily exceeds that of production traffic
      which is wasteful

   o  There is no ability to aggregate OAM data, or make context
      dependent OAM collection.

   o  Integration with other solutions such as DetNet is unclear.

   While useful, IOAM exposes the limits of what add-on solutions can
   provide.  Solutions that provide visibility at the level of flows or
   that provide automatic verification of Service Level Objectives are
   missing entirely.

4.5.  Holistic solution

   It needs to be also recognized that it will not be sufficient for
   solutions to support new services and capabilities one at a time and
   independently from one another.  Instead, solutions need to be
   holistic and be able to support new services and capabilities in
   integrated fashion and simultaneously.
   For example, better-than-best-effort, operational visibility, and
   efficient packet design should go together, without leading to
   additional integration problems ore requiring users to to make a
   choice.

   This is in contrast to the current piecemeal approach, in which
   solutions for any one particular problem may well be developed but



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   emerge one at a time, resulting in fragmented solutions that are may
   be hard to integrate.

5.  Deployment Models

   Service requirements from networks and security implications vastly
   differ in various deployment models as categorized below.

5.1.  Edge-2-Edge Model

   This is the traditional service provider deployment where various
   network services (VPN, security, Bandwidth..) are offered to the
   endpoints of the communication and other providers.  Such
   capabilities are purchased through contract with the service provider
   and are typically expensive.

   These networks predominantly use MPLS technology though native IP
   (IPv4/IPv6) with GRE and IPv6 with routing extension headers with
   SRv6 are being deployed recently.

                ..................................
         +---+ . +---+        Single        +---+ . +---+
         |CE1|---|PE1|---..  Provider  ..---|PE2|---|CE2|
         +---+ . +---+       Network        +---+ . +---+
                ..................................

                     Figure 1: An Edge-2-Edge Network

5.2.  End-2-End Model Single Provider

   In this case there is a single provider network in which E2E
   offerings and host session are initiated and terminated with in the
   single provider network.

   1.  OTT Provider Networks: Endpoints of the communication (virtual or
       physical hosts) consuming services through with in the OTT
       provider network servers (Cloud and Data Center (DC) networks);
       where the other endpoint can be in the same server form or on the
       DC Gateway or on the other end of the DC Server Farm connected
       through Data Center Interconnect (DCI).

   2.  Wireless and Wire-line Networks: Endpoints (UE's) connecting to
       the provider wireless or wired networks, where service is
       terminated inside the provider network end points.  Based on the
       service offerings connection termination can happen close to the
       Radio/access nodes with multi-access edge computing (MEC) clouds
       or in the provider core network (core-cloud) before going to the




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


       Internet eventually.  Example of these deployments include BNG,
       4G and 5G wireless access/RAN/backhaul networks.

   There are two sub cases:

   a) Where the host is physically (wired/wireless) connected to the
   Provider Edge (PE)

         .............................................
   +---+ .+----+                               +----+. +---+
   | H +--+ PE |---  1 Provider Network     ---| PE +--+ H |
   +---+ .+----+    (Single/Multiple domains)  +----+. +---+
         .............................................

                  Figure 2: An Edge-2-Edge Network Direct

   In this case the provider controls the whole path and can certify the
   correct operation of the service according to contract.

   b) Where the host is connected via its own network to the PE

   +---+                                                +---+
   | H |                                                | H |
   +-+-+                                                +-+-+
     |                                                    |
     |    .............................................   |
   +-+--+ .+----+                               +----+. +-+-+
   | CE +--+ PE |---  1 Provider Network     ---| PE +--+ H |
   +----+ .+----+     (Single/Multiple domains) +----+. +---+
          ..............................................

                 Figure 3: An Edge-2-Edge Network Indirect

   In this case the provider controls only the path to the CE and can
   certify the correct operation of the service according to contract
   from that point but the user is responsible for providing the
   required service characteristics into their own network.

5.3.  End-2-End Model with multiple Providers

   There are two cases to consider:

   1.  Multiple provider with Transit Networks: These are traditional
       E2E deployments where communication endpoints of the data traffic
       on different provider networks with regional, transit network
       providers through Internet Exchange Providers (IXPs) providing
       the global inter connection.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   2.  Two Providers with no Internet Transit Network: Another variant
       of the E2E connectivity can be seen as evolving comprises only
       endpoints provider (access) network and receiver access provider
       network with global transit provided by one ISP.

   The first case is very difficult to support since it is unlikely that
   the whole path is know to support extended capabilities in the
   forwarding plane.  It is not infeasible, and it would be possible to
   set up such paths in principle given suitable enhancements to the
   routing system.  However such a scenario must be considered
   infeasible for the foreseeable future.

   The second case is more tractable provided there is co-operation
   between the providers.

5.4.  Embedded Service

   The industry move is towards content and application service
   providers embedding themselves within the edge network.  This is
   currently done to save bandwidth and improve response time.  As the
   need for high precision low latency networking develops the need for
   edge computing rises since the closer the client and the server the
   less the scope for network induced performance degradation.

   +---+
   | H |
   +-+-+
     |
     |    .....................................
   +-+--+ .+----+        +---+                .
   | CE +--+ PE |--------+ S |                .
   +----+ .+----+        +---+   Provider 1   .
          .....................................

                       Figure 4: An Edge-2-Provider

   In this network the server S (owned by the content and applications
   provider) has a contractual relationship with provider 1 and is thus
   able to negotiate the network characteristics needed to meet its
   service requirement.  This model in which the server brokers the user
   to network interface (UNI) requirements removes many of the
   objections to the classical UNI model in which the client requests
   the service requirements.  In this model the host authenticates
   itself with the server, having formed a previous business
   relationship (for example by purchasing a holographic conferencing
   service).  The server has a relationship with Provider1, and thus is
   a trusted party able to request that the service be set up between
   itself and and its client, paying as necessary.  As this is a



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   requested paid service traversing a limited distance over a defined
   network, a bespoke packet protocol can, if necessary, be used with in
   a contained and constrained way.

   How the server communicates with any other part of the application
   domain is out of scope for this document and possibly out of scope
   for Provider 1.

   This takes us to consider the embedded global service described in
   {#EGS}.

5.5.  Embedded Global Service

   +---+
   | H1|
   +-+-+
     |
     |    ......................................
   +-+--+ . +----+        +---+                .
   | CE +---+ PE |--------+ S1|                .
   +----+ . +----+        +-+-+   Provider 1   .
          ..................|...................
                            |
                            |
          ..................|...................
   +----+ . +----+        +-+-+                .
   | CE +---+ PE |--------+ S2|                .
   +----+ . +----+        +---+   Provider 2   .
     |    ......................................
     |
   +-+-+
   | H2|
   +-+-+

                    Figure 5: Edge-2-Edge via Provider

   In this network model, the server S1 (owned by the content and
   applications provider) has a contractual relationship with provider 1
   and is thus able to negotiate the network characteristics needed to
   meet its service requirement.  It is servicing the needs of host H1.

   Similarly that same provider has a contractual relationship with
   provider 2 where it is servicing the needs of host H2.

   By a method outside the scope of this document and outside the scope
   of the global Internet the contents and applications provider has a
   private path between S1 and S2.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   This scenario shown in Figure 5 is important because it removes the
   overwhelming issues associated with providing enhanced service across
   the global Internet.  Furthermore it describes a model where there is
   commercial incentive, at scale, for the edge providers (Provider 1
   and 2 above) to invest in providing and enhanced access service.

6.  Existing Protocol and Layering Challenges and Gaps

   Despite IPv4 still having a large user base, and having a number of
   useful properties the IETF has abandoned future development of IPv4
   as a way to force the deployment of IPv6.  For example, in terms of
   traffic steering the segment routing could have usefully been applied
   to IPv4 to support network operators that wished to retain IPv4 as
   their preferred internal protocol.

   Given the gaps in each of the existing network layer protocols the
   IETF may wish to look at the design of a protocol that both fills the
   gaps and unifies its three existing network layer protocols.

   Additionally there is a clear need for a more sophisticated approach
   to indicating the required quality of service that a packet, or flow,
   needs in an IP network.

6.1.  Challenges with IPv6

6.1.1.  The End-to-End Model

   IPv6 and specifically [RFC8200] was designed to fit within an
   Internet architecture centered around the end-to-end model with
   "Internet Paths" potentially passing through one or more networks
   without any relationship to the endpoints of a communication such as
   most so-called transit-AS.  As history already from IPv4 had shown,
   anything more than the most simple per-hop processing options can
   cause interoperability issues.  In result, [RFC8200] has drastically
   limited such per-hop processing options.

   Two core restrictions of RFC8200 are the following:

   o  Restrictions on extension headers (EH): EHs must never be deleted
      or changed in size by any node on the path the packet takes.
      Intermediate nodes are only expected to examine these headers (if
      they are configured to do so).  Implementations cannot expect
      intermediate nodes to examine, or act on, except for hop-by-hop
      header (section 4.8 of [RFC8200]).

      At the time of writing this is an area of considerable active
      discussion in the IETF 6MAN and SPRING WGs.  The issues that




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


      arrise from allowing unrestricted insertion, deletion or
      modification of EHs are for example:

      *  Breakage of path MTU discovery

      *  Impact on the Authetication Header protocol

      *  Inability to return ICMP error messages to the correct node.

      See Section 6.1.1.1 for further discussion.

   o  No new hop-by-hop headers (HBH) in IPV6: No new EHs that require
      hop-by-hop behavior should be defined (section 4 of [RFC8200]) -
      the only EH that has hop-by-hop behavior is the Hop-by-Hop Options
      header.  The only alternative available to the designer is instead
      to use destination headers (section 6.8 of [RFC8200]).

6.1.1.1.  IPv6 For Controlled Networks

   While [RFC8200] is a conservative set of requirements to enable
   proliferation of the target use case of "Internet Paths", the same
   set of requirements limit the flexibility of IPv6 unnecessarily when
   it is used in controlled networks where the constraints and
   interoperability issues for "Internet Paths" do not equally apply,
   for example the deployment scenarios shown in Section 5.4 and
   Section 5.5.

   One typical type of controlled networks are service providers (SP)
   where SRv6 is used as the architecture within the SP network.

   o  IPv6 extension headers can not be added on a midpoint.  Any
      addition/change requires an encapsulation where another IPv6
      header with optional SRH extension header is prepended to the
      carried IPv6 packet.  This is expensive in terms of packet MTU,
      and in terms of packet buffer requirements at the ends of the
      provider path which can be an economic issue in cost sensitive
      network segments.

   o  The requirement to encapsulate instead of being allowed to add an
      EH along the path stems from the desire to isolate any header
      changes from Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD).  This is a necessary
      complexity when traversing uncontrolled hops across the Internet,
      but it is unnecessary overhead when only passing through
      controlled hops.  In MPLS and SR-MPLS, the MPLS header size is not
      included in the MTU available to the MPLS payload, instead the
      network is managed such that the maximum MPLS header size plus the
      available payload MTU is always smaller that the encapsulating L2
      frame MTU.  In IPv6 instead, the encapsulating and decapsulating



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


      would logically have to perform signaling for PMTUD
      (unnecessarily).

   o  Because of the authorization header (AH) [RFC4302] and OAM
      concerns, [RFC8200] likewise prohibits removing extension headers
      or fields thereof on hops along the path, requiring for example
      more complex packet parsers.  In SR-MPLS it is possible to simply
      remove the top SID on a node that has processed it, in SRv6 it is
      instead necessary to look up an offset field in the SRH and, read
      the appropriate SID (which may be deep in the packet), and then
      increment the offset field.

   o  Even though the number of identifiers required within a controlled
      network is often less than 16 bit, and almost always 32 bits,
      carrying the overhead of 128 bits per SID in SRv6 can be seen as a
      significant unnecessary overhead, and workarounds such a proposed
      micro programs [I-D.bonica-6man-comp-rtg-hdr],
      [I-D.bonica-spring-srv6-plus],
      [I-D.filsfils-spring-net-pgm-extension-srv6-usid] require complex
      forwarding plane processing and SRv6 programmability in the lower
      64 bit is not required in the majority of use-cases for SIDs on
      midpoints.

   For use-cases like this, it would be a lot easier to innovate IPv6 by
   clone & modify: E.g.: defining (say) IPv7 to be similar to IPv6, but
   without the constraints that are not useful for the controlled
   network use-case.  A better alternative would be to create different
   profiles of IPv6 with [RFC8200] being one.  However, there is, as
   yet, no concept of "profiles" in IPv6.

   The issue of IP protocol operation in limited domains is discussed in
   [I-D.carpenter-limited-domains].

   Some possible solutions are described in
   [I-D.herbert-6man-eh-attrib].  This will be considered further in a
   future version of this text.

6.1.1.2.  IPv6 for Edge-Compute

   Today, the majority of end-to-end connections already do not pass via
   the traditional "Internet-Path" but instead toward a server in data
   center co-located with the access service provider Figure 4[DOT].  In
   this case, there is no transit service provider, but there is a well-
   established commercial relationship between either end of the
   communications and the access service provider.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   Today, the majority of traffic consists of video-streaming/TV
   services, but in the future, Edge-Compute will enable ever more
   applications to operate in such a controlled environment.

   The difference between the aforementioned use-case of IPv6 within an
   service provider, and this use-case is that enhanced services in this
   would naturally operate end-to-end between a Data Center application
   server and the subscriber endpoints.

   In the case of SRv6, it is not necessary to incur the overhead of an
   IPv6 in IPv6 encapsulation, the SRH can be inserted by the endpoint
   and removed by the endpoint on the other side.  Nevertheless, the
   [RFC8200] limitations of not being able to add/remove or freely
   change the content of the SRH payload or any other EH on a midpoint
   router still exists.  This seriously limits the usage and evolution
   of of IPv6 to the edge-to-edge model.

6.1.1.3.  Hop-by-Hop Extension Header processing

   Hop-by-hop IPv6 extension headers caused interoperability and
   performance issues and as a result caused resistance to further
   leverage and extend them except for SRv6-SRH RPL-SRH [RFC6554].  In
   the authors opinions, this regression on hop-by-hop extension headers
   is because of a combination of insufficient specifications and
   resulting implementation issues.  Both could be solved in future work
   with new hop-by-hop processing specifications.

   For example, router alert (RA) was (and still maybe) implemented in
   routers so that all router alert packets are punted from the fast-
   path to the slow-path even when the "value" field identifies a
   protocol that the router can not process.  As a result, protocols
   that rely on RA such as RSVP [RFC2205] or even more so Pragmatic
   General Multicast (PGM) [RFC3208] where filtered in networks because
   they caused high control plane load on routers that did not support
   either protocols but still unnecessarily punted their packets with
   RA.

   There are no normative statements about the need that fast-path
   forwarding planes "MUST" be able to ignore unsupported/not-enabled EH
   features at a speed such that such a packet can be forward at the
   same speed as the same packet without the EH.  For example, for RA,
   there is only a "SHOULD" requirement to do this in [RFC6398], a BCP
   published a decade after IPv6 router alert [RFC2711].  With such a
   gap in time between the specification and the BCP, it is impossible
   to rely on the existing RA and expect safe deployment across the
   Internet without still running into performance issues.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


6.1.1.4.  Segment Routing Header Constraints

   The same design paradigm could have been used for the Segment Routing
   Header (SRH) [I-D.ietf-6man-segment-routing-header], but there is no
   distinction possible for IPv6 instances running in such a controlled
   network or running as an Internetwork instance to form the Internet.
   This is particularly unfortunate as we are evolving to a model where,
   as noted earlier in this document, in most cases the packet will only
   travel through two well-known networks: the hosts network and the
   service provider network hosting the server to which the client is
   interacting.

6.1.2.  Fixed Address Length

   When IPv6 was designed, the key focus was on solving the problem of
   growth of the Internet and resulting growth of global Internet
   address space.  Variable length and a hetrogenious address approach
   were proposed [RFC1347] however, these were rejected partially for
   political reasons and partially out of a concern over the difficulty
   of parsing the packet and doing a fast address lookup.

   There was seemingly no focus on better supporting the now millions of
   often network-layer isolated TCP/IP networks in industrial, defense,
   research, embedded, industrial or other commercial environments.

   One key problems with with 128 bit addresses is the overhead on low-
   speed radio/IoT-wire networks.  This is especially the case when
   using source-routing, where multiple of these addresses have to be
   included in the header.  Current solutions are only able to resolve
   these issues with CPU expensive IETF standardized header compression
   techniques [RFC2507], [RFC3095], [RFC5795].  Even though these
   approaches are feasible in many of todays IoT networks, there is a
   strong desire to reduce power consumption in such devices.  This is
   particularly the case where they are powered by a single-for-life-
   battery, or are self-powering through automatic replenished energy
   sources.  As a result of this CPU performance in future IoT network
   should not be expected to increase but whenever feasible is more
   likely to decrease.

   Another, often overlooked, problem of the 128 bit IPv6 addresses is
   that global address prefix allocation is a a big up-front burden on
   many IoT networks, but also isolated networks (industrial, defense,
   research, industrial).  Often, this leads to the use of Unique Local
   Addresses (ULA) [RFC4193], which have the risk of conflicts when
   those previously isolated networks need to interconnect with other
   networks.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   While solutions to these problems may look easier enough, it should
   be noted that in the time when IPv6 was designed, variable length
   addresses in the fastest forwarding planes were not seen as feasible,
   and there was also a lack of experience with the impact of
   interconnecting heterogeneous address spaces other than as ships-in-
   the-night parallel operation of protocols.  A lot of that experience
   came later through 14++ IPv4/IPv6 transition solutions designed in
   the past 20 years and respective work on address discovery in IETF
   frameworks such as SIP/STUN/ICE.

   Another issue with the fixed length homogeneous address approach is
   the constraints this places on the current practice of overloading
   addresses with other functionality for example
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-srv6-network-programming].

6.2.  Better Than Best Effort E2E Network Services

   Some of the fastest growing network segments where new services are
   being introduced in an End-2-End manner belong to deployment models
   as described in Section 5.2.  The requirements here for service
   delivery involves stringent E2E latency with no retransmission and no
   packet loss.  Not all scenarios need "lower" latency but bounded to a
   particular value/range.  Example use cases involving an user
   equipment (UE) consuming service from the provider cloud network or
   another UE (e.g.  Vehicular device, IIoT) in the same network.  Here
   the service endpoints could be connected over wire or wireless (LTE/
   NR) and the service termination happens in the provider network
   either close to the access network or provider core network as
   illustrated in Figure 2, Figure 3.  The existing network layer and
   best-effort model simply cannot guarantee needed service level
   objectives in these scenarios.

   Some specific needs and requirements from cellular fixed transport
   networks are:

   o  Need for determinism on E2E throughput and latency.  The current
      TCP/IP is hence not-suitable for Mission-critical and real-time
      E2E applications.

   o  Need for E2E QoS for ultra-reliable-low-latency communications
      (uRLLC).

   o  Efficient use of protocols in the network by minimizing tunnels
      over tunnels and duplicate header fields.

   o  Efficient deployment of network slicing





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


6.3.  Adaptive Bit-rate Video streaming

   Even without going to future application requirements as described
   elsewhere in this document, even the majority of existing Internet
   traffic is lacking competitively usable and standardized service to
   support quality of service.

   The majority of traffic today is Adaptive Bit-rate (ABR) based audio/
   video streaming.  The primary benefit of this approach is that it can
   adjust itself to much lower bandwidth than the bandwidth to offer the
   ideal/target experience quality to the user.  It therefore enabled
   Over The Top (OTT) services to offer streaming media.  Nevertheless,
   ABR itself does not provide any actual quality guarantees.

   Service providers that use ABR streaming to their subscribers do
   therefore combine ABR with IP developments, some non-published, which
   are often out-of-band bandwidth reservation schemes.  These allow ABR
   video streams to have their ideal/target experience bandwidth within
   the SP's network and only need to degrade if there was bandwidth
   contention in the subscribers (home) network.

   If a subscriber, or a content provider which is not the access
   service provider wanted to get the same type of bandwidth guarantees
   for other content across the access providers network, they could do
   so with existing IETF standards via RSVP [RFC2205] which is widely
   implemented, or NSIS [RFC4080], which was to the knowledge of the
   authors never implemented in widely used router products (because it
   does not offer sufficient benefits over RSVP).  In either case, the
   per-flow control-plane based signaling architecture including the
   aforementioned router-alert issues make these protocols a difficult,
   likely not future-proof solution.

   Even more fundamentally, ABR has shown that media streaming can
   easily support elastic adjustment between a range of bandwidth limits
   in which the quality is between acceptable and ideal, but there is as
   of today no standardized mechanisms by which to express relative
   bandwidth allocations when streams compete against each other that
   goes beyond the very loosely defined "internet fairness".  For
   example, more intelligent congestion management could defend
   bandwidth the more the bandwidth approaches the minimum acceptable
   bandwidth, or admission control of bandwidth could be elastic.  Some
   work in these direction exists in [RFC8698] with its ability for
   weighted congestion control or
   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec] for (limited) elastic
   admission control management.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


6.4.  DetNet and Higher Precision Networking Service

   Time Critical (TC), Ultra-Reliable, Low Latency (URLLC), Internet-of-
   Things is another important use case scenario-set that highlights
   requirements that are difficult to satisfy with existing Internet
   connectivity paths where a part of that path includes a radio access
   link.  These kind of close-loop control systems borne over
   heterogeneous communications networks have very precision and bounded
   latency requirements for the E2E network connecting the sensor and
   actuator.

   Deterministic networking within the IETF is focused on only one
   dimension of the URLLC problem.

   DetNet is also far from attempting to identify currently if/how the
   services it plans to introduce could be made to operate over the
   Internet in general, instead, it focusses mostly on the shorter term
   goal to enable them in controlled networks within a limited domains.

   Currently, the requirements for a DetNet forwarding plane have been
   reasonably mapped out for an MPLS based forwarding layer.
   Nevertheless, in addressing these needs within an IP network
   [I-D.ietf-detnet-ip] the solution has of necessity been limited to
   the capabilities of the IP as it exists today.  It has not, for
   example, been possible to add the packet replication elimination and
   reordering function (PREOF)which allows multiple concurrent packet
   delivery attempts in an MPLS network [I-D.ietf-detnet-mpls].  The
   DETNET body of requirements needs to be revisited in the light of any
   development to network forwarding capabilities.

6.5.  Forwarding Plane vs. Control Plane

   High-end hardware with accelerated forwarding plane devices, can
   support a significant number of forwarding states including
   destination entries (IP destination/mask, MPLS label, SR SID) as well
   as 2, 3 or 5 tuple IP/IPv6 "flow" entries.  Nevertheless, the control
   plane that builds and changes these entries often limits their
   usability because the control plane does not even scale to the number
   of hardware accelerated forwarding entries possible, or because the
   supported rate of changes is slow.

   The root of this problem is that with the increase of speed and scale
   of hardware accelerated forwarding hardware, control plane had
   challenges to keep up in performance.  The performance of
   appropriately priced control plane CPUs (relative to the cost of the
   forwarding plane) has not grown at the same speed as that of hardware
   accelerated forwarding plane chips.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   One of the directions to overcome these challenges is invisible
   outside these forwarder devices and it is to optimize the control-
   plane to forwarding plane interactions, such as programming the
   building of forwarding state directly on the accelerated forwarding
   infrastructure (e.g.  NPU), but using otherwise existing control
   plane protocols.

   A more fundamental approach is to redesign control plane protocols
   such that they are lighter weight in their signaling and state
   machinery, and can therefore be completely implemented in the
   hardware accelerated forwarding plane.  Effectively turning a control
   plane protocol into an advanced forwarding plane protocol function.

   This approach is logically most easily applicable to on-path per-flow
   signaling mechanisms such as RSVP or RSVP-TE, both of which are quite
   complex with their signaling messaging and state keeping and
   therefore directly infeasible to become hardware accelerated
   forwarding implementations.  An example approach to provide similar
   functionality to RSVP with signaling light-weight enough to allow
   hardware accelerated implementation are the in-band signaling
   mechanisms (e.g. for TCP or UDP) described in [DIP1]
   [I-D.han-tsvwg-ip-transport-qos] [I-D.han-tsvwg-enhanced-diffserv].

   Signaling that is feasible to become part of a complete in-
   forwarding-plane signaling solution is not limited to in-band on-path
   flow signaling, but would likely also be applied to other signaling
   options.  Of the aforementioned existing signaling protocols, IGPs
   are likely the ones whose signaling could most easily be processed in
   an NPU compute elements except that the SPF calculation itself
   introduces a complexity that would make this very complex.  One
   example of a solution that solves this problem by signaling the
   actual per-hop adjacencies in IGP and therefore eases NPU
   implementation can be found in
   [I-D.chunduri-isis-preferred-path-routing].

   In summary: The scope of what should be considered forwarding plane
   today is defined by decade historic architectures, but should for the
   future be scoped by the realities of the new, different "layers" of
   hardware and their capabilities.  Hence also the use of the term
   forwarding plane, because it can span not only across classical
   bridging (L2), label/tag/SIG switching (L2.5), network/internetwork
   (L3) and transport (L4) layers, but also across the classical "data
   plane" and "control plane" components of each such layer.








Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


6.6.  User-Network/Network-User Interface Signaling

   Some of the deployment models as described in Section 5.2, needs
   specific signaling mechanism from user/applications.  These are
   needed for E2E service offering for better than best effort
   Section 6.2 or high-precision networking Section 6.4.  These may
   involve new transport mechanisms at hosts, middle-boxes and routers
   to meet the E2E service requirements in these limited domain
   deployments.

   Here one of the functional requirements is to signal the service
   level objectives (SLOs) dynamically for a particular service from the
   network.  This signaling includes the service description, the
   service negotiation with the network, the service setup or
   modification, or the need to execute some functions at network device
   and send the results back to the sender.  However, the current IP was
   not designed for this.  For example, the result of SLO negotiation at
   any hop needs to be updated in the IP packet at the router and
   returned back to the sender (originating host or gateway device for a
   Service Provider).

   There are some attempts to achieve the above as described in
   [I-D.han-tsvwg-ip-transport-qos], which describes general in-band
   signaling for QoS control with IPv6 protocol and
   [I-D.han-tsvwg-enhanced-diffserv], which proposes a backward
   compatible class-based queuing and scheduling schema for hybrid
   service to support guaranteed service from the network (e.g. for
   latency and bandwidth).

   In summary, it is difficult to do better than best effort or High
   Precision Services described in Section Section 6.4, in closed
   domains with current IP given the best effort congestion control
   (TCP/QUIC) and explicit congestion notification (ECN) framework.  A
   comprehensive mechanism needs to be explored as the limitations in
   silicon technologies or deployment models 30 years ago are not
   relevant with respect to security, scalability, packet size change,
   MSS or FCS recalculation, etc.

7.  Candidate Solution Directions

   This section describes a number of solution considerations, but is
   not prescriptive about any specific approach or technical solution,
   and is provided to stimulate thought on the subject.








Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


7.1.  Variable Length Addresses

   When private networks are set up, they only need to use an address
   length that allows the construction of networks sufficiently large to
   meet the expected service requirements.  If a future network layer
   protocol could support address length of e.g.: 16, 24, 32, 48, 64 and
   128 bits (or maybe more), it would be easy for such networks to pick
   a right size.  This would allow them to have as efficient packets
   without compression as possible, and it would also avoid for them to
   have to think about allocation procedures for "global" addresses.

   Whenever networks with a smaller address size would later on have to
   interconnect to other networks, the shorter length address would have
   to be interpreted as the suffix of a sufficiently larger address
   space through which those connecting networks could achieve unique,
   non-overlapping addresses.  At the border between these networks,
   high speed forwarding planes could easily perform per-packet
   stateless prefix addition/deletion transformations of addresses in
   the packet header when the interconnection should be free of further
   policy.  When such an interconnection is desired to employ specific
   traffic control policies, mapping of addresses in a stateful manner
   is a convenient way to enforce and support such policies through the
   forwarding plane.

7.2.  Address Semantics

   Classically IP unicast addresses identify an interface.  There is the
   special case of a loop-back address, but this is normally modeled as
   an internal interface.  Addresses are often silently mapped to
   include other semantics and this is most developed in the IP network
   programming concept [I-D.filsfils-spring-srv6-network-programming].

   MPLS is more general.  It defines the concept of a Forwarding
   Equivalence Class in which a Label which can be visualized as an
   offset into a specific table with up to 2^20 entries, with the table
   containing the instruction to be executed.  Thus a single identifier
   is able to specify: forward towards an egress, forward along a
   specific path, decapsulate and sent to an interface, decapsulate and
   forward via an IP lookup in a label specific address table etc.

   The semantics of the MPLS label and the size of the label are such
   that it is not possible to include any instruction parameters in the
   label and very inefficient to include those parameters in one or more
   further labels.  The only example of doing this is the Entropy Label
   indicator [RFC6790] which uses two Label Stack Entries (LSEs).  Any
   future development along these lines will need at least three LSEs.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   Whilst an IPv6 is larger there is still limited space to add
   parameters within the address.  In the current work on this the size
   is limited to 16 bits, and there is a fundamental limit of 64 bits.

   It is clear that move is towards a multiplicity of semantic for the
   network layer address, and indeed a formal recognition that the
   address is in reality an instruction with a specific scope.

7.3.  Multiple Instructions

   What we have learned from MPLS and then from SRv6 is that it is often
   desirable for a node (be that the originating host or a router) to
   impose on a packet a set of instructions to be executed in sequence
   by one or more entities in the network.  An development of IP or any
   successor needs to recognize this and provide a simple and efficient
   way to incorporate a list (or stack) of instructions within the
   packet header.

7.4.  Node and Path Specific Processing Instructions

   There is an established need to do node specific instructions as is
   indicated by the design of MPLS and Segment Routing (SR).  Any
   development of the forwarding system needs to retain this feature and
   ideally develop a method that is simultaneously both general and
   efficient.

   References to efficiency include efficiency in packet size and
   efficiency decoding and and executing the instruction.  The
   efficiency of encoding is not simply a matter of on the wire
   bandwidth, but is also a matter of the size of the forwarder packet
   header cache.  This cache has to operate at wire speed can be an
   expensive silicon element.

   There is also a need to do path specific operations as are done in
   RSVP-TE.  However RSVP has a significant path set-up and path
   maintenance cost.  Clearly a per path instruction can be specified as
   a set of N per node instructions where N is the number of hops along
   the path, for example by using SR, but that is not an efficient
   encoding where N is large.  It is thus a useful optimization to
   include the ability to include per path instructions, and this is the
   subject of further study.

7.5.  Integrated Assurance and Verification

   Being best effort in nature, assurance for services provided using IP
   is left to add-on solutions built after the fact.  How to perform
   tasks such as verifying of service levels is left as an exercise for
   network providers, often approached using statistical approaches that



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   are themselves "best effort" in nature.  This will be no longer
   sufficient for mission-critical services such as tele-driving or
   tele-operations that demand guarantees, where failure to meet those
   guarantees may expose providers and users exposed to liability
   demands and call the feasibility of applications relying on those
   services into question.

   Moving forward, network protocols suitable to deliver high-precision
   services for mission critical applications need to address assurance
   as an intrinsic property, not left to afterthoughts.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not request any allocations from IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   Security is likely to be more significant with the applications being
   considered in this work.  With interest in tightly controlled access
   and latency, and contractual terms of business it is going to be
   necessary to have provable right of access to network resources.
   However heavyweight security is a contra-requirement to the light-
   weight process needed for power efficiency, fast forwarding and low
   latency.  Addressing this will require new insights into network
   security.

   Further information on the issue of providing security in latency
   sensitive environments can be found in [I-D.ietf-detnet-security]
   which are a sub-set of the considerations applicable to the new use
   cases considered in this text.

10.  Appendix 1: Expanded Summary of Sub-G1 Use Cases

10.1.  Holographic-type communications

   This work projects that we will move towards a holographic society
   where users remotely interact with the physical world over the
   network.  In industry the digital twin model will enable the control
   of real objects through digital replicas.  Telepresence will move to
   a new level with multi-site collaborations becoming much closer to
   physical meetings that can take place without the time and
   environmental cost of physical travel. 3D medical scans will become
   full 3D views rather than the body/ organ slices that too many of us
   are regrettably familiar with.  It is easy to imagine that this
   technology will take message delivery to a completely new level.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   o  Ultra-high bandwidth (Tbps class)

   o  Ultra-low latency (sub-ms)

   o  Multi-stream synchronization

   o  Enhanced network security

   o  Enhanced network reliability

   o  Edge computation

10.2.  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations

   Two cases were proposed as examples of this class of application.
   The first is remote industrial management which involves the real-
   time monitoring and control of industrial infrastructure operations.
   The second involves remote robotic surgery.  Remote robotic surgery
   within an operating suite complex is a standard practice today,
   however there are cases where it would be desirable to extend the
   range of this facility.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:

   o  Ultra-high bandwidth (Tbps class)

   o  Ultra-low latency (sub-ms)

   o  Sensory input synchronization

   o  Enhanced network security

   o  Enhanced network reliability

   o  Differentiated prioritization levels

10.3.  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks

   The game-changer in the area of space-terrestrial networking is the
   active deployment of huge clusters of cheap Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
   satellite constellations.  These LEOs have a number of properties
   that make them attractive, but arguably the most important is that
   they combine global coverage with low latency.  Studies [Handley]
   show that for distances over 3000Km latency via a LEO cluster is
   lower than the latency of terrestrial networks.  The up-link to a LEO
   cluster has to constantly change the point of attachment to the
   cluster as the satellites that form the cluster rapidly move across



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   the sky relative to both the ground and relative to the satellites in
   other orbits.  In this scenario a number of access and connection
   models need to be considered.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:

   o  A suitable addressing and routing mechanism to deal with a network
      that is constantly in flux.

   o  Sufficient bandwidth capacity on the satellite side to support the
      new application needs

   o  A suitable satellite admission system

   o  Edge computation and storage

10.4.  ManyNets

   There is evidence that there is a change in direction from the
   Internet as a single hetrogenious network back to a true Internet,
   that is an interconnection of a number of networks each optimized for
   its local use but capable of inter-working.

   For example, satellite and the terrestrial networks adopt different
   protocol architecture, which causes the difficulty to internetwork
   between them, yet the common goal is to provide access to the
   Internet.  Secondly, there will be a massive number of IoT-type
   devices connecting to the networks but the current interconnection
   schemes are too complex for these services.  There are further trends
   in 5G/B5G back-haul infrastructure, requiring diverse set of resource
   guarantees in networks to support different industry verticals.  The
   collection of such special purpose networks, existing together and
   requiring interconnection among themselves are called ManyNets.

   Much closer the traditional Internet model is the move to edge
   computing services in which the client traffic is terminated at a
   compute node very close to access edge.  [DOT] Any resultant
   application traffic is a private matter between the application on
   the edge server and the servers it communicates with in the
   fulfillment of those needs.  Furthermore the application on the
   client may be using a tunnel to the edge compute server.  In such a
   network the protocol used inside the tunnel and the protocol used
   between the servers executing the service is a private matter.

   The ManyNets concept aims to support flexible methods to support the
   communication among such heterogeneous devices and their networks.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


11.  Appendix 2: Expanded Summary of Sub-G2 New Network Capabilities and
     Services

   This appendix expands on the ITU-T Sub-G2 new network capabilities
   and services introcuced in Section 3 It builds upon the analysis that
   was conducted at ITU-T FG-NET2030; readers are also referred to
   output produced by that group [NET2030SubG2] for more detail.

11.1.  New Services

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies a number of network services that will be
   needed to support many of the new use cases.  These network services
   are divided into two categories:

   o  Foundational Services (FS) require which dedicated support on some
      or all network system nodes which are delivering the service
      between two or more application system nodes.  FS cannot be
      decomposed into other services.  For example, IP packet routing
      and forwarding are is a (pre-existing) foundational network
      services.

   o  Compound Services (CS) are composed of one or more foundational
      services.  CS are "convenience services" that make network
      services easier to consume by certain applications or categories
      of use cases, but do not by themselves introduce new network
      services or requirements into network system nodes.  One example
      would be a Tactile Internet Service which consists of two
      communications channels, one for tactile control and the other for
      haptic feedback.

   The following sections focus on Foundational Services only, as these
   are the ones that provide the basic building blocks with which the
   needs of all other services can be addressed, and which are the ones
   that potentially introduce new foundational requirements on network
   system nodes.

11.1.1.  High-Precision Communications Services

   High-Precision Communications Services refers to services that have
   precisely defined service level objectives related to end-to-end
   latency, in many cases coupled with stringent requirements regarding
   to packet loss and to bandwidth needs.  These requirements are in
   stark contrast to the best effort nature with related to existing
   network services.
   Of course, existing services often go to great lengths in order to
   optimize service levels and minimize latency, and QoS techniques aim
   to mitigate adverse effects of e.g. congestion by applying various
   forms of prioritization and admission control.  However,



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   fundamentally all of these techniques still constitute patches that,
   while alleviating the symptoms of the underlying best-effort nature,
   do not address the underlying cause and fall short of providing
   service level guarantees that will not be just of a statistical
   nature but that will be met by design.

   The high-precision communications services that have been identified
   are described in the following three sub-sections.

11.1.2.  In-time Services

   In-time services require end-to-end latency within a quantifiable
   limit.  They specific a service level objective that is not to be
   exceeded, such as a maximum acceptable latency (putting a hard
   boundary on the worst case).  In-time services are required by
   applications and use cases that have clear bounds on acceptable
   latency, beyond which the Quality of Experience would deteriorate
   rapidly, rendering the application unusable.  An example concerns use
   cases that involve providing tactile feedback to users.  Creating an
   illusion of touch requires a control loop with a hard-bounded round-
   trip time that is determined by human / biological factors, beyond
   which the sense of touch is lost and with it the ability to e.g.
   operate a piece of machinery from remote.  Because many such use
   cases are mission-critical (such as tele-driving or remote surgery),
   in addition any loss or need for retransmission is unacceptable.

   This service is similar to the service provided by DetNet [RFC8655]
   but with more demanding applications which need to be satisfied over
   IP.

11.1.3.  On-time Services

   On-time services require end-to-end-latency to be of an exact
   duration, with the possibility of a small quantifiable variance as
   can be specified either by an acceptable window around the targeted
   latency or by a lower bound in addition to an upper bound.  Examples
   of use cases include applications that require synchronization
   between multiple flows that have the same in-time latency target, or
   applications requiring fairness between multiple participants
   regardless of path lengths, such as gaming or market exchanges when
   required by regulatory authorities.  The concept of a lowest
   acceptable latency imposes new requirements on networks to
   potentially slow down packets by buffering or other means, which
   introduces challenges due to high data rates and the cost e.g. of
   associated memory.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


11.1.4.  Coordinated Services

   Coordinated services require multiple interdependent flows to be
   delivered with the same end-to-end latency, regardless of any
   (potential additional) service level objective.  Use cases and
   applications include applications that require synchronization
   between multiple flows, such as use cases involving data streams from
   multiple cameras and telemetry sources.  In the special case where an
   on-time service is required, no additional service is needed (as
   synchronization occurs by virtue of the fact that each flow adheres
   to the same SLO), but coordination may also be required in cases
   where no specific end-to-end latency is required, as long as all
   flows are serviced with service levels that are identical.

11.1.5.  Qualitative Communication Services

   Qualitative communication services (QCS) are able to suppress
   retransmission of portions of the payload that are deemed less
   relevant when necessary in order to meet requirements on latency by
   applications that are tolerant of certain quality degradation.  They
   may involve the application of network coding schemes.

   QCS is a new service type that is needed to support AR/VR,
   holographic-type communications Industrial Internet and services such
   as autonomous driving.  This needs the support of a new network
   capability that is as yet to be developed.

11.2.  New Capabilities

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies also a number of network capabilities that
   will become increasingly important going forward, in addition to the
   support for any particular services.  These were introduced in
   Section 3.2.  A number of these capabilities need to be taken into
   consideration from the very beginning when thinking about how future
   dataplanes need to evolve.
   While many of those capabilities are well known, the past has shown
   that retrofitting dataplanes with such capabilities after the fact
   and in a way that is adequate to the problem at hand is very hard.

11.2.1.  Manageability

   Many of the services that need to be supported in the future have in
   common that they place very high demands on latency and precision
   that need to be supported at very high scales, coupled with
   expectations of zero packet loss and much higher availability than
   today.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   In order to assure in-time and on-time services with high levels of
   accuracy, advances in measurements and telemetry will be required in
   order to monitor and validate that promised service levels are indeed
   being delivered.  This requires advanced instrumentation that is
   ideally built-in all the way to the protocol level.

   For example, the ability to identify and automatically eliminate
   potential sources of service-level degradations and fluctuations will
   become of increasing importance.  This requires the ability to
   generate corresponding telemetry data and the ability to observe the
   performance of packets as they traverse the network.  Some of the
   challenges that need to be addressed include the very high volume of
   data that gets generated and needs to be assessed, and the effects of
   the collection itself on performance.  In general, greater emphasis
   will need to be placed on the ability to monitor, observe, and
   validate packet performance and behavior than is the case today.  For
   seamless support, these capabilities will be inherently integrated
   with the forwarding function itself, for example delivered together
   with the packets.  Today's solution approach, IOAM, is a promising
   technology currently that points in the right direction, and that
   also highlights some of the challenges - from MTU considerations due
   to extending packet sizes to the ability to customize and obtain the
   "right" data.  It will therefore be not sufficient by itself.  Data
   to be generated from the network will need to be "smarter", i.e. more
   insightful and action-able.  This will require additional abilities
   to process data "on-device".  In additional, the need for new
   management functions may arise, such as functions that allow to
   validate adherence with agreed-upon service levels for a flow as a
   whole, and to prevent data or privacy leakage as well as provide
   evidence for the possibility or absence of such leakage.

11.2.2.  High Programmability and Agile Lifecycle

   Operators need to be able to rapidly introduce new network services
   and adapt to new contexts and application needs.  This will require
   advances in network programmability.  Today's model of vendor-defined
   (supporting service features via new firmware or hardware-based
   networking features) or operator-defined (supporting service features
   via programmable software-defined networking (SDN) controllers,
   virtualized network functions (VNF) and Network Function
   Virtualization (NFV), and service function chaining (SFC) will no
   longer be sufficient.

   Software Defined Networking and Network Function Virtualization (NFV)
   have opened up the possibility to accelerate development life-cycles
   and enable network providers to develop new networking features on
   their own if needed.  Segment Routing is being evolved for that
   purpose as well.  Furthermore, network slicing promises more agility



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   in the introduction of new network services.  However, the complexity
   of the associated controller software results in its own challenges
   with software development cycles that, while more agile than life-
   cycles before, are still prohibitive and that can only be undertaken
   by network providers, not by their customers.  Rapid customization of
   networking services for specific needs or adaptation to unique
   deployments are out of reach for network provider customers.  What is
   lacking is the ability for applications to rapidly introduce and
   customize novel behavior at the network flow level, without need to
   introduce application-level over-the-top (OTT) overlays.  Such a
   capability would be analogous to server-less computing that is
   revolutionizing cloud services today.  In addition, it should be
   noted that softwarized networks are built on relatively stable (and
   slowly evolving) underlying physical commodity hardware network
   infrastructure.  This is insufficient to deliver on new high-
   precision network services, which require hardware advances at many
   levels to provide programmable flow and QoS behavior at line rate,
   affecting everything from queuing and scheduling to packet processing
   pipelines.

   The evolution of forwarding planes should allow development life-
   cycles that are much more agile than today and move from "Dev Ops" to
   "Flow Ops" (i.e. dynamic programmability of networks at the flow
   level).
   This requires support of novel network and data-plane programming
   models which can possibly be delivered and effected via the
   forwarding plane itself.

11.2.3.  Security

   The possibility of security threats increases with complexity of
   networks, the potential ramifications of attacks are growing more
   serious with increasing mission-criticality of networking services
   and applications.
   The forwarding plane plays a large role in the ability to thwart
   attacks.
   For example, the fact that source addresses are not authenticated in
   existing IP is at the root of a wide range security problems from
   phishing and fraudulent impersonation designed to compromise and
   steal user assets to amplification attacks designed to bring down
   services.
   Going forward, it is absolutely critical, then, to minimize the
   attack surface of the forwarding plane as it evolves.

   A key security aspects needed from the network point of view includes
   to verify if the packet is authorized to enter into the network and
   if it is sufficiently integrity protected.  However, when packets are
   emitted from the host for these new communication services, the



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   network portion of the packet (e.g., an extension header or an
   overlay header) should not be encrypted because network nodes may
   need to interpret the header and provide the desired service.
   Lack of encryption and integrity validation, of course, would at the
   same time increase the threat surface and open up the possibility for
   attacks.
   Mechanisms for authorization and integrity protection must be
   developed to meet the line rate performance as services delivered can
   be time sensitive.  At the same time, the size of packets should not
   be significantly increased to avoid negative impact on utilization
   and overhead tax.
   This limits the options for additional security collateral that can
   be included with packets.

   Homomorphic forms of encryption may need to be devised in which
   network operations can be performed in privacy-preserving manner on
   encrypted packet headers and tunneled packets without exposing any of
   their contents.

   Another dimension to security arises when the end to end service that
   needs to be delivered crosses the administrative boundary of the
   originating host.  For those cases, additional mechanisms need to be
   specified to sufficiently ensure the privacy and confidentiality of
   the network layer information.  While there are lot of avenues to
   tackle these issues and some aspects are being looked into by various
   Standards Development Organizations, e.g.  IRTF PANRG on Path-Aware
   Networking, comprehensive solutions are yet to be worked out.

   Any mechanisms specified for authorization, integrity protection, and
   network header confidentiality should be orthogonal to the transport
   layer and above transport layer security mechanisms set in place by
   the end host/user.  Regardless of whether or not the latest security
   advances in transport and layers above (e.g.  TLS1.3, QUIC or HTTPSx)
   are applied on the payload, network nodes should not have to act on
   this information to deliver new services to avoid layer violations.

11.2.4.  Trustworthiness

   As future network services are deployed, deployment scenarios will
   include cases in which packets need to traverse trust boundaries
   which are under different administrative domains.  As the forwarding
   plane evolves, it should do so in such a way that trustworthiness of
   packets is maintained - i.e. integrity of data is protected,
   tampering with packet meta-data (such as source authentication or
   service level telemetry) would be evident, and privacy of users is
   guarded.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


11.2.5.  Resilience

   Ultra-low-latency requirements and the huge increase of bandwidth
   demands of new services such as holographic type communication
   services make retransmission as a mechanism to recover data that was
   lost in transit increasingly less feasible.  Therefore, network
   resilience and avoidance of loss becomes of paramount importance.

   There are many methods for providing network resilience.  This
   includes providing redundancy and diversity of both physical (e.g.
   ports, routers, line cards) and logical (e.g. shapers, policers,
   classifiers) entities.  It also includes the use of protocols that
   provide quick re-convergence and maintain high availability of
   existing connections after a failure event occurs in the network.
   Other techniques include packet replication or network coding and
   error correction techniques to overcome packet loss.
   As the forwarding plane evolves, mechanisms to provide network
   resilience should be inherently supported.

11.2.6.  Privacy-Sensitive

   Today, there is a growing awareness of the lack of privacy in the
   Internet and its implications.
   New network services have to be sensitive to and comply with
   heightened user privacy expectations.
   At the same time, the need for privacy needs to be balanced with
   legitimate needs of network providers to operate and maintain their
   networks, which requires some visibility into what is happening on
   the network and how it is being used.
   Likewise, mechanisms to provide privacy must be provided in such a
   way to not compromise security, such as allowing anonymous attackers
   to prey on other users.

   An evolved forwarding plane must provide mechanisms that ensure users
   privacy by design and prevent illegitimate exposing of personally-
   identifiable information (PII), while preventing abuse of those
   mechanisms by attack exploits and while affording network providers
   with legitimate visibility into use of their network and services.

   There are a variety of privacy-related requirements that ensue, such
   as:

   o  Anonymization: To prevent tracking by eavesdropper by packet
      capture, visible information in packets such as source and
      destination addresses should be difficult (ideally: impossible) to
      directly correlate to PII.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   o  Opaque User data: Networks must not rely on the user data to
      provide or improve the service.  However, network providers may
      use specific service-visible data in packets.

   o  Secured Storage: Some services may require the network to slow
      down the delivery of the packets, implying the possibility that
      packets are temporarily buffered on the router.  The storage of
      those packets must be secured and prevented from extraction for
      deep inspection or analysis.

   o  Flow anonymization: Flows of information should be randomized in a
      dynamic manner so that it is difficult through traffic analysis to
      deduce patterns and identify the type of traffic.

   Potential mechanisms to consider include (but are not limited to)
   avoiding the need for long-lived addresses (to prevent trackablity)
   and the use of homomorphic encryption for packet headers and tunneled
   packets (in addition to traditional payload encryption) that allow to
   perform network operations in privacy-preserving manner without
   exposing meta-data carried in headers.

11.2.7.  Accountability and Verifiability

   Many new services demand guarantees instead of being accepting of
   "best effort".
   As a result, today's "best effort" accounting may no longer be
   sufficient.

   Today's accounting technology largely relies on interface statistics
   and flow records.
   Those statistics and records may not be entirely accurate.
   For example, in many cases their generation involves sampling and is
   thus subject to sampling inaccuracies.
   In addition, this data largely accounts for volume but not so much
   for actual service levels (e.g. latencies, let alone coordination
   across flows) that are delivered.
   Service level measurements can be used to complement other statistics
   but come with significant overhead and also have various limitations,
   from sampling to the consumption of network and edge node processing
   bandwidth.
   Techniques that rely on passive measurements are infeasible in many
   network deployments and hampered by encryption as well as issues
   relating to privacy.

   Guarantees demand their price.  This makes it increasingly important
   both for providers and users of services to be able to validate that
   promised service levels were delivered on.




Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   For example, proof of service delivery (including proof of service
   level delivery) may need to be provided to account and charge for
   network services.
   This will require advances in accounting technology that should be
   considered as forwarding technology evolves, possibly providing
   accounting as a function that is intrinsically coupled with
   forwarding itself.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC0791, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc791>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [DIP1]     ETSI, "Recommendation for New Transport Technologies, GR
              NGP 010", September 2018,
              <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/
              NGP/001_099/010/01.01.01_60/gr_NGP010v010101p.pdf>.

   [DOT]      Huston, G., "The Death of Transit and Beyond", n.d.,
              <https://hknog.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/01_GeoffHust
              on_TheDeath_of_Transit_and_Beyond.pdf>.

   [FGNETWORK2030]
              "Focus Group on Technologies for Network 2030", n.d.,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/net2030/Pages/
              default.aspx>.

   [Handley]  Handley, M., "Delay is Not an Option: Low Latency Routing
              in Space", n.d.,
              <http://nrg.cs.ucl.ac.uk/mjh/starlink-draft.pdf>.

   [I-D.bonica-6man-comp-rtg-hdr]
              Bonica, R., Kamite, Y., Niwa, T., Alston, A., and L.
              Jalil, "The IPv6 Compressed Routing Header (CRH)", draft-
              bonica-6man-comp-rtg-hdr-13 (work in progress), March
              2020.





Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   [I-D.bonica-spring-srv6-plus]
              Bonica, R., Hegde, S., Kamite, Y., Alston, A., Henriques,
              D., Jalil, L., Halpern, J., Linkova, J., and G. Chen,
              "Segment Routing Mapped To IPv6 (SRm6)", draft-bonica-
              spring-srv6-plus-06 (work in progress), October 2019.

   [I-D.carpenter-limited-domains]
              Carpenter, B. and B. Liu, "Limited Domains and Internet
              Protocols", draft-carpenter-limited-domains-13 (work in
              progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.chunduri-isis-preferred-path-routing]
              Chunduri, U., Li, R., White, R., Tantsura, J., Contreras,
              L., and Y. Qu, "Preferred Path Routing (PPR) in IS-IS",
              draft-chunduri-isis-preferred-path-routing-00 (work in
              progress), June 2018.

   [I-D.filsfils-spring-net-pgm-extension-srv6-usid]
              Filsfils, C., Camarillo, P., Cai, D., Voyer, D., Meilik,
              I., Patel, K., Henderickx, W., Jonnalagadda, P., and D.
              Melman, "Network Programming extension: SRv6 uSID
              instruction", draft-filsfils-spring-net-pgm-extension-
              srv6-usid-04 (work in progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.filsfils-spring-srv6-network-programming]
              Filsfils, C., Camarillo, P., Leddy, J.,
              daniel.voyer@bell.ca, d., Matsushima, S., and Z. Li, "SRv6
              Network Programming", draft-filsfils-spring-srv6-network-
              programming-07 (work in progress), February 2019.

   [I-D.han-tsvwg-enhanced-diffserv]
              Han, L., Qu, Y., and R. Li, "Enhanced DiffServ by In-band
              Signaling", draft-han-tsvwg-enhanced-diffserv-00 (work in
              progress), November 2019.

   [I-D.han-tsvwg-ip-transport-qos]
              Han, L., Qu, Y., Dong, L., Li, R., Nadeau, T., Smith, K.,
              and J. Tantsura, "Resource Reservation Protocol for IP
              Transport QoS", draft-han-tsvwg-ip-transport-qos-03 (work
              in progress), October 2019.

   [I-D.herbert-6man-eh-attrib]
              Herbert, T., "Attribution Option for Extension Header
              Insertion", draft-herbert-6man-eh-attrib-00 (work in
              progress), December 2019.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   [I-D.ietf-6man-segment-routing-header]
              Filsfils, C., Dukes, D., Previdi, S., Leddy, J.,
              Matsushima, S., and D. Voyer, "IPv6 Segment Routing Header
              (SRH)", draft-ietf-6man-segment-routing-header-26 (work in
              progress), October 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-detnet-ip]
              Varga, B., Farkas, J., Berger, L., Fedyk, D., Malis, A.,
              and S. Bryant, "DetNet Data Plane: IP", draft-ietf-detnet-
              ip-05 (work in progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-detnet-mpls]
              Varga, B., Farkas, J., Berger, L., Fedyk, D., Malis, A.,
              Bryant, S., and J. Korhonen, "DetNet Data Plane: MPLS",
              draft-ietf-detnet-mpls-05 (work in progress), February
              2020.

   [I-D.ietf-detnet-security]
              Mizrahi, T., Grossman, E., Hacker, A., Das, S., Dowdell,
              J., Austad, H., and N. Finn, "Deterministic Networking
              (DetNet) Security Considerations", draft-ietf-detnet-
              security-08 (work in progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data]
              Brockners, F., Bhandari, S., Pignataro, C., Gredler, H.,
              Leddy, J., Youell, S., Mizrahi, T., Mozes, D., Lapukhov,
              P., remy@barefootnetworks.com, r., daniel.bernier@bell.ca,
              d., and J. Lemon, "Data Fields for In-situ OAM", draft-
              ietf-ippm-ioam-data-08 (work in progress), October 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec]
              Polk, J. and S. Dhesikan, "Integrated Services (IntServ)
              Extension to Allow Signaling of Multiple Traffic
              Specifications and Multiple Flow Specifications in
              RSVPv1", draft-ietf-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec-02 (work
              in progress), February 2013.

   [NET2030SubG2]
              ITU-T FGNET2030, "New Services and Capabilities for
              Network 2030: Description, Technical Gap and Performance
              Target Analysis", October 2019, <https://www.itu.int/en/
              ITU-T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/
              Deliverable_NET2030.pdf>.

   [RFC1347]  Callon, R., "TCP and UDP with Bigger Addresses (TUBA), A
              Simple Proposal for Internet Addressing and Routing",
              RFC 1347, DOI 10.17487/RFC1347, June 1992,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1347>.



Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   [RFC2205]  Braden, R., Ed., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, DOI 10.17487/RFC2205,
              September 1997, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2205>.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, DOI 10.17487/RFC2460,
              December 1998, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2460>.

   [RFC2507]  Degermark, M., Nordgren, B., and S. Pink, "IP Header
              Compression", RFC 2507, DOI 10.17487/RFC2507, February
              1999, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2507>.

   [RFC2711]  Partridge, C. and A. Jackson, "IPv6 Router Alert Option",
              RFC 2711, DOI 10.17487/RFC2711, October 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2711>.

   [RFC3095]  Bormann, C., Burmeister, C., Degermark, M., Fukushima, H.,
              Hannu, H., Jonsson, L-E., Hakenberg, R., Koren, T., Le,
              K., Liu, Z., Martensson, A., Miyazaki, A., Svanbro, K.,
              Wiebke, T., Yoshimura, T., and H. Zheng, "RObust Header
              Compression (ROHC): Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP,
              ESP, and uncompressed", RFC 3095, DOI 10.17487/RFC3095,
              July 2001, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3095>.

   [RFC3208]  Speakman, T., Crowcroft, J., Gemmell, J., Farinacci, D.,
              Lin, S., Leshchiner, D., Luby, M., Montgomery, T., Rizzo,
              L., Tweedly, A., Bhaskar, N., Edmonstone, R.,
              Sumanasekera, R., and L. Vicisano, "PGM Reliable Transport
              Protocol Specification", RFC 3208, DOI 10.17487/RFC3208,
              December 2001, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3208>.

   [RFC4080]  Hancock, R., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and S. Van den
              Bosch, "Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS): Framework",
              RFC 4080, DOI 10.17487/RFC4080, June 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4080>.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, DOI 10.17487/RFC4193, October 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4193>.

   [RFC4302]  Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4302, December 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4302>.







Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   [RFC5795]  Sandlund, K., Pelletier, G., and L-E. Jonsson, "The RObust
              Header Compression (ROHC) Framework", RFC 5795,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5795, March 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5795>.

   [RFC6282]  Hui, J., Ed. and P. Thubert, "Compression Format for IPv6
              Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based Networks", RFC 6282,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6282, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6282>.

   [RFC6398]  Le Faucheur, F., Ed., "IP Router Alert Considerations and
              Usage", BCP 168, RFC 6398, DOI 10.17487/RFC6398, October
              2011, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6398>.

   [RFC6554]  Hui, J., Vasseur, JP., Culler, D., and V. Manral, "An IPv6
              Routing Header for Source Routes with the Routing Protocol
              for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL)", RFC 6554,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6554, March 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6554>.

   [RFC6790]  Kompella, K., Drake, J., Amante, S., Henderickx, W., and
              L. Yong, "The Use of Entropy Labels in MPLS Forwarding",
              RFC 6790, DOI 10.17487/RFC6790, November 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6790>.

   [RFC8578]  Grossman, E., Ed., "Deterministic Networking Use Cases",
              RFC 8578, DOI 10.17487/RFC8578, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8578>.

   [RFC8655]  Finn, N., Thubert, P., Varga, B., and J. Farkas,
              "Deterministic Networking Architecture", RFC 8655,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8655, October 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8655>.

   [RFC8698]  Zhu, X., Pan, R., Ramalho, M., and S. Mena, "Network-
              Assisted Dynamic Adaptation (NADA): A Unified Congestion
              Control Scheme for Real-Time Media", RFC 8698,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8698, February 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8698>.

   [UC]       ITU-T FGNET2030, "Use Cases and Requirements for Network
              2030 Summary report "Representative use cases and key
              network requirements for Network 2030"", January 2020,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
              T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/Technical_Report.pdf>.






Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                       March 2020


   [WP]       "Network 2030 - A Blueprint of Technology, Applications,
              and Market Drivers towards the Year 2030 and Beyond, a
              White Paper on Network 2030, ITU-T", May 2019,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
              T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/White_Paper.pdf>.

Authors' Addresses

   Stewart Bryant
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: sb@stewartbryant.com


   Uma Chunduri
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: uma.chunduri@futurewei.com


   Toerless Eckert
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: tte@cs.fau.de


   Alexander Clemm
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: ludwig@clemm.org





















Bryant, et al.         Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 45]
