

Network Working Group                                         C. Malamud
Internet-Draft                                          October 10, 2003
Expires: April 9, 2004


                A "No Soliciting" SMTP Service Extension
			

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 9, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This note presents an extension to SMTP for an electronic mail
   equivalent to the real-world "No Soliciting Sign." By itself, this
   extension does little to stop unsolicited bulk electronic mail.
   However, the extension gives policy makers in the real world a "hook"
   on which to pass anti-spam laws.

Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [21].

Changes From Previous Draft




Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 1]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   Changes from draft-malamud-no-soliciting-00 to
   draft-malamud-no-soliciting-01:

   o  The two service extensions previously proposed (
      "SYSTEM-WIDE-NO-SOLICITING" and "PER-MESSAGE-NO-SOLICITING") have
      been collapsed into a single "NO-SOLICITING" service extension See
      Section 3.

   o  "PER-MESSAGE" has been changed to "PER-RECIPIENT" to more properly
      express the operation of the extension. Section 3.3.

   o  A solicitation class keyword syntax is introduced to allow
      different kinds of unsolicited mail to be considered.Section 3.2

   o  The "Solicitation:" header has been supplemented with an extended
      "Received:" header syntax.  See Section 3.5.

   o  A discussion of the use of Enhanced Mail Status Codes has been
      included.  See Section 3.7.

   o  A more extensive IANA Considerations section has been added,
      including creation of a Solicitation Keywords registry.  See
      Section 6.




























Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 2]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  The Spam Pandemic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  No Soliciting in the Real World  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  The No-Soliciting SMTP Service Extension . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.1 SYSTEM-WIDE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.2 Solicitation Class Keywords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3 PER-RECIPIENT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.4 Solicitation Mail Header . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.5 Insertion of Solicitation Keywords in Trace Fields . . . . . . 11
   3.6 Relay of Messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.7 Use of Enhanced Mail Status Codes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.8 Recommendations for Developers and Administrators  . . . . . . 13
   4.  Hooks for ISPs and Other Policy Makers . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.1 The Mail Parameters Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.2 ESMTP-Solicitation Additional Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.3 The Solicitation Class Keywords Registry . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.4 The Solicitation Mail Header . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  Author's Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 22


























Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 3]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


1. The Spam Pandemic

   Unsolicited Unwanted Email (UUE), otherwise known as spam, has become
   as one of the most pressing issues on the Internet.  One oft-quoted
   study estimated that spam will cost businesses $13 billion in
   2003.[1] In April 2003, AOL reported that it had blocked 2.37 billion
   pieces of UUE in a single day. [2] And, in a sure sign that UUE has
   become of pressing concern, numerous politicians have begun to issue
   pronouncements and prescriptions for fighting this epidemic.[3] [4]

   A variety of mechanisms from the technical community have been
   proposed and/or implemented to fight UUE:

   o  Whitelists are lists of known non-spammers.  For example, Habeas,
      Inc. maintains a Habeas User List (HUL) of people who have agreed
      to not spam.  By including a haiku in email headers and enforcing
      copyright on that ditty, they enforce their anti-spamming terms of
      service. [5]

   o  Blacklists are lists of known spammers or ISPs that allow spam.[6]

   o  Spam filters run client-side or server-side to filter out spam
      based on whitelists, blacklists, and textual and header
      analysis.[7]

   o  A large number of documents address the overall technical
      considerations for the control of UUE [8], operational
      considerations for SMTP agents[9], and various extensions to the
      protocols to support UUE identification and filtering. [10] [11]
      [12]

   o  Various proposals have been advanced for "do not spam" lists, akin
      to the Federal Trade Commission's "Do Not Call" list for
      telemarketers.[13]

   Many of these proposals and services have great merit, however none
   of them give notice to an SMTP agent in the process of delivering
   mail that the receiver does not wish to receive solicitations. Such a
   virtual sign would serve two purposes:

   o  It would allow the receiving system to "serve notice" that a
      certain class of electronic mail is not desired, whether or not
      such a message is properly identified as belonging to that class.

   o  If a message is properly identified as belonging to a certain
      class and that class of messages is not desired, transfer of the
      message can be eliminated.  Rather than filtering after delivery,
      elimination of the message transfer can save network bandwidth,



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 4]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


      disk space, and processing power.


















































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 5]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


2. No Soliciting in the Real World

   Municipalities frequently require solicitors to register with the
   town government.  And, in many cases, the municipalities prohibit
   soliciting in residences where the occupant has posted a sign.  The
   town of West Newbury, Massachusetts, for example, requires:

      "It shall be unlawful for any canvasser or solicitor to enter the
      premises of a resident or business who has displayed a 'No
      Trespassing' or 'No Soliciting' sign or poster.  Further, it shall
      be unlawful for canvassers or solicitors to ignore a resident or
      business person's no solicitation directive or remain on private
      property after its owner has indicated that the canvasser or
      solicitor is not welcome." [14]

   Registration requirements for solicitors, particularly those
   soliciting for political or religious reasons, have been the subject
   of a long string of court cases.  However, the courts have generally
   recognized that individuals may post "No Soliciting" signs and the
   government may enforce the citizen's desire. In a recent case where
   Jehovah's Witnesses challenged a registration requirement in the city
   of Stratton, Connecticut, saying they derived their authority from
   the Scriptures, not the city.  However, the court noted:

      "A section of the ordinance that petitioners do not challenge
      establishes a procedure by which a resident may prohibit
      solicitation even by holders of permits. If the resident files a
      'No Solicitation Registration Form' with the mayor, and also posts
      a 'No Solicitation' sign on his property, no uninvited canvassers
      may enter his property ..." [15]

   Even government, which has a duty to promote free expression, may
   restrict the use of soliciting on government property. In one case,
   for example, a school district was allowed to give access to its
   internal electronic mail system to the union that was representing
   teachers, but was not required to do so to a rival union that was
   attempting to gain the right to represent the teachers.  The court
   held that where property is not a traditional public forum "and the
   Government has not dedicated its property to First Amendment
   activity, such regulation is examined only for reasonableness.[16]

   The courts have consistently held that the state has a compelling
   public safety reason for regulating solicitation.  In Cantwell v.
   Connecticut, the Supreme Court held that "a State may protect its
   citizens from fraudulent solicitation by requiring a stranger in the
   community, before permitting him publicly to solicit funds for any
   purpose, to establish his identity and his authority to act for the
   cause which he purports to represent."[17] And, in Martin v. City of



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 6]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   Struthers, the court noted that burglars frequently pose as
   canvassers, either in order that they may have a pretense to discover
   whether a house is empty and hence ripe for burglary, or for the
   purpose of spying out the premises in order that they may return
   later."[18] Note that the public safety issue applies very much to
   email, where viruses and can easily be delivered, in contrast to
   telephone solicitations where public safety is not nearly as much an
   issue.

   This analysis is very U.S.-centric, which may be appropriate given
   that the large majority of UUE appears to originate from U.S.
   citizens.  However, the concept of prohibiting unwanted solicitation
   does carry over to other countries:

   o  In Hong Kong, offices frequently post "no soliciting" signs.

   o  In the United Kingdom, where door-to-door peddlers are fairly
      common, "no soliciting" signs are also common.

   o  In Australia, where door-to-door does not appear to be a pressing
      social problem, there was legislation passed which outlawed the
      practice of placing ads under wipers of parked cars.

   o  In France, which has a long tradition of door-to-door
      solicitation, apartment buildings often use trespass laws to
      enforce "no solicitation" policies.

   o  In the Netherlands, where door-to-door solicitation is not a
      pressing issue, there is a practice of depositing free
      publications in mailboxes.  The postal equivalent of "no spam"
      signs are quite prevalent and serve notice that the publications
      are not desired.



















Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 7]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


3. The No-Soliciting SMTP Service Extension

   Per RFC 2821,[22] a "NO-SOLICITING" SMTP service extension is
   defined. The service extension is presented during the initial "EHLO"
   SMTP exchange.  The extension has one optional parameter and zero or
   more solicitation class keywords.  Using the notation as described in
   the Augmented BNF[23], the syntax is:

     No-Soliciting-Service = "NO-SOLICITING"
       [ "SYSTEM-WIDE" / "PER-RECIPIENT" ]
       0*( Solicitation-keywords )


3.1 SYSTEM-WIDE

   "NO-SOLICITING SYSTEM-WIDE" indicates that no soliciting is in effect
   for all messages delivered to this system.  It is equivalent to the
   sign on the door of an office building announcing a company-wide
   policy.

   The parameter is presented during the initial exchange between sender
   and receiver:

     R: <wait for connection on TCP port 25>
     S: <open connection to server>
     R: 220 trusted.example.com SMTP service ready
     S: EHLO untrusted.example.com
     R: 250-trusted.example.com says hello
     R: 250-NO-SOLICITING SYSTEM-WIDE

   A similar proposal was advanced in 1999 by John Levine and Paul
   Hoffman.  This proposal used the SMTP greeting banner to specify that
   unsolicited bulk email is prohibited on a particular system through
   the use of the "NO UCB" keyword.[19]  As the authors note, their
   proposal has the potential of overloading the semantics of the
   greeting banner, which may also be used for other purposes (see,
   e.g., [20]).

3.2 Solicitation Class Keywords

   The "NO-SOLICITING" service extension may accept additional
   solicitation class keywords that signify a specific class of
   solicitations that are not accepted.  Keywords are separated by
   commas and follow the "SYSTEM-WIDE" parameter.

   Two classes are defined in this draft:

   Keywords  Description                       Reference



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 8]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   --------- --------------------------------  ---------
   MAPS-UBE  Unsolicited Bulk Email            http://mail-abuse.org/
   ADV       Unsolicited Commercial Email      http://www.spamlaws.com/
   ADV:ADLT  Sexually Explicit Commercial Mail http://www.spamlaws.com/

   MAPS-UBE is the standard advanced by the Mail Abuse Prevention System
   (MAPS), which states:

      An electronic message is "spam" IF: (1) the recipient's personal
      identity and context are irrelevant because the message is equally
      applicable to many other potential recipients; AND (2) the
      recipient has not verifiably granted deliberate, explicit, and
      still-revocable permission for it to be sent; AND (3) the
      transmission and reception of the message appears to the recipient
      to give a disproportionate benefit to the sender.

   Numerous states have adopted the "ADV" and "ADV:ADLT" conventions.
   We cite the spamlaws.com site as a reference because it provides an
   excellent summary of the definitions and pointers to the relevant
   statutes.

   There is no default keyword for the service.  In other words, the
   following example is a "no-op":

     R: 250-NO-SOLICITING SYSTEM-WIDE

   Additional solicitation class keywords may be defined and registered
   in the registry as specified in Section 6. Multiple solicitation
   class keywords are separated by a comma to form a list:

     Solicitation-keywords = 1Solicit-word 0*("," 1Solicit-word)
     Solicit-word = [ "MAPS-UBE" / "ADV" / "ADV:ADLT"
                      / x-word / registered-word ]
     x-word = ["x-" / "X-"] 1*(wordchars)

     registered-word = ALPHA 0*(wordchars)
                                  ; registered-word(s) are registered
                                  ; with the IANA
     wordchars = 1*("-" / "_" / ":" / ALPHA / DIGIT)


3.3 PER-RECIPIENT

   The "NO-SOLICITING PER-RECIPIENT" extension specifies that each "MAIL
   FROM" command must identify if a message is a solicitation.

   The presence of this extension is identified during the initial
   greeting:



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                  [Page 9]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


     R: <wait for connection on TCP port 25>
     S: <open connection to server>
     R: 220 trusted.example.com SMTP service ready
     S: EHLO untrusted.example.com
     R: 250-trusted.example.com says hello
     R: 250-NO-SOLICITING PER-RECIPIENT

   Additionally, "SOLICIT" is defined as a parameter for the "MAIL FROM"
   command.  The "SOLICIT" parameter is followed by an optional equal
   sign and a comma separated list of solicitation class keywords.

   The syntax for this parameter is:

     Mail-From-Solicit-Parameter = "SOLICIT"
                            1( "=" Solicitation-keywords)

   As an informational message, the 550 or 250 replies to the "RCPT TO"
   command may also contain the "SOLICIT" parameter.

   The receiving system may decide on a per-user basis the appropriate
   disposition of messages:

     S: MAIL FROM:<savebigbucks@hotmail.com> SOLICIT=ADV, MAPS-UBE
     S: RCPT TO:<coupon_clipper@trusted.resource.org>
     R: 250 <coupon_clipper@trusted.resource.org>... Recipient ok
     S: RCPT TO:<grumpy_old_boy@trusted.resource.org>
     R: 550 <grumpy_old_boy@trusted.resource.org>... SOLICIT=ADV:ADLT


3.4 Solicitation Mail Header

   Per RFC 2822,[24] a new "Solicitation:" header field is defined which
   contains one or more solicitation class keywords.

     To: Coupon Clipper <coupon_clipper@trusted.resource.org>
     From: Spam King <savebigbucks@hotmail.com>
     Solicitation: ADV,ADV:ADLT

   Several proposals, particularly legal ones, have suggested requiring
   the use of keywords in the "Subject" header. While embedding
   information in the "Subject:" header may provide visual cues to end
   users, it does not provide a straightforward set of cues for computer
   programs such as mail transfer agents. As with embedding a "no
   solicitation" message in a greeting banner, this would overload the
   semantics of the "Subject:" header.  Of course, there is no reason
   why both mechanisms can't be used, and in any case the
   "Solicitation:" header could be automatically inserted based on the
   contents of the subject line.



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 10]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


3.5 Insertion of Solicitation Keywords in Trace Fields

   The "Solicitation:" mail header is only available to the sending
   client.  RFCs 2821 and 2822 are quite specific that intermediate MTAs
   shall not change message headers, with the sole exception of the
   "Received:" trace field.  Since many current systems use an
   intermediate relay to detect unsolicited mail, an addition to the
   "Received:" header is described.

   As a review, RFC 2821[22] documents the following productions for the
   "Received:" header in a mail message:

     Time-stamp-line = "Received:" FWS Stamp <CRLF>

     Stamp = From-domain By-domain Opt-info ";"  FWS date-time
        ; where "date-time" is as defined in [32]
        ; but the "obs-" forms, especially two-digit
        ; years, are prohibited in SMTP and MUST NOT be used.

     From-domain = "FROM" FWS Extended-Domain CFWS

     By-domain = "BY" FWS Extended-Domain CFWS

     Extended-Domain = Domain /
           ( Domain FWS "(" TCP-info ")" ) /
           ( Address-literal FWS "(" TCP-info ")" )

     TCP-info = Address-literal / ( Domain FWS Address-literal )
         ; Information derived by server from TCP connection
         ; not client EHLO.

     Opt-info = [Via] [With] [ID] [For]

     With = "WITH" FWS Protocol CFWS

     Addtl-Link = Atom
         ; Additional standard names for links are registered with the
         ; Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).  "Via" is
         ; primarily of value with non-Internet transports.  SMTP
         ; servers SHOULD NOT use unregistered names.
     Protocol = "ESMTP" / "SMTP" / Attdl-Protocol
     Attdl-Protocol = Atom
        ; Additional standard names for protocols are registered with
        ; the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).  SMTP servers
        ; SHOULD NOT use unregistered names.

   The appropriate location for solicitation information is the
   "Attdl-Protocol" field, which is defined in this document as



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 11]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   "ESMTP-Solicitation".  The RFC 2821 productions are supplemented as
   follows:

     Protocol = "ESMTP" / "SMTP" / ESMTP-Solicitation / Attdl-Protocol
     ESMTP-Solicitation =  "ESMTP-Solicitation"
                           FWS 0*( Solicitation-keywords )

   An example of a Received: header from a conforming MTA is as follows:

     Received: by foo-mta.example.com with
        ESMTP-Solicitation ADV,ADV:ADLT ; Sat, 9 Aug 2003
        16:54:42 -0700 (PDT)


3.6 Relay of Messages

   The "NO-SOLICITING SYSTEM-WIDE" service extension, if present,
   applies to all messages handled by the receiving Message Transfer
   Agent (MTA), including those messages intended to be relayed to
   another system.

   When relaying a message which was received via the SMTP protocol in
   which the "SOLICIT" parameter was set on the "MAIL FROM" command, the
   MTA MUST also set the "SOLICIT" parameter when delivering the message
   to an SMTP server that supports this extension.

   The "SOLICIT" parameter on a "MAIL FROM" command can be derived from
   a variety of sources, including receipt of a message from a
   conforming SMTP server. An SMTP server MAY, for operational reasons
   as detailed in Section 7.7 of RFC 2821[22], set this parameter after
   detecting the presence of the "Solicitation:" or extended "Received:"
   message header field or by using other system-specific techniques.

   Implementers should be aware that the "NO-SOLICITING" service
   extension is not a guaranteed end-to-end service.  Specifically,
   intermediate relays that do not support this service may "lose" the
   per-message parameters. However, any trace fields inserted during the
   message transfer process will persist.

3.7 Use of Enhanced Mail Status Codes

   If a session between two MTAs is using both the "NO-SOLICITING"
   extension and the Enhanced Mail Status Codes as defined in RFC
   3463[25] and a message is rejected based on the presence of a
   "SOLICIT" parameter, the correct error message to return is "5.6.0".

   This error message is defined as being of class permanent failure
   because it "is not likely to be resolved by resending the message in



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 12]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   the current form.  Some change to the message or the destination must
   be made for successful delivery."  It is defined as subject/detail
   6.0 since the policy decision is based on message content and there
   are not any detail fields that clearly fit this "error" in delivery.

   If the "NO-SOLICITING" service extension is adopted, it is
   recommended that a new detail code be added to subject 6 (i.e.,
   "X.6.6 Message Not Accepted For Delivery").

3.8 Recommendations for Developers and Administrators

   It is strongly recommended that any developers that implement the
   "NO-SOLICITING" service extension SHOULD NOT enable the service as a
   default.  There are some indications that some policy makers may view
   a default filtering in software as a prior restraint on commercial
   speech. In other words, because the person installing the software
   did not make an explicit choice to enable a certain type of
   filtering, some might argue that such filtering was not desired.

   Likewise, it is recommended that a system administrator installing
   software SHOULD NOT enable "PER-RECIPIENT" filtering by default for a
   user.  Again, individual users should request the service.

   The mechanism for an individual user to communicate their desire to
   enable certain types of filtering is outside the scope of this
   document.

























Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 13]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


4. Hooks for ISPs and Other Policy Makers

   This proposal is not meant to "solve" the UUE problem, but offers
   some tools that can be used by policy makers, be they governments
   defining laws or Internet Service Providers defining appropriate use
   policies.

   By providing a service-level extension to SMTP, this proposal
   provides a simple mechanism that allows a system or ISP to put email
   senders on notice that mail that is both bulk and unsolicited is not
   wanted.

   One common criticism of any technical or legal measures to prevent
   UUE is that the global reach of the Internet makes any such measures
   futile.  Several points are worth noting:

   1.  First, anti-UUE complaints are often pursued through the
       Appropriate Use Policy (AUP) in a service agreement between an
       Internet Service Provider and an end user is accused of violating
       the ISP's AUP.  Assuming the Appropriate Use Policy is part of a
       valid contract, conflicts of law do not exist in this case.

   2.  Disparity between laws of different jurisdictions is an age-old
       problem and many mechanisms have evolved to solve these issues.
       In the United States, conflicts of state laws are dealt with
       through the courts and a well-established body of law.

   3.  On an international level, conflicts of law are dealt with
       through international agreements, particularly trade agreements.
       Thus, if the U.S. believes that UUE is a pressing policy issue,
       it will bring the issue into a forum such as the World Trade
       Organization, trading off a stronger agreement on spam for a more
       liberal policy, for example, on the import of packaged meat
       products.

   4.  Anectodal evidence suggests that much if not most UUE originates
       from U.S. citizens.  A policy "hook" in the SMTP architecture
       will prove highly effective at a national level if not
       universally effective on a global level.

   In summary, no one proposal will solve all issues with unsolicited
   unwanted email, but adding a mechanism at the SMTP service level
   provides one more tool in that fight.








Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 14]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


5. Security Considerations

   This proposal does not present additional security complications
   beyond those already amply represented in the current architecture
   for electronic mail.














































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 15]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


6. IANA Considerations

   There are four IANA considerations presented in this draft:

   1.  Addition of the "NO-SOLICITING" service extension to the Mail
       Parameters registry.

   2.  Addition of the "ESMTP-Solicitation" Additional Protocol

   3.  Creation of a Solicitation Class Keywords registry.

   4.  Creation of a "Solicitation:" mail header, which does not
       currently raise any IANA considerations.


6.1 The Mail Parameters Registry

   The IANA Mail Parameters registry documents SMTP service extensions.
   The "NO-SOLICITATION" service extension would need to be added to
   this registry as follows.

     Keywords        Description                       Reference
     ------------    --------------------------------  ---------
     NO-SOLICITING   Notification of no soliciting.    [<this draft>]

   The parameters subregistry would need to be modified as follows:

     Service Ext      EHLO Keyword   Parameters       Reference
     -----------      ------------   -----------      ---------
     No Soliciting    NO-SOLICITING  SYSTEM-WIDE      [<this draft>]
     No Soliciting    NO-SOLICITING  PER-RECIPIENT    [<this draft>]


6.2 ESMTP-Solicitation Additional Protocol

   The Mail Parameters registry would need to be modified to list
   "ESMTP-Solicitation" as a valid additional protocol for use in the
   "Received:" header of a mail message.

6.3 The Solicitation Class Keywords Registry

   A new registry (or a subregistry of Mail Parameters) would need to be
   established for Solicitation Class Keywords.  The registry would
   contain the following fields:

   1.  Keyword name (e.g., "MAPS-UBE").

   2.  Keyword description (e.g., "Unsolicited Bulk Email").



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 16]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   3.  Keyword reference (e.g., "<this draft>").

   Per the policies outlined in RFC 2434[26], it is recommended that the
   IESG appoint a Designated Expert to administer this registry.
   Authority for solicitation class keywords in this registry will come
   in some cases from published RFCs, but in other cases will come from
   applicable laws or regulations.  It is recommended that any non-RFC
   derived solicitation class keywords be documented in future
   informational RFCs to provide a consistent set of references.

6.4 The Solicitation Mail Header

   There is currently no registry defined for mail headers.  If such a
   registry were to exist, the "Solicitation:" header field would need
   to be added to it.




































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 17]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


7. Author's Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Rebecca Malamud for many discussions
   and ideas that led to this proposal and to John C. Klensin and
   Marshall T. Rose for their extensive input on how it could be
   properly implemented in SMTP. Dave Crocker, Paul Hoffman, John
   Levine, Keith Moore, Paul Vixie, and Pindar Wong kindly provided
   reviews of the draft and/or suggestions for improvement. Information
   about soliciting outside the U.S. was received from Rob Blokzijl, Jon
   Crowcroft, Christian Huitema, Geoff Huston, and Pindar Wong.  As
   always, all errors, omissions, generalizations, and simplifications
   (EOGS) are the responsibility of the author.







































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 18]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


Informative References

   [1]   Associated Press, "Study: Spam costs businesses $13 billion",
         January 2003.

   [2]   CNET News.Com, "AOL touts spam-fighting prowess", April 2003.

   [3]   Charles, C., "Schumer, Christian Coalition Team Up to Crack
         Down on Email Spam Pornography", June 2003.

   [4]   Federal Trade Commission, "Federal, State, Local Law Enforcers
         Target Deceptive Spam and Internet Scams", November 2002.

   [5]   Habeas, Inc., "Habeas Compliant Message", April 2003.

   [6]   Spamhaus.Org, "Register of Known Spam Operations".

   [7]   Mason, J., "Spamassassin - Mail Filter to Identify Spam Using
         Text Analysis", Version 2.55, May 2003.

   [8]   Crocker, D., "Technical Considerations for Spam Control
         Mechanisms", draft-crocker-spam-techconsider-01 (work in
         progress), May 2003.

   [9]   Lindberg, G., "Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs", BCP
         30, RFC 2505, February 1999.

   [10]  Danisch, H., "A DNS RR for simple SMTP sender authentication",
         draft-danisch-dns-rr-smtp-02 (work in progress), June 2003.

   [11]  Daboo, C., "SIEVE Spamtest and Virustest Extensions",
         draft-daboo-sieve-spamtest-03 (work in progress), April 2003.

   [12]  Crouzet, B., "Authenticated Mail Transfer Protocol",
         draft-crouzet-amtp-00 (work in progress), June 2003.

   [13]  Federal Trade Commission, "Telemarketing Sales Rule", Federal
         Register Vol. 68, No. 19, January 2003.

   [14]  The Town of West Newbury, Massachusetts, "Soliciting/Canvassing
         By-Law", Chapter 18 Section 10, March 2002.

   [15]  U.S. Supreme Court, "Watchtower Bible & Tract Society of New
         York, Inc., et al. v. Village of Stratton et al.", 122 S.Ct.
         2080 (2002), June 2002.

   [16]  U.S. Supreme Court, "Perry Education Association v. Perry Local
         Educators' Association", 460 U.S. 37 (1983), February 1983.



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 19]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   [17]  U.S. Supreme Court, "Cantwell v. State of Connecticut", 310
         U.S. 296 (1940), May 1940.

   [18]  U.S. Supreme Court, "Martin v. City of Struthers, Ohio", 319
         U.S. 141 (1943), May 1943.

   [19]  Levine, J. and P. Hoffman, "Anti-UBE and Anti-UCE Keywords in
         SMTP Banners", Revision 1.1, March 1999.

   [20]  Malamud, C., "An Internet Prayer Wheel", Mappa.Mundi Magazine,
         August 1999.








































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 20]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


Normative References

   [21]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [22]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821, April
         2001.

   [23]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [24]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822, April 2001.

   [25]  Vaudreuil, G., "Enhanced Mail System Status Codes", RFC 3463,
         January 2003.

   [26]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October
         1998.


Author's Address

   Carl Malamud
   PO Box 300
   Sixes, OR  97476
   US

   EMail: carl@media.org






















Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 21]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 22]

draft-malamud-no-soliciting    No-Solicit                   October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Malamud                  Expires April 9, 2004                 [Page 23]

