



Network Working Group                                        R. Van Rein
Internet-Draft                                                 ARPA2.net
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 10, 2015
Expires: April 12, 2016


                   Pseudonymity Support for Kerberos
                draft-vanrein-kitten-krb-pseudonymity-00

Abstract

   Kerberos either retains client identity in all its ticket
   transformations, or it applies rigorous anonymity.  When crossing
   over to another realm, an intermediate privacy measure is often
   desired, namely pseudonymity, as described in this specification.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 12, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Principles and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Procedures and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Efficiency Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Kerberos' privacy model is not always well-suited for connections to
   other realms, especially when these are previously unencountered
   realms that have not earned the client's trust with respect to
   privacy.  Normally, the client identity as obtained during an AS
   exchange is always retained by Kerberos.  There is one exception, and
   that is anonymity [RFC6112], which completely conceals the client's
   principal name and possibly also its realm.

   Where anonymity is obvious in concealing the client identity, this
   section describes a more covert alternative in the form of
   pseudonymity.  By using a pseudonym, the ticket changes to another
   client identity, and the chosen identity may be selected specifically
   for dealing with a particular remote service.  As a result, that
   remote can trace return visits without knowing what name is used
   locally, or when accessing other realms and/or services.  As far as
   the remote realm is concerned, the pseudonym is just a client
   identity.

   Pseudonyms can be useful to replace a personal login with that of a
   group or role, in which case a client can act on behalf of an entity
   for which it has established access rights.  This is in the service
   of the remote realm, which is given a more concise view on the client
   than a mere personally identifying name.  For instance, a remote
   realm may setup access rights to a group purchasing@EXAMPLE.COM and
   it is up to the administrators of EXAMPLE.COM which users are
   permitted to change their client identity to that account (or,
   informally, which users belong to the purchasing group).  This
   separation of group management and access to the remote service is
   often a desirable distribution of responsibilities.








Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


2.  Principles and Definitions

   Pseudonymity is applied during a TGS exchange.  The client requests
   or permits the KDC to change its identity supplied in the TGT into
   another identity in the returned ticket.  Without pseudonymity (or
   anonymity) the KDC simply copies this identity from the TGT to the
   returned ticket.

   Clients can make implicit or explicit requests for a new client
   identity.  An implicit request permits the KDC to apply whatever
   policies it has for a TGS, and an explicit request asks the KDC to
   set a particular client principal name.  Explicit pseudonymity
   requests can be used with restrictive KDC policies, such as demanding
   a client identity to be selected from a set of possibilities.

   The application of pseudonymity can be realm-neutral or realm-
   changing.  Realm-neutral means that the realm of the TGT included in
   the TGS-REQ is the same as the client identity's realm.  Realm-
   changing means that those realms differ.  When applying pseudonymity,
   the client realm is replaced with the TGT realm, which only has an
   impact in the realm-changing case.  It is not permitted to apply
   pseudonimity more than once in a realm-changing manner, to avoid
   arbitrary proxying between realms; a remote realm shall only welcome
   a client identity from its login realm and a client shall not accept
   arbitrary relaying of its identity to realms beyond the ones it uses
   directly.  There is no limitation on realm-neutral pseudonymity,
   neither before nor after realm-changing pseudonymity.

   To test whether a KDC is willing to support pseudonymity, the client
   may set the "pseudonymity" flag in the kdc-options field of its AS-
   REQ.  When the KDC produces a ticket, it MAY respond to this KDC
   option by setting the "pseudonymity" ticket flag; if it does, it is a
   statement that the KDC is supportive of pseudonymity.

   For explicit pseudonymity, the requested client principal name is
   included in the optional cname field of the TGS-REQ; this field is
   not normally included in this message, but may be used after assuring
   that the KDC supports pseudonyms.  Explicit requests are unacceptable
   after applying realm-changing pseudonymity; this leaves room for a
   last realm-neutral change of the client identity just before crossing
   over to anoter realm, namely when a TGS-REQ returns a server
   referral.

3.  Procedures and Requirements

   A client MAY always send a TGS-REQ with a "pseudonymity" KDC option,
   even when there is no "pseudonymity" ticket flag.  KDCs unsupportive
   of pseudonymity will silently ignore the unknown KDC option.



Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


   The KDC does not apply pseudonymity without "pseudonymity" KDC
   Options in the TGS-REQ; however, if psuedonymity is required by local
   policy, it MAY return a KRB-ERROR with code TODO

   A number of rules MUST be applied by the KDC if it receives a TGS-REQ
   with the "pseudonymity" KDC option:

   1.  For explicit psuedonymity, the TGT must have the "pseudonymity"
       flag set; if not, it responds with KRB-ERROR code
       KDC_ERR_WRONG_REALM (because realm-changing pseudonymity appears
       to have been applied already).

   2.  For realm-changing pseudonymity, the TGT must have the
       "pseudonymity" flag set; otherwise, the request for pseudonymity
       is ignored if it is implicit, or leads to KDC_ERR_SVC_UNAVAILABLE
       if it is explicit.

   3.  The KDC may apply local policy; for implicit pseudonymity, it
       silently ignores disapproved requests; for explict pseudonymity,
       it responds to disapproved requests with KRB-ERROR code
       KDC_ERR_C_PRINCIPAL_UNKNOWN if it policy forbids the use of
       pseudonymity, or KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE (TODO:e-data) if it
       is permitted but lacks guidance on what to choose.  The latter
       error message may also be generated if zero or one potential
       principals were found, but other things stop it, such as an
       explicit confirmation of setup by the end user through an
       external mechanism.

   4.  As a special case of the foregoing, external pseudonymity with
       the special name of type NT-UNKNOWN and zero components in the
       name string is permitted by default policy and cannot be setup
       with a pseudonym by the user, so it always triggers the
       aforementioned KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE error reply.

   5.  TODO: Define special error codes for pseudonymity; overloading
       existing ones isn't proper

   6.  When the KDC applies realm-changing pseudonymity, it MUST clear
       the "pseudonymity" flag in the returned ticket.  This serves two
       purposes.  First, it drops the knowledge of KDC-supported
       pseudonymity for the new realm.  Second, it ensures that realm-
       changing pseudonymity is applied at most once.  In all other
       cases, when the KDC returns a ticket it MUST copy the
       "pseudonymity" ticket flag from the TGT in the TGS-REQ.

   Clients supportive of pseudonymity MUST ensure that the
   "pseudonymity" flag in a TGS-REP is never set unless the
   "pseudonymity" KDC option was set in the corresponding TGS-REQ.



Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


   Clients supportive of pseudonymity SHOULD process the "pseudonymity"
   flag in the TGS-REP.  When it is set, the client identity in the TGS-
   REP may have changed, and give rise to somewhat different handling of
   the returned ticket.  Those clients MUST also verify that the client
   identity is unchanged when the "pseudonymity" flag in the TGS-REP is
   not set.

   Clients supportive of pseudonymity MUST notice realm-changing
   pseudonymity in a TGS-REP, and then ensure that the "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag is reset on the returned ticket; they MUST NOT accept
   realm-changing pseudonymity based on TGTs without "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag, and they MUST NOT request explicit pseudonymity based on
   TGTs without "pseudonymity" ticket flag.  They MAY request realm-
   changing implicit pseudonymity based on TGTs without "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag, but this will be silently ignored by the KDC.

   These specifications permit arbitrary rewrites of client principal
   names within the local realm to which the client signed up, either at
   the initiative of the client or the KDC.  This means that a database
   of pseudonyms can be set up in the client and/or the KDC.  The KDC is
   probably most useful when it applies pseudonymity during a request
   for a service ticket, and even more likely when it decides that realm
   crossover is involved in finding that ticket.

   There are two situations in which the KDC explicitly lists pseudonyms
   that are acceptable for a request, as part of an error message
   KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE with an e-data field containing an ASN.1
   SEQUENCE OF PrincipalName in DER encoding.  TODO: encryption?  This
   reply can be sent when the client needs it, to which end it sends an
   explicit pseudonymity request with a cname holding an NT-UNKNOWN name
   type.  Alternatively, the KDC may generate this message when its
   policy requires pseudonymity but lacks policies to select one
   pseudonym; this requires that the "pseudonymity" KDC option is set in
   the TGS-REQ; it is especially of interest when the KDC is about to
   release a realm crossover ticket from the client's realm to a service
   realm.  The e-data may hold an empty sequence to signal that no
   options exist; it may contain one or more PrincipalNames when it
   lacks the policy setup to make a choice.

   Although it may seem unnatural to permit pseudonymity to foreign
   realms as well, it can actually be quite helpful.  First, since it is
   always implicit pseudonymity, the remote KDC cannot create a "more
   unique" representation of the client identity; it is however able to
   group clients.  Think of time-constrained test rides in public or
   free-trial accounts, or think of temporary gold or silver status
   access.  This sort of use case enables the service to provide
   previews without demanding clients to setup accounts upfront.  This
   provides a friendlier, and more useful way to explore new services.



Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


   The service on the other hand, avoids a long list of one-time users
   that never return because they don't like the functionality on offer.
   With this in mind, it is recommended to continue to send the
   "pseudonymity" KDC option on any TGS-REQ to a remote realm, so long
   as the TGT has the "pseudonymity" flag set.

   Note that foreign realms may hide information in the tickets that
   they return, but this is not likely to be very useful; tickets are
   not constantly updated during use, and they are discarded after a
   brief usage period.  These properties makes them far less potent than
   other privacy alerts, such as browser cookies.

   TODO: Use Anonymous Kerberos [RFC6112] as a checklist, for instance
   refer to it for its handling of AuthorizationData.

4.  Efficiency Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; lightweight mechanism, choice of central setup in KDC

5.  Privacy Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; pseudonym appears like the right person; identities
   tailored to targeted service; choice of decentral setup in client;
   remote realm cannot run away and make us move from realm to realm;
   remote realm can hardly store interesting information in the tickets

6.  Security Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; impersonation guarded by KDC (TODO: spec); remote realm
   might do this in hidden ticket info anyway, or may use another
   identity, which seems harmless?

7.  IANA Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; "pseudonymity" KDC option; "pseudonymity" ticket flag

8.  Normative References

   [RFC6112]  Zhu, L., Leach, P., and S. Hartman, "Anonymity Support for
              Kerberos", RFC 6112, DOI 10.17487/RFC6112, April 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6112>.

Author's Address








Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support         October 2015


   Rick van Rein
   ARPA2.net
   Haarlebrink 5
   Enschede, Overijssel  7544 WP
   The Netherlands

   Email: rick@openfortress.nl












































Van Rein                 Expires April 12, 2016                 [Page 7]
