


idr                                                           B. Dickson
Internet-Draft                                       Afilias Canada, Inc
Expires: January 14, 2009                                  July 13, 2008


   Enhanced BGP Capabilities for Exchanging Additional Nth-Best Paths
               draft-dickson-idr-well-ordered-nth-best-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This Internet Draft describes an enhanced way to exchange prefix
   information, so as to permit multiple copies of a prefix, with
   different paths, to be announced and withdrawn.

   This negotiated capability facilitates faster local (inter-AS) and
   global (intra-AS) convergence, reduces path-hunting, improves route-
   reflector behaviour, including eliminating persistent oscillations.

   Additional prefix instances have a new wire format for updates and



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   withdrawals, to control path selection.

   Benefits are seen both when deployed intra-AS, and on inter-AS
   peering.

Author's Note

   This Internet Draft is intended to result in this draft or a related
   draft(s) being placed on the Standards Track for idr.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [5].

   Intended Status: Proposed Standard.


Table of Contents

   1.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  The Best Path Chaining and the Best Path Tree  . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  The Withdrawal Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  The Uniqueness Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Proposed Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  USE_N_BEST Capability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Modifications to BGP Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Changes to Path Selection Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  N Best - Basic Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  N Best - Route Reflector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4.  N Best - Inter-AS Hybrid Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.5.  IBGP vs EBGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Implementation Guidelines  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Path-Hunting Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix B.  Persistent Oscillation Examples . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12









Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


1.  Background

   Even when all the best current practises are observed, operational
   problems may be experienced when running a BGP network.

   These include slow convergence due to "path-hunting" and persistant
   oscillations [1].

   Standardization of MRAI timers helps path-hunting, and oscillations
   can be worked around with RFC 5004 [3].

   However, both of these RFCs identify the above issues as needing
   further work.

1.1.  The Best Path Chaining and the Best Path Tree

   In a stable system of BGP speakers, for every given prefix, the
   selected best paths should form a spanning tree.  At each node, the
   best path selected points further up the tree.  The root of the tree
   is the destination, i.e. the originator of the prefix.  The path from
   any leaf to the root forms a "chain" of best paths.

   There are any number of ways that path attributes may be modified
   over time, at arbitrary places in this tree.  When this happens,
   individual segments of the tree may conceptually "stretch" or
   "shrink".  These changes may have no effect on the overall set of
   choices of best path, or they may cause a cascade effect "below" that
   point in the tree, with nodes migrating to new locations in a new
   version of the tree.

   However, each node makes its choice of best path locally, and every
   time a node changes its selection of best path, that change is
   visible to its peers, and may in turn affect their own choice of best
   path.  This propogation of changes is not instantaneous, and owing to
   the non-tree-like nature of the actual connectivity between nodes,
   can and does result in race conditions.

   Depending on connectivity, peering policy, and initial conditions,
   the behavior may border on that of systems best describe through
   chaos theory.  The time to reach a stable state, while generally
   bounded, is often far from fast, not necessarily predictable, and not
   necessarily consistent.

1.2.  The Withdrawal Problem

   Under normal circumstances, a change in attributes for a prefix will
   "flow" along the tree of best paths, without disrupting the structure
   of the tree itself signficantly.  Even when a node selects a new best



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   path (and thus re-attaches itself to the tree in a new location), it
   typically will continue to pass the new attributes along the branch
   of the tree for which it is the root.

   However, under certain circumstances, its choice of new best path,
   requires it to WITHDRAW the prefix from those peers, and effectively
   sever the branch.  It is in the after-effects of this truncation that
   much of the path-hunting behavior gets triggered.

   When a withdrawal effectively severs a branch of the tree, all the
   nodes on the tree will need to find new paths to the root.  The
   problem is, that it takes some time for them to learn this fact.

   In the mean time, the nodes in the severed branch may continue to
   use, and propogate, paths that are technically infeasible.

   The idea is to fast-track the flooding of the infeasibility of paths
   throughout all parts of the tree below a given link, so as to
   minimize the use of infeasible paths.

1.3.  The Uniqueness Property

   Currently, for each prefix, only one path for that prefix is ever
   announced from one peer to another (ignoring Route Reflectors).
   Because of this property, uniqueness, a withdrawal on a prefix does
   not require path information.  This also means that a change of best
   path is accomplished via an update for a prefix with the new path
   information.

   If, however, more than one path for a given prefix were sent, then
   any attempt to withdraw a prefix+path would require some mechanism to
   distinguish between prefix instances.

   In an environment where multiple path announcments per prefix are
   possible, but only one "best" path per prefix is maintained, then two
   steps would be involved in changing the "best" path.  In no
   particular order, that would be the withdrawal of the old prefix+
   path, and the announcement of the new prefix+path.


2.  Proposed Changes

   What is being proposed is, maintaining a set of "N best" for each
   prefix, and sending ALL of these rather than just the "best" path.

   When any of the "N best" becomes infeasible, a withdrawal is sent.
   If a withdrawal is received, it receives special fast-track handling,
   taking advantage of the "N best" information.  If any of the N best



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   is affected by the withdrawal, it is immediately flooded to peers
   without doing a prefix BGP path comparison (since those results have
   already been pre-calculated).

   The supposition is that pruning all infeasible branches, while
   maintaining information on N best paths, allows for fast removal of
   all best paths which are dependent on infeasible paths, and fast
   reconvergence with pre-computed alternate paths.  It is expected that
   the N-best mechanism should act as a stop-gap until, but not actually
   replace, full prefix path comparisons to generate a new set of "N
   best" paths.

2.1.  USE_N_BEST Capability

   The USE_N_BEST Capability is a new BGP capability [RFC2842].  The
   Capability Code for this capability is specified in the IANA
   Considerations section of this document.  The Capability Length field
   of this capability is variable.  The Capability Value field consists
   of zero or more of the tuples <AFI, SAFI> as follows:

                  +------------------------------------------------+
                  | Address Family Identifier (2 octets)           |
                  +------------------------------------------------+
                  | Subsequent Address Family Identifier (1 octet) |
                  +------------------------------------------------+

                                 Figure 1

   The meaning and use of the fields are as follows:
   Address Family Identifier (AFI):  This field carries the identity of
      the Network Layer protocol for which the BGP speaker intends to
      advertise multiple paths.  Presently defined values for this field
      are specified in [IANA-AFI].
   Subsequent Address Family Identifier (SAFI):  This field provides
      additional information about the type of the Network Layer
      Reachability Information carried in the attribute.  Presently
      defined values for this field are specified in [IANA-SAFI].
   When advertising the USE_N_BEST Capability to a peer, a BGP speaker
   conveys to the peer that the speaker is capable of receiving multiple
   paths as well as the single path from the peer for address families
   that the speaker supports.  When a tuple <AFI, SAFI> is included in
   the capability, it indicates that the BGP speaker intends to
   advertise multiple paths for the <AFI, SAFI>.  If the USE_N_BEST
   Capability is also received from the peer, the speaker would then
   follow the procedures for advertising "Best N" paths to the peer for
   the specified <AFI, SAFI>.

   When advertising "Best N" paths:



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   o  Update messages MUST be in the new format [4], and
      ADD_PATH_ORDERED must also be advertised
   o  For each prefix, at most one of each ordinal value, 1 through N,
      may be sent
   o  The sender is responsible for selecting its own path ordinals
   o  The sender is responsible for maintaining the sequence order per
      prefix
   o  As a result of withdrawals, the sequence sent might not start at
      1, and might be sparse


3.  Modifications to BGP Behavior

3.1.  Changes to Path Selection Rules

   The path selection rules for BGP (section 9.1.2.2 of BGP4 [2]) are
   changed as follows:
   o  The following rule is a modification to step (c).

      It MAY only be needed when the node is acting as a Route
      Reflector.  If a node is NOT a Route Reflector, a simplified
      modification (remove any paths NOT marked BEST) MAY be used.
      (This modification exists to resolve the Persistent Oscillation
      problem only.)

      The modification to step (c) is:

      Step (c) is first performed INCLUDING paths NOT marked as BEST.

      If, at the end of the first attempt at step (c), no paths marked
      BEST remain, re-run step (c), this time EXCLUDING all paths NOT
      marked BEST.

      After this modified version of step (c), it should be observed
      (and asserted) that only paths marked BEST must remain.

      In other words, Step (c) MUST remove any non-BEST paths.
   o  The remainder of the usual BGP path selection rules are applied as
      normal
   The path selection rules for "Nth Best" path are as follows:
   o  The already-selected (N-1) best paths are removed from the set of
      paths to compare
   o  The same rules are applied as for the "best" path (including the
      modification to step (c), above)
   o  The selected path is advertised (to any peers with whom Nth-best
      has been negotiated), with the ordinal value of N applied
   The prefix instances for consideration of Nth-best path are the
   REMAINDER of non-yet-selected instances.  NB: Only the best (lowest



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   received ordinal), not-yet-selected instance of any IN-RIB may be
   selected for the local (and out-RIB) Nth-best path.

3.2.  N Best - Basic Method

   Once the capabality for doing so has been negotiated between a pair
   of BGP speakers, each sends the best N paths for each prefix.  The
   path information will include the additional ordinal value on the
   each Nth-best path.

   When the current "best" path is withdrawn, the withdrawal MAY be
   propogated without having to perform a full BGP prefix path
   selection.  The current "second best" path in the local-RIB is
   promoted to "best".  This is because the alternate candidates have
   already been evaluated and "second-best" has already been selected.

   Whenever an AS consists of a mesh of BGP speakers who have negotiated
   this capability, the withdrawal will propogate through the entire AS.
   This will either have no effect, or will cause a change in "best",
   which does not require non-local information in order to choose the
   new "best" path.

   The second-best path from a neighbor MUST ONLY be considered as a
   candidate for best path, when the previous best path from that
   neighbor is withdrawn.  When this occurs, the path in question is
   promoted to "best" status.

3.3.  N Best - Route Reflector

   The N best are all reflected.  The same mechanism is used for
   determining the best N per prefix.  Updates must be reflected
   whenever the choice of any of the best N change.  Withdrawals may be
   propogated immediately.

3.4.  N Best - Inter-AS Hybrid Method

   When a withdrawal of the current best path is received from a peer
   doing USE_N_BEST, and the rules for sending updates require that an
   update for this prefix be sent to a peer who does not support
   USE_N_BEST, the current second-best instance of the prefix is sent to
   that peer in an Update.  The neighbor does not need the withdrawal,
   since the new path replaces the old path.

3.5.  IBGP vs EBGP

   The same rules apply for EBGP->EBGP, EBGP->IBGP, IBGP->EBGP, and
   IBGP->IBGP.  If a particular peering has had USE_N_BEST negotiated,
   then any update for a particular prefix that results in new selection



Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   of any of the N best paths, the new selections (and possible
   withdrawal of old selections) is sent to the appropriate peers.


4.  Implementation Guidelines

   In order to encourage effective implementation schemes, and to
   demonstrate some of the benefits of deployment, here are some
   suggestions for facilitating fast propogation of path changes, which
   are anticipated as improving behavior.  This applies in particular to
   Path Hunting issues.


   In-RIB-N (many) -> RIB-N -> out-RIB-N
                       |   \
                       v    `-> out-RIB (to non-Nth-best peers)
                       RIB -> FIB


   +----------+------+--------+---------+-----------------|
   |   PREFIX | UNIQ | IN-ORD | OUT-ORD | *PATH-info-ptr  |
   +----------+------+--------+---------+-----------------|

                                 Figure 2

   Where IN-ORD and OUT-ORD indicate the preference order (from BEST to
   Nth-BEST) of the sender, or ourselves, and UNIQ is chosen to uniquely
   identify the prefix; BGP Originator is used for UNIQ.  IN-ORD are the
   values sent from a peer.  OUT-ORD is non-zero for ONLY those prefixes
   selected for inclusion into the RIB-N.

   For example, if all external peers have NOT negotiated Nth-Best,
   those prefixes would have an ordinal value of 1.  Each In-RIB-N would
   have at most one instance.  And for each prefix, at most one In-RIB-N
   would be selected as best, and have its corresponding OUT-ORD set to
   1.

   This forward-chaining allows for expedited processing of updates.  We
   can immediately determine whether any given withdrawals need to be
   flooded to peers, and if so, what ordinal to use on the forwarded
   update.  This flooding MAY be performed in parallel to normal BGP
   table update processing.

   For clarity, it should be pointed out that:
   o  The process for the step RIB-N to RIB is "select prefixes with
      OUT-ORD == 1".





Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   o  The process for the step RIB-N to out-RIB is also "select prefixes
      with OUT-ORD == 1".
   o  The process for the step RIB-N to out-RIB-N is the same as
      ordinary RIB to out-RIB, except for preservation of Ordinal
      values.


5.  Security Considerations

   No additional security considerations beyond those already present in
   BGP are introduced.


6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA will need to assign a new code point for BGP Capabilities for
   USE_N_BEST.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to acknowledge the helpful guidance of Joe Abley,
   and Tony Li.  The author thanks the following for feedback during the
   review and revision process: Joel M. Halpern, Tony Li.  The author
   also wishes to acknowledge the insight gained from his Scottish
   Deerhound, Skylar, winning a Reserve Best-in-Show.  (The selection
   method of "second best" comes from the Reserve system used at the
   group and best-in-show levels of dog shows).


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  McPherson, D., Gill, V., Walton, D., and A. Retana, "Border
        Gateway Protocol (BGP) Persistent Route Oscillation Condition",
        RFC 3345, August 2002.

   [2]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4
        (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [3]  Chen, E. and S. Sangli, "Avoid BGP Best Path Transitions from
        One External to Another", RFC 5004, September 2007.

   [4]  Dickson, B., "Enhanced BGP Capabilities for Exchanging Second-
        Best Paths", July 2008.





Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


8.2.  Informative References

   [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Appendix A.  Path-Hunting Examples

   (These will be included in a subsequent version of this ID.)


Appendix B.  Persistent Oscillation Examples

   Consider the example in Figure 3 where o R1, R2, R3, R4, and R5
   belong to one AS. o R1 is a route reflector with R2 and R3 as its
   clients. o R4 is a route reflector with R5 as its client. o The IGP
   metrics are as listed. o External paths (a), (b), and (c) are as
   described in Figure 4.

   +----+      1      +----+
   | R1 |-------------| R4 |
   +----+             +----+
    |  \                |
    |   \               |
   3|    \ 2            | 6
    |     \             |
    |      \            |
   +----+  +----+     +----+
   | R2 |  | R3 |     | R5 |
   +----+  +----+     +----+
    |        |          |
   (a)      (b)        (c)

                                 Figure 3


   Path    AS_PATH MED
    a       1 3    10
    b       2 3     1
    c       2 3     0

                                 Figure 4

   With the addition of "Nth Best", and locally limiting N to 2, we
   have:






Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


   R1 has the following:

   Path    AS_PATH MED IGP-metric
    a       1 3    10   3 (received:best) (best)
    b       2 3     1   2 (received:best)
    c       2 3     0   7 (received:best) (second_best - not sent)

   R4 has the following:

   Path    AS_PATH MED IGP-metric
    a       1 3    10   4 (received:best) (best - not sent)
    c       2 3     0   6 (received: best) (second_best)

   This results in R1 having:

  Path    AS_PATH MED IGP-metric
   a       1 3    10   3 (received:best) (best)
   b       2 3     1   2 (received:best)
   c       2 3     0   7 (received:second_best) (second_best - not sent)

   By including N best (for N=2) in the best path calculation, the
   persistent oscillation problem is resolved.


Author's Address

   Brian Dickson
   Afilias Canada, Inc
   4141 Yonge St,
   Suite 204
   North York, ON  M2P 2A8
   Canada

   Email: brian.peter.dickson@gmail.com
   URI:   www.afilias.info
















Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        BGP Well-Ordered N-Best Paths            July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Dickson                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12]

