


Network Working Group                                         E. Marocco
Internet-Draft                                            Telecom Italia
Intended status: Informational                                V. Gurbani
Expires: May 6, 2009                   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
                                                        November 2, 2008


    Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement
                draft-marocco-alto-problem-statement-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 6, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   A significant part of the Internet traffic today is generated by
   peer-to-peer applications used, for example, for file sharing,
   realtime communications and live media streaming.  Such applications
   often deal with large amounts of data in direct peer-to-peer
   connections, but they usually have little knowledge of the underlying
   network topology.  As a result, they may choose their peers based on
   measurements and statistics which, in some situations, may lead to



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   suboptimal choices.  This document describes problem related to
   optimizing traffic generated by peer-to-peer applications through the
   use of network-layer information, provides a representative set of
   use cases that may exhibit this problem, and outlines considerations
   that have to be taken in account when arriving at equitable
   solutions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Research or Engineering? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  File sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Cache/Mirror Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Live Media Streaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Realtime Communications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.5.  Distributed Hash Tables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Solution Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  ALTO Service Providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  Discovery of ALTO servers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.3.  User Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4.  Topology Hiding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  Coexistence with Caching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13




















Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


1.  Introduction

   A significant part of the Internet traffic today is generated by
   peer-to-peer (P2P) applications used, for example, for file sharing,
   realtime communications and live media streaming
   [WWW.cachelogic.picture] [WWW.wired.fuel].  Different from the
   client/server architecture, P2P applications access resources (e.g.
   files or media relays) distributed across the Internet and exchange
   large amounts of data in connections that they establish directly
   with nodes sharing such resources.

   One advantage of P2P systems arises from the fact that the resources
   such systems offer are often made available through multiple
   replicas.  Yet applications generally do not have reliable
   information of the underlying network and thus have to select among
   available instances based on information they deduce from empirical
   measurements which, in some situations, lead to suboptimal choices.

      For example, popular metrics based on round trip time estimation
      sometimes used for initial sources selection (i.e. before actual
      data transmissions begin, when goodput values are unknown) perform
      quite badly for file sharing applications as they tend to ignore
      bandwidth and reliability of underlying links, which have much
      more influence than delay on file transfers.

   Many of the existing P2P systems are based on an overlay network
   consisting of direct connections peers establish among themselves;
   such connections, obviously, do not account for the underlying
   network topology.  In addition to simply achieving suboptimal
   performance, such networks can lead to congestions and cause serious
   inefficiencies.  As shown in [ACM.fear], traffic generated by popular
   P2P applications often cross network boundaries multiple times,
   overloading links which are frequently subject to congestion
   [ACM.bottleneck].

   Recent studies [ACM.ispp2p] [WWW.p4p.overview] [ACM.ono] have shown
   that if Internet Service Providers (ISP), network operators or third
   parties in general provide reliable network information such as
   topology and/or bandwidth to P2P applications, it would be possible
   to greatly increase application performance, reduce congestion and
   optimize the overall traffic across different networks.  This
   document gives the problem statement of optimizing traffic generated
   by P2P applications using information provided by a separate party.

   The rest of this document is structured as follows.  Section 3
   introduces the problem more formally.  Section 4 describes some use
   cases where both P2P applications and network operators would benefit
   from a solution to such a problem.  Section 5 describes the main



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   issues to consider when designing such a solution.

1.1.  Research or Engineering?

   At the time of writing, several solutions have been proposed to
   address the problem described in this document, both inside and
   outside the IETF accompanied by encouraging simulation and field test
   results [I-D.bonaventure-informed-path-selection] [ACM.ispp2p]
   [WWW.p4p.overview].  Such solutions have been proposed independently,
   but all consists of two essential parts:
   o  a discovery mechanism which can be used by a P2P application to
      find a reliable information source;
   o  a protocol used by P2P applications to query such sources in order
      to retrieve the information needed to perform better-than-random
      selection of the endpoints providing a desired resource.

   It is not easy to foresee how such solutions would perform in the
   Internet, but a more accurate evaluation would require representative
   data collected from real systems by a critical mass of users.

   However, wide adoption will probably never happen without an
   agreement on a common solution based on open standard.


2.  Definitions

   The following terms have special meaning in the definition of the
   Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem.

   Application:  A distributed communication system (e.g., file sharing)
      that uses the ALTO service to improve its performance (or quality
      of experience) while reducing resource consumption in the
      underlying network infrastructure.  Applications may use the P2P
      model to organize themselves, or they can be simple client-server
      based, or even a hybrid of both.
   Peer:  A specific participant in an application.  Colloquially, a
      peer refers to a participant in a P2P network or system, and this
      definition does not violate that assumption.  If the application
      is based on a client-server or hybrid model, then the usage of the
      terms "client" and "server" imparts enough context for dis-
      ambiguity.
   Resource:  A piece of content (e.g. a file or a chunk of a file) or a
      server process (e.g. for relaying a media stream or for perfoming
      a computation) which can be accessed by applications.  In the ALTO
      context a resource is often available in several equivalent
      replicas, shared by different peers.





Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   Resource Identifier:  An application layer identifier used to
      identify a resource, no matter how many replicas thereof exist.
   Resource Provider:  For P2P applications, a resource provider is a
      specific peer that provides some resources.  For client-server or
      hybrid applications, a provider is a server that hosts a resource.
   Resource Consumer:  For P2P applications, a resource consumer is a
      specific peer that needs to access resources.  For client-server
      or hybrid applications, a consumer is a client that needs to
      access resources.
   Transport Address:  All address information that is needed by a
      resource consumer to access the desired resource at a specific
      resource provider.  This information usually consists of the
      resource provider's IP address, and it may include other
      information, such as a transport protocol identifier or port
      numbers.
   Overlay Network:  A virtual network consisting of direct connections
      on top of another network, established by a group of peers.  This
      logical structure, which can be used to implement distributed
      applications, may benefit from guidance from the ALTO service.
   Resource Directory:  An entity which is separate from the resource
      consumer, and which assists a resource consumer to identify a set
      of resource providers.  In P2P applications, the resource
      directory may be referred to as a P2P tracker.  Some applications
      do not use this concept and do the address mapping directly in the
      resource consumer.
   Host Location Attribute:  Information which is related to the
      location of a host in the network topology.  The ALTO service
      gives recommendations based on this information.  A host location
      attribute may consist, for example, of an IP address, an address
      prefix or address range that contains the host, an autonomous
      system (AS) number, or any other localization attribute.  These
      different options may provide different levels of detail.
      Depending on the system architecture, this may have implications
      on the quality of the recommendations ALTO is able to provide, on
      whether recommendations can be aggregated, and on how much
      privacy-sensitive information about users might be disclosed to
      additional parties.
   ALTO Service:  If several resource providers are able to provide the
      same resource, the ALTO service gives guidance to a resource
      consumer or resource directory, on which resource provider(s) to
      select, in order to optimize its performance (or quality of
      experience) while minimizing resource consumption in the
      underlying network infrastructure.
   ALTO Server:  A logical entity that provides interfaces that can be
      used to query the ALTO service.






Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   ALTO Client:  The logical entity that sends ALTO queries.  Depending
      on the architecture of the application it may be embedded in the
      resource consumer or in the resource directory.
   ALTO Query:  A message sent from an ALTO client to an ALTO server,
      which requests guidance from the ALTO Service.
   ALTO Reply:  A message sent from an ALTO server to an ALTO client,
      which contains guiding information from the ALTO service.
   ALTO Transaction:  An ALTO transaction consists of an ALTO query and
      the corresponding ALTO reply.
   Local Traffic:  Internet traffic which stays within the network
      infrastructure of one Internet Service Providers (ISP).  This type
      of traffic usually causes the least costs for the ISP.
   Peering Traffic:  Internet traffic exhcanged by two Internet Service
      Providers whose networks are directly connected.  Apart from
      infrastructure and operational costs, peering traffic is usually
      free, within the contract of a peering agreement.
   Transit Traffic:  Internet traffic exchanged on the basis of economic
      agreements between Internet Service Providers (ISP).  An ISP
      generally pays a transit provider for the delivery of traffic
      flowing between its network and networks that are not directly
      connected.


3.  The Problem

   Network engineers have been facing the problem of traffic
   optimization for a long time now and have already designed mechanisms
   like MPLS [RFC3031] and DiffServ [RFC3260] to deal with it.  The
   problem they address consists in finding (or setting) optimal routes
   for packets traveling between specific source and destination
   addresses and based on requirements such as low latency, high
   reliability, and priority.  Such solutions are usually implemented at
   the link and network layers, and tend to be almost transparent.  At
   best, applications can only "mark" the traffic they generate with the
   corresponding properties.

   However, P2P applications that are today posing serious challenges to
   Internet infrastructures, do not benefit much from the above
   techniques and "cooperating" with external services aware of the
   network topology could greatly optimize the traffic they generate.
   In fact, when a P2P application needs to establish a connection, the
   logical target is not a host, but rather a resource (e.g. a file or a
   media relay) generally available in multiple instances on different
   peers; selection of the closest one -- or, in general, the best from
   an overlay topological proximity -- has much more impact on the
   overall traffic than the route followed by its packets to reach the
   endpoint.




Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   Optimization of the peer selection is particularly important in the
   initial phase of the process.  Consider a P2P protocol such as
   BitTorrent, where a querying peer receives a list of candidate
   destinations where a resource resides.  From this list, the peer will
   derive a smaller set of candidates to connect to and exchange
   information with.  In another example, a streaming video client may
   be provided with a list of destinations from which it can download
   content from.  In both cases, the use of topology information in an
   early stage will allow applications to improve their performance and
   will help ISPs make a better use of their network resources (in
   particular, reducing the transit traffic on interdomain links).

   Addressing the Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem
   means, on the one hand, deploying an ALTO service to provide
   applications with information regarding the underlying network and,
   on the other hand, enhancing applications in order to use such
   information to perform better-than-random selection of the endpoints
   they establish connections with.


4.  Use Cases

4.1.  File sharing

   File sharing applications allow users to search for content shared by
   other users and download it.  Typically, search results consist of
   many instances of the same file (or chunk of a file) available from
   multiple sources; the goal of an ALTO solution would be to help peers
   find the best ones according to the underlying networks.

   On the application side, integration of ALTO functionalities may
   happen at different levels.  For example, while in the completely
   decentralized Gnutella network selection of the best sources is
   totally up to the user, in systems like BitTorrent and eDonkey,
   central elements (i.e. trackers or servers) act as mediators.
   Therefore, in the former case, optimization would require
   modification in the applications, while in the latter it could just
   be implemented in some central elements.

4.2.  Cache/Mirror Selection

   Providers of popular content like media and software repositories
   usually resort to geographically distributed caches and mirrors for
   load balancing.  Selection of the proper mirror/cache for a given
   user is today based on inaccurate geolocation data, on proprietary
   network location systems or often delegated to the user himself.  An
   ALTO solution could be easily adopted to ease such a selection in an
   automated way.



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


4.3.  Live Media Streaming

   P2P applications for live streaming allow users to receive multimedia
   content produced by one source and targeted to multiple destinations,
   in a realtime or near-realtime way without recurring to multicast.
   Such applications typically participate in the distribution of the
   content, acting as both receivers and senders; the goal of an ALTO
   solution would be to help peers to find the best sources and the best
   destinations for media flows they receive and relay.

4.4.  Realtime Communications

   P2P realtime communications allow users to establish direct media
   flows, usually to place audio and video calls, or to have text chats.
   In the basic case, media would flow directly between the two
   endpoints; however, in the general case, a significant portion of
   communications between users with limited access to the Internet
   (e.g. users behind NATs, firewalls or HTTP proxies) need to be
   relayed by other elements.  Such media relays are distributed over
   the Internet -- in some cases co-located with applications with a
   public address; the goal of an ALTO solution would be to help peers
   to find the best relays.

4.5.  Distributed Hash Tables

   Distributed hash tables (DHT) are a class of overlay algorithms used
   to implement lookup functionalities in popular P2P systems, without
   recurring to centralized elements.  In such systems, peers maintain
   addresses of other peers participating in the same DHT in a routing
   table, sorted according to specific criteria.  An ALTO solution would
   provide valuable information for DHT algorithms which, in order to
   reduce path latency of distributed queries, include round trip time
   estimations among such criteria [SIGCOMM.resprox].


5.  Solution Considerations

   This section introduces some aspects to keep in consideration when
   designing an ALTO service to provide applications with information
   they can use to perform better-than-random peer selection.

5.1.  ALTO Service Providers

   ALTO services can be provided by at least three different kinds of
   entity:
   1.  Network operators: usually have full knowledge of the network
       they administer and are aware of the topology and policies that
       transit and peering traffic are subject to;



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   2.  Third parties: entities different from the network operators, but
       which may have collected network information.  Examples of such
       entities are content delivery networks (like Akamai) which
       control wide and highly distributed infrastructures, or companies
       providing an ALTO service on behalf of ISPs (and thus acquire the
       information from the ISPs themselves);
   3.  User communities: running distributed algorithms, for example for
       estimating the topology of the Internet.

5.2.  Discovery of ALTO servers

   As a direct consequence of the totally decentralized architecture of
   the Internet, it seems almost impossible to centralize all
   information P2P applications may need to optimize traffic they
   generate.  Therefore, any solution for the ALTO problem will need to
   specify a mechanism for applications to find a proper ALTO server to
   query.

   It is important to note that, depending on the implementation of the
   ALTO service, an ALTO server could be a centralized entity for
   example deployed by the network operator as well as a volatile node
   participating in a distributed algorithm.

5.3.  User Privacy

   Information provided by the ALTO client querying the ALTO server
   could help increase the level of accuracy in the replies.  For
   example, if the querying client indicates what kind of application it
   is using (e.g. realtime communications or bulk data transfer), the
   server will be able to indicate priorities in its replies
   accomodating the requirements of the traffic the application will
   generate.  However, it is important that for using an ALTO service
   the application does not have to disclose information it may consider
   sensible.

5.4.  Topology Hiding

   Operators can play an important role in addressing the ALTO problem,
   but they generally consider network information they own to be
   confidential; therefore, in order to succeed and achieve wide
   adoption, any solution should provide a method to help P2P
   applications in peer selection without explicitly disclosing topology
   of the underlying network.

5.5.  Coexistence with Caching

   A common approach to optimizing traffic generated by applications
   which require large data transfers is based on caching techniques.



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   In some cases, such techniques have proven to be extremely effective
   in both enhancing user experience and saving network resources;
   however, they have two main limits in respect to the solutions based
   on provision of topology information:
   1.  Application specificity: since a cache is meant to replace the
       source of the content being accessed -- either explicitly or
       transparently -- it must be able to speak the same protocol with
       the querying peer.  For this reason, caching solutions can be
       reasonably adopted only for most popular applications (e.g.  HTTP
       and BitTorrent).
   2.  Content awareness: since caches need to actually store the
       content being delivered, they are subject to legal threats
       whenever the user does not have the right to access or distribute
       such content.  This limitation makes caching approaches unusable
       in today's popular file sharing systems.

   In general, solutions based on provision of topology information need
   not to interfere with caching; to the contrary, if ALTO service used
   by applications is aware of the presence of chaches, it can point
   them out in its replies with higher priorities and thus achieve
   greater optimization.


6.  Security Considerations

   The approach proposed in this document requires P2P applications to
   delegate a portion of their routing capability to third parties,
   giving them a significant role in systems where that would be
   otherwise excluded.

   In the case where an ALTO solution is deployed by the network
   operator, it is conceivable that the P2P community would consider it
   hostile because the operator could, for example:
   o  redirect applications to corrupted mediators providing malicious
      content;
   o  track connections to perform content inspection;
   o  apply policies based on criteria other than network efficiency
      (for example, to avoid peering points regulated by inconvenient
      economic agreements).

   However, ALTO is completely optional for P2P applications and its
   purpose is to help improve performance of such applications.  If, for
   some reason, it fails to achieve this purpose, it would simply fail
   to gain popularity and would not be used.

   Even in cases where the ALTO service provider would decide to
   maliciously alter results returned by queries only after the solution
   has gained popularity (i.e. it behaves for a while to become popular



Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   and then starts misbehaving), it would be fairly easy for P2P
   application maintainers and users to revert to solutions that are not
   using it.  After all, it would all come down to change some
   application settings in cases where the protocol is implemented
   inside the client and upgrading centralized elements for
   architectures like BitTorrent and eDonkey.


7.  Acknowledgments

   Vinay Aggarwal and the P4P working group conducted the research work
   done outside the IETF.  Emil Ivov, Rohan Mahy, Anthony Bryan,
   Stanislav Shalunov, Laird Popkin, Stefano Previdi, Reinaldo Penno,
   Dimitri Papadimitriou, Sebastian Kiesel, and many others provided
   insightful discussions, specific comments and much needed
   corrections.

   Thanks in particular to Richard Yang for several reviews.


8.  Informative References

   [ACM.bottleneck]
              Akella, A., Seshan, S., and A. Shaikh, "An Empirical
              Evaluation of WideArea Internet Bottlenecks",  Proceedings
              of ACM SIGCOMM, October 2003.

   [ACM.fear]
              Karagiannis, T., Rodriguez, P., and K. Papagiannaki,
              "Should ISPs fear Peer-Assisted Content Distribution?",
               In ACM USENIX IMC, Berkeley 2005.

   [ACM.ispp2p]
              Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A., and C. Scheideler, "Can ISPs
              and P2P systems co-operate for improved performance?",  In
              ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communications Review (CCR), 37:3,
              pp. 29-40.

   [ACM.ono]  Choffnes, D. and F. Bustamante, "Taming the Torrent: A
              practical approach to reducing cross-ISP traffic in P2P
              systems",  Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM, August 2008.

   [I-D.bonaventure-informed-path-selection]
              Saucez, D. and B. Donnet, "The case for an informed path
              selection service",
              draft-bonaventure-informed-path-selection-00 (work in
              progress), February 2008.




Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3260]  Grossman, D., "New Terminology and Clarifications for
              Diffserv", RFC 3260, April 2002.

   [SIGCOMM.resprox]
              Gummadi, K., Gummadi, R., Ratnasamy, S., Gribble, S.,
              Shenker, S., and I. Stoica, "The impact of DHT routing
              geometry on resilience and proximity",  Proceedings of ACM
              SIGCOMM, August 2003.

   [WWW.cachelogic.picture]
              Parker, A., "The true picture of peer-to-peer
              filesharing", <http://www.cachelogic.com>.

   [WWW.p4p.overview]
              Xie, H., Krishnamurthy, A., Silberschatz, A., and R. Yang,
              "P4P: Explicit Communications for Cooperative Control
              Between P2P and Network Providers",
              <http://www.dcia.info/documents/P4P_Overview.pdf>.

   [WWW.wired.fuel]
              Glasner, J., "P2P fuels global bandwidth binge",
              <http://www.wired.com/techbiz/media/news/2005/04/67202>.


Authors' Addresses

   Enrico Marocco
   Telecom Italia
   Via G. Reiss Romoli, 274
   Turin  10148
   Italy

   Email: enrico.marocco@telecomitalia.it


   Vijay K. Gurbani
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   1960 Lucent Lane
   Naperville, IL  60566
   USA

   Email: vkg@alcatel-lucent.com






Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           ALTO Problem Statement            November 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Marocco & Gurbani          Expires May 6, 2009                 [Page 13]

