

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  C. Apple
<draft-apple-schema-rqmts-list-02.txt>                 AT&T Laboratories
Expires: April 11, 1998                                  11 October 1997




                 Directory Schema Listing Requirements
                 <draft-apple-schema-rqmts-list-02.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   This memo documents requirements for listing directory services
   schema in a centrally operated, administered, and maintained
   repository. This repository will be available as a resource to
   directory protocol and service implementors to facilitate schema
   discovery.

1.0 Introduction

The fastest route to interoperable directory services is through
standard object classes and attribute types. There is a growing number
of places where schema for Internet Directory Services and Internet
Operations are being defined, with varying degrees of documentation.
This plethora of schema is unavoidable in the light of the needs of
different service communities, but it makes it difficult for directory
service builders to find and make use of an existing schema that will
serve their needs and increase interoperability with other systems. A
listing service providing a single point of discovery for directory
service schema will promote schema reuse, reduce duplication of effort,



Apple                                                           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


and thus promote directory service interoperability.

The intent is to offer a schema listing service with public read access
and restricted, moderated write access. Many hard-coded choices and
constraints have been reflected in this requirements document for the
purpose of expediting deployment. Future releases of the service may
require an update of this document.

Initially, such a listing service will be centrally operated,
administered, and maintained. The schema listing repository database may
also be mirrored to ensure some level of redundancy for read access in
the event of service interruption. Eventually, the operations,
administration, and maintenance of such a listing service may evolve to
use a more distributed deployment scenario.

The schema listing service is also intended to be largely automated,
with minimal human involvement. Human involvement is likely to be
limited to the following types of activities:

   + handling repository access problems
   + trouble resolution for computing and communications facilities
   + dealing with reasonable requests that fall outside
     of the scope of normal schema listing repository operations
   + reviewing schema listing requests on a mailing list
     prior to publishing in the listing repository

Future releases of the service may automate some of these tasks.

1.1 Scope

Requirements for the initial release of a directory schema listing
service are inside the scope of this document.

Specifications for syntaxes and grammars to be used in the initial
release of the directory schema listing service are outside the scope of
this document.

Documentation of schema listing procedures is outside the scope of this
document.

1.2 Terms and Definitions

Information Object - a descriptive abstraction of some real-world object

Schema - a collection of definitions for related information objects

Listing Meta Data - characteristics that differentiate one schema from
another; used to catalog schema



Apple                                                           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


Listing Content - a formal specification, using a single type of syntax,
of a schema

Schema Listing - the combination of listing meta data and all available
syntax types of listing content for a particular schema

Repository - a database in which schema listings are stored

Schema Listing Request - a schema listing formatted using MIME
constructs that is submitted for consideration as a schema listing to be
published in a repository

Operator - an organization that administers and maintains a repository

Primary Repository - the repository that masters the schema listings
database

Shadow Repository - a repository that mirrors the primary repository

Contact Person - the name of the individual who holds the authority to
update a schema listing and who should be contacted if questions or
concerns arise related to a schema listing or schema listing request

Listing Authority Contact - the name of the individual who holds
authority to replace a contact person; can be either the contact person
for a schema listing or an alternate contact within the organization to
which the contact person belongs (this allows one person organizations
to list schema)

The terms for specifying requirement level described in [RFC2119] are
used in this document.

1.3 Usage Scenarios

1.3.1 Location and Retrieval of the vCard Schema for LDAPv3

A user of the schema listing service wants to locate a copy of the vCard
schema for LDAPv3 so that they can use it in a prototyping project.
First, they point their web browser at a schema listing repository web
site and download the list of available schema. Next, they use the
search command on their browser to locate occurences of the string
"vCard". The browser automatically scrolls down to the appropriate place
in the list of available schema and the user clicks on a link to view
the listing meta data to verify that this is indeed the vCard schema for
use with version 3 of the LDAP protocol. Included in the web-based
representation of the listing meta data are ftp URLs pointing to
available syntaxes for this schema. The user clicks on the link for the
syntax that they can use.



Apple                                                           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


1.3.2 Submission of a New Schema Listing via SMTP

A schema writer wishes to list a schema they have created and prepares
the listing meta data and listing content according to appropriate
syntax specifications. However, the schema writer does not currently
have an OID at which to root this schema. The schema writer may apply
for and obtain an OID through channels other than the schema listing
service. However, if the schema writer is unable or does not wish to
independently obtain an OID, the primary listing repository operator
will supply one.

Once this OID is available for use, the schema writer or the listing
repository operator incorporates it into the listing meta data and
submits an SMTP message includeing the listing meta data and all
available syntaxes of the listing content in multipart-mixed MIME format
to a listing request review mailing list. After a short review period,
the listing repository operator validates the request, and if properly
formed, assigns a unique serial number to the listing and publishes it
according to the listing procedures. An announcement of the newly
published schema listing is sent to a mailing list reserved for this
purpose.

2.0 Listing Service Requirements

2.1 Functional Requirements

Listed schema MAY be published as an RFC.

A list of available schema listings MUST be maintained.

Schema MUST be named according to the namespace defined in section 3.

Schema listings MUST be identifiable by a unique serial number.

The listing service SHALL also maintain information about the schema,
beyond its definition. This information is referred to as meta data and
will consist of information used for cataloging schema in the listing
repositories.  The particular set of  meta data elements used during the
initial deployment of the listing service are outside of the scope of
this document.

Listing meta data and listing content MUST be parsable.

2.2 Operational Requirements

The process of listing schema MUST be centralized for the initial
deployment.




Apple                                                           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


Updated schema listings SHALL be deprecated.

A new serial number SHALL be generated for each schema listing that
results in the deprecation of an existing schema listing.

Schema listing serial numbers MUST NOT be recycled or re-used.

The listing repository MUST be centrally administered.

The listing repository MAY be mirrored.

Schema listing requests MAY be signed using PGP/MIME as described in
[RFC2015]. The primary listing repository operator MUST be able to
accept schema listing requests in PGP/MIME messages, although they are
NOT REQUIRED to validate the signatures. The method for validating and
determining trust of signatures is outside the scope of this document
and is determined by the parties in the exchange. The method for
determining and validating trust in an unsigned request is outside the
scope of this document, as is the method for determining trust in schema
listing repository or its content.

A mailing list MUST be created for the purpose of submitting schema
listing requests for publishing in the schema listing repository.  The
schema listing repository MUST be moderated via this mailing list.
Schema listing requests MUST be subjected to community review on this
mailing list for a period of at least 2 weeks. If no comments are
received, properly formed schema SHALL be listed as requested;
otherwise, the request MAY either denied or the schema MAY listed
subject to incorporation of comments.

A mailing list MUST be created for announcing new and updated schema
listings.

A mailbox MUST be created for the purpose of receiving service trouble
requests from users.

Listing repository operators (of primary and shadow sites) MUST provide
a free means of accessing the listing service consistent with the
functions documented in paragraph 2.3.

2.3 Repository Access Functionality

The following schema listing repository access protocols MUST be
supported:  FTP [RFC959], HTTP 1.1[RFC2044], and SMTP [RFC821].

The following access functions are REQUIRED:

   a) obtain schema listing content



Apple                                                           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


   b) obtain schema listing meta data
   c) browse schema listing meta data
   d) browse schema listing content
   e) obtain a list of available schema listings
   f) browse a list of available schema listings
   g) search a list of available schema listings
   h) add a schema listing
   i) update a schema listing

The following access functions MAY be supported:

   a) search schema listing content
   b) search schema listing meta data

3.0 Listing Service Namespace

The listing service namespace MUST be protocol-independent.

Names constructed using the listing service namespace MUST be permanent,
globally unique, and publicly available.

The listing name MUST be the OID at which the schema is rooted.

Consider the following example of a schema name for the vCard schema
[VCARD]:

      1.3.6.1.4.1.2309.1.1.1.1

4.0 Listing Requirements

Listing content SHALL be limited to the information actually required to
specify the schema.

Listing meta data SHALL be composed of information used to catalog
schema listings.

Meta data element syntax SHALL be defined based on the concept of tagged
attribute type-value pairs.

Language tags as specified in [RFC1766] MUST be used in listing content
and meta data.

Meta data element values MUST be encoded using the UCS Transformation
Format - 8 bit form [RFC2044].

For the purposes of submitting a listing request, listing content and
meta data SHOULD be structured according to appropriate MIME type
definitions [MIME].



Apple                                                           [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


5.0 Listing Storage Requirements

Listing file names MUST be permanent, globally unique, and publicly
available.

Listing content and listing meta data MUST be stored in separate files.

6.0 Security Considerations

6.1 Compromisable Assets

One or more of the following assets could be compromised if the service
is attacked:

   + Listing meta data
   + Listing content
   + Repository Hardware & Software
   + Networking Facilities Connecting Repository to the Internet
   + Repository Mirror Sites

6.2 Attack Scenarios

Allowable methods for submitting schema listing requests are:

   a) sending an e-mail message to a mail box

   b) submitting requests using web-based forms

Based on these request submission methods, there are a number of known
repository attack scenarios that must be considered during the
implementation of schema listing procedures and the software and
operational processes required to support them.

6.2.1 Denial-of-Service Attack Scenarios

Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of improperly formed
requests

Scenario B: someone could send in a large number of properly formed, but
frivolous, useless, or trivial requests

6.2.2 Confuse-the-User Attack Scenarios

Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of valid, but
frivolous, useless, or trivial requests and some or all of these
requests actually become listings in the repository

Scenario B: someone could maliciously submit one or more slightly



Apple                                                           [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


modified versions of existing schema listings which are popular or
widely used

6.3 Security Requirements on Schema Listing Procedures

The following contextual definitions apply to the requirements listed in
the remainder of this paragraph:

Verification - a process of determining authenticity of facts implied or
explicitly specified by a contact person during the process of
submitting a schema listing request; the methods used to implement such
a process MAY or MAY NOT be based on an IETF-sanctioned security
protocol; specification of the methods used to implement such a process
as well as the trust relationships relevant to the process are outside
the scope of this document.

High-Quality Directory Schema - a directory schema that serves some
useful purpose (e.g., a related set of attribute and object class
definitions for holding information about people in a LDAP directory); a
schema that is _not_ merely trivial or frivolous (e.g., a trivial schema
might consist of a related set of attribute and object class definitions
for holding information about the two possible binary bit values in a
directory).

The schema listing procedures SHOULD be designed to enable:

   a) verification that all properly formed schema listing requests are
   submitted by the contact person claiming to originate them

   c) methods of ensuring that only properly-formed, high-quality
   directory schema are published in the schema listing repository

   d) verifcation that requests to change the identity of the contact
   person for a schema listing originate from the listing authority
   contact

   e) coping with the situation in which the contact person and/or
   listing authority contact for a schema is no longer available or is
   unable to submit updates to the schema listing for which they hold
   update authority

7.0 Acknowledgements

Leslie Daigle of Bunyip Information Systems and Chris Weider of
Microsoft provided valuable comments on multiple versions of this
document.

The engineering team for listing service requirements:



Apple                                                           [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


   Sanjay Jain - Oracle
   Michael Mealling - NSI
   John Strassner - Cisco
   Sam Sun - CNRI
   Mark Wahl - Critical Angle
   Chris Weider - Microsoft

The members of the ietf-schema-reg@imc.org mailing list.

8.0 References

[CHARSET] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, "CHARACTER SETS",
<URL:ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/character-sets>.

[LDAPV3] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access
Protocol (Version 3)", INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-ietf-asid-ldapv3-
protocol-06.txt>, July 1997.

[MIME] [RFC2045], [RFC2046], and [RFC2047].

[RFC821] J. Postel, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 821, Aug-01-
1982.

[RFC959] J. Postel, J.K. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol", RFC 959,
Oct-01-1985.

[RFC1766] H. Alvestrand, "Tags for the Identification of Languages", RFC
1766, March 1995.

[RFC2015] M. Elkins, "MIME Security with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)", RFC
2015, October 1996.

[RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
Level", March 1997.

[RFC2068] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, T. Berners-Lee,
"Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2068, January 1997.

[RFC2044] F. Yergeau, "UTF-8, a transformation format of Unicode and ISO
10646", RFC 2044, October 1996.

[RFC2045] N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC
2045, November 1996.

[RFC2046] N. Freed & N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November 1996.




Apple                                                           [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   11 October 1997


[RFC2047] K. Moore, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part
Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047, November
1996.

[VCARD] F. Dawson, M. O'Brien, "The vCard Schema For Use In LDAPv3",
INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-ietf-asid-ldapv3schema-vcard-00.txt>, July 1997.

9.0 Author's Address

Chris Apple
AT&T Laboratories
600 - 700 Mountain Ave., Room 2F-165
Murray Hill, NJ 07974-0636
USA

E-Mail: capple@att.com
Phone: +1 908 582 2409
FAX: +1 908 582 3296




             This INTERNET-DRAFT expires on April 11, 1998.




























Apple                                                          [Page 10]
