

CCAMP Working Group                                  Richard Douville
Internet Draft                                  Dimitri Papadimitriou
Category: Informational                              Martin Vigoureux
Expires: December 2002                                Emmanuel Dotaro
                                                              Alcatel

                                                            June 2002



    Additional Extensions to Generalized MPLS for Waveband Switching

         draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extensions-01.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   Generalized-MPLS (GMPLS) extends the MPLS control plane to encompass
   time-division, wavelength and spatial switching. A functional
   description of the extensions to MPLS signaling needed to support
   the new types of switching is provided in [GMPLS-SIG]. Along with
   the current development of IP over optical switching, there are
   considerable developments in optical transport systems based on the
   multiple optical switching granularities. [GMPLS-SIG] currently
   defines two layers of optical granularity (wavelength and fiber). As
   described in [IPO-MG], a revisited definition of waveband switching
   must be introduced. This document presents a functional description
   of the extensions, to the GMPLS protocol suite, to integrate the
   additional requirements of optical multi-granularity and to further
   benefit from the features of those switching layers.



R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        1

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002



2. Summary for Sub-IP Area

2.1. Summary

   See the Abstract above.

2.2. Where does it fit in the Picture of the Sub-IP Work

   This work fits the CCAMP box.

2.3. Why is it Targeted at this WG

   This draft is targeted at the CCAMP WG, because it specifies the
   extensions to the GMPLS signaling. GMPLS is itself addressed in the
   CCAMP WG.

2.4. Justification of Work

   The WG should consider this document as it specifies the extensions
   to the GMPLS signaling. These extensions are related to the
   definition of waveband switching and the introduction of optical
   multi-granularity.

3. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

   Other abbreviations and terminology in addition to the [GMPLS-ARCH]
   and [GMPLS-SIG] are:

      WB-LSP    =       WaveBand-LSP
      WBSC      =       WaveBand Switch Capable
      WXC       =       Wavelength Cross-Connect
      WBXC      =       WaveBand Cross-Connect
      FXC       =       Fiber Cross-Connect
      MG-OXC    =       Multi-Granularity Optical Cross Connect
      MG-PXC    =       Multi-Granularity Photonic Cross Connect

4. Introduction

   In optical networks, multi-granularity provides the ability to
   simultaneously switch different levels of granularity inside a given
   optical network. The granularities we considered inside optical
   networks are single wavelengths (L-LSP), bundles of wavelengths that
   we call wavebands (WB-LSP), and whole fibers (F-LSP).

   Optical Multi-Granularity (Optical MG) relies on technologies
   working at the different switching levels (e.g. wavelength, band and
   fiber). One of the key benefits in optical backbone networks is to
   simplify the switching procedures of numerous lower granularity LSPs

R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        2

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


   (Lambda-LSPs, for instance) by switching these LSPs as a single
   entity or LSP of higher granularity order (e.g. WB-LSP or F-LSP). To
   enable such grouping of LSPs, grooming strategies can be employed.

   We propose to extend GMPLS previous set of switching capabilities in
   the optical domain, by identifying uncovered characteristics of the
   optical transport, taking into account interest for optical
   components working at the band level and its impact on the control
   of the optical networks. In the efforts of describing the
   requirements and set of capabilities for optical multi-granularity,
   three approaches to waveband switching have been identified:
        - Inverse Multiplexing
        - Wavelength Concatenation
        - Waveband

   The common availability of optical/photonic switching equipment
   capable to work at the band level motivates the redefinition of
   waveband switching as defined in the GMPLS architecture. Current
   definition of waveband switching (see [GMPLS-ARCH] and [GMPLS-SIG])
   refers to inverse multiplexing mechanism or wavelength concatenation
   (ôcontiguousö lambdas in a trunk defining a logical waveband). While
   this definition is still valid and applicable, it does not consider
   the approach where band has a physical significance, i.e. where the
   interface is WaveBand Switch Capable (WBSC). Physical waveband has
   the ability to switch directly a portion of the frequency spectrum
   without the need to distinguish between the inner components (e.g.
   wavelengths).

   The following document regroups the extensions to the GMPLS protocol
   suite required to support the introduction of the optical multi-
   granularity and particularly the new definition and features of
   waveband switching.

5. Extensions to the GMPLS Protocol Suite

5.1. Hierarchy Overview

   The integration of optical multi-granularity in the GMPLS
   architecture requires modifications and extensions to current
   definitions. For this purpose, we first introduces a new type of
   switching capable interface: the Waveband Switching Capable
   Interface (WBSC). The WBSC interface materializes the physical
   reality of optical waveband as an atomic entity or granularity. As
   with the introduction of the waveband switch capable interface, a
   new class of LSP is defined: the WaveBand LSP (WB-LSP).

     LSP Hierarchy       Interfaces        Network Element

        L-LSP (1)  <--->    LSC     <---->      WXC   -
                                                       |
        WB-LSP (1) <--->    WBSC    <---->      WBXC    > Optical MG
                                                       |
        F-LSP      <--->    FSC     <---->      FXC   -

R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        3

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002



   (1) WB-LSPs can be supported on both Lambda and WaveBand Switch
   Capable interfaces depending on the nature of the waveband being
   requested (inverse multiplexing, wavelength concatenation, and
   physical waveband).

   Note that WXC, BXC and FXC can be part of the same entity referred
   to as MG-OXC or MG-PXC.

   The above figure illustrates the hierarchy of the switching layers
   and highlights the optical multi-granularity part. The network
   element column shows typical equipment that supports such
   interfaces. Note that this representation does not aim at
   restricting interfaces that network elements can support.

   The [GMPLS-ARCH] document considers waveband switching a particular
   case of lambda switching. As specified, a waveband represents a set
   of contiguous wavelengths, which can be switched together to a new
   waveband. However, definition does not introduce a new LSP Encoding
   Type.

   The current definition of the waveband is too restrictive at least
   on two key aspects. The first one is that current definition of
   waveband implies a wavelength composition of the waveband, due to
   waveband switching by wavelength cross-connects (WXC). This
   definition provides support to inverse multiplexing mechanism and
   wavelength concatenation. This approach limits the use of waveband
   to the wavelength switch capable technologies. With waveband
   switching technologies, the WBSC interface doesnÆt distinguish
   between the component optical channels, sub-channels (i.e.
   timeslots) or packets on the waveband which is switch as a single
   unit (wide frequency spectrum) like it could be done with the fibers
   (the penultimate frequency spectrum) on photonic cross-connect
   (PXC). The second restrictive point is that the current definition
   of the waveband does not enable intermediate grooming strategy.

   For this purpose, we introduce an additional optical granularity
   representing the waveband. This definition is quite general and
   backward compatible, it allows requesting a set of contiguous
   wavelengths (i.e. inverse multiplexing mechanism and wavelength
   concatenation) but also address the "real" waveband switching and
   following the set of capabilities. Therefore, the proposed
   definition better fits into the GMPLS architecture.

   It would be noted that "Waveband/Set of wavelength", as it is today
   defined, form a contiguous optical granularity concatenation/set
   i.e. nesting of wavelengths in waveband. This general scheme which
   request contiguous optical granularity concatenation/set could be
   applied with other optical granularities.

5.2. Generalized Label Request

   The Generalized Label Request must support the Waveband LSP request.

R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        4

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


   For this purpose, we propose to extend field values of the LSP
   Encoding for the Generalized Label Request by an adjunction of a new
   LSP Encoding Type, a specific Switching Type and also some
   enhancement of the already defined Generalized PID (G-PID) values.

      The information carried in a Generalized Label Request is:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | LSP Enc. Type |Switching Type |             G-PID             |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   LSP Encoding Type: 8 bits

        Indicates the encoding of the LSP being requested. The
        following Value 14 and Type Waveband (Photonic) is added to the
        existing LSP Encoding Type values to provide Waveband LSP
        support:

             Value              Type
             -----              ----
                 1              Packet
                 2              Ethernet
                 3              ANSI/ETSI PDH
                 4              Reserved
                 5              SDH ITU-T G.707 / SONET ANSI T1.105
                 6              Reserved
                 7              Digital Wrapper
                 8              Lambda (photonic)
                 9              Fiber
                10              Reserved
                11              FiberChannel
                12              G.709 ODUk (Digital Path)
                13              G.709 Optical Channel
                14              Waveband (Photonic)

        For example, consider an LSP signaled with "WaveBand" encoding.
        It is expected that such an LSP would be supported with no
        electrical conversion and no knowledge of the frequency
        cutting, modulation and speed by the transit nodes.  Other
        formats normally require framing knowledge, and field
        parameters are broken into the framing type and speed.

   Switching Type: 8 bits

        Indicates the type of switching that should be performed on a
        particular link. This field is needed for links that advertise
        more than one type of switching capability. For OXC or PXC
        enabling Waveband switching, the WBSC value is used to refer to
        such switching capability. Other values of this field are as
        the Switching Capability field defined in [GMPLS-ROUTING].


R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        5

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


   Generalized PID (G-PID): 16 bits

        An identifier of the payload carried by an LSP, i.e. an
        identifier of the client layer of that LSP.  This is used by
        the nodes at the endpoints of the LSP, and in some cases by the
        penultimate hop.  Standard Ethertype values are used for packet
        and Ethernet LSPs; other values are defined in [GMPLS-SIG].

        A waveband can carry a Lambda LSP while a Waveband LSP can be
        transported on a Fiber LSP, the following additional G-PID
        values must be considered: see [GMPLS-SIG] section 3.1.1 û
        Required Information, paragraph on Generalized-PID.

           Value        Type               Technology
           -----        ----               ----------
            37          Lambda             Waveband, Fiber
            ..          ...                ...
            55          Waveband           Fiber

        In addition the following existing values must be updated in
        order to reflect the transport of Ethernet and SDH/SONET
        payload over a waveband LSP:

            33          Ethernet           SDH, Lambda, Waveband, Fiber
            34          SDH                Lambda, Waveband, Fiber
            35          Reserved           None 
            36          Digital Wrapper    Lambda, Waveband, Fiber

5.3. Generalized Label

   As currently proposed in [GMPLS-SIG], the waveband label space
   definition is perfectly suitable and does not require any
   modification or extension.

5.4. Waveband-Switching Capability

   A new WaveBand-Switch-Capable (WBSC) Link Multiplex Capability value
   shall be defined to identify and distinguish the associated
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability of a link [MPLS-HIER]. If the
   switching capability of a (TE) link is of type WBSC, it means that
   the node receiving data over this link (fiber) can recognize and
   switch individual WaveBands within the link (without distinguishing
   lambdas, channels or packets).

   [GMPLS-RTG] and the new value define the following Interface
   Switching Capabilities:

                 Packet-Switch Capable-1 (PSC-1)
                 Packet-Switch Capable-2 (PSC-2)
                 Packet-Switch Capable-3 (PSC-3)
                 Packet-Switch Capable-4 (PSC-4)
                 Layer-2 Switch Capable  (L2SC)
                 Time-Division-Multiplex Capable (TDM)

R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        6

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


                 Lambda-Switch Capable   (LSC)
                 Waveband-Switch Capable (WBSC)
                 Fiber-Switch Capable    (FSC)

   Note that the node that is advertising a given link (i.e., the node
   that is transmitting) has to know the "multiplexing/demultiplexing"
   capabilities at the other end of the link (i.e., the receiving end
   of the link). One way to accomplish this is through configuration.
   Other options to accomplish this are outside the scope of this
   document.

5.4.1. Waveband Switch Capable

   If an interface is of type WBSC, it means that the node receiving
   data over this interface can recognize and switch wavebands (sets of
   contiguous lambdas) within the interface as a unit (without
   distinguishing lambdas, channels or packets). An interface that
   allows only one waveband per interface belongs to the WBSC type.

5.4.2. Interface Switching Capability Descriptor

   For ISIS, the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor is a sub-TLV
   (of type 21) of the extended IS reachability TLV. The length is the
   length of value field in octets.

   For OSPF, the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor is a sub-TLV
   of the Link TLV with type 15. The length is the length of value
   field in octets.

   The common format of Interface Switching Capability Descriptor is
   defined in [GMPLS-OSPF] and [GMPLS-ISIS], respectively.

   A new value for the Switching Capability (Switching Cap) field is
   defined to identify the Waveband-Switch Capable (WBSC) interfaces:

        151   Waveband-Switching Capable   (WBSC)

   In an Interface Switching Capability Descriptor, when the Switching
   Capability (Switching Cap) field contains the value for WBSC, the
   specific information field includes the Minimum LSP Bandwidth, which
   is the number of contiguous wavelength constituting a WaveBand
   entity. Additional technology specific information can be considered
   in future releases such as the channel spacing.

5.5. LSP Regions and Forwarding Adjacencies

   The information carried in the Switching Capability field (8 bits)
   of the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor is used to
   construct LSP regions, and determine regions' boundaries as defined
   in [MPLS-HIER].




R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        7

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


   The introduction of the new Link Multiplex Capability WBSC define a
   new ordering among link multiplexing capabilities as follows: PSC-1
   < PSC-2 < PSC-3 < PSC-4 < TDM < LSC < WBSC < FSC.



   Path computation may take into account this region boundary when
   computing a path for an LSP. When an LSP need to cross a region
   boundary, it can trigger the establishment of a Forwarding Adjacency
   (FA) at the underlying layer. The new cascading of FAs can be
   triggered between layers with the new following obvious order: L2SC,
   then TDM, then LSC, then WBSC and then finally FSC.

6. Security Considerations

   No additional security considerations beyond the one covered in
   RSVP-TE (see [RFC-3209]) and CR-LDP (see [RFC-3212]).

7. References

7.1 Normative References

   [GMPLS-LDP]  L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS Signaling -
                CR-LDP ExtensionsÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-06.txt, April 2002.

   [GMPLS-ISIS] K.Kompella et al., æIS-IS Extensions in Support of
                Generalized MPLSÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-12.txt, May 2002.

   [GMPLS-OSPF] K.Kompella et al., æOSPF Extensions in Support of
                Generalized MPLSÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-ospf-gmpls-extensions-07.txt, MayÆ02.

   [GMPLS-RSVP] L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS Signaling -
                RSVP-TE ExtensionsÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-07.txt, April 2002.

   [GMPLS-RTG]  K.Kompella et al., æRouting Extensions in Support of
                Generalized MPLSÆ, Internet Draft, Work in Progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing-04.txt, April 2002.

   [GMPLS-SIG]  L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS
                - Signaling Functional DescriptionÆ, Internet Draft,
                Work in progress, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-
                signaling-08.txt, April 2002.

   [ISIS-TE]    T.Li et al.,ÆIS-IS Extensions for Traffic
                EngineeringÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-
                ietf-isis-traffic-04.txt, November 2001.

   [MPLS-BUNDLE]K.Kompella et al., æLink Bundling in MPLS Traffic


R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        8

draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extension-01.txt         June 2002


                EngineeringÆ, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-bundle-
                03.txt, March 2001.

   [MPLS-HIER]  K.Kompella et al., æLSP Hierarchy with MPLS TEÆ,
                Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-
                hierarchy-05.txt, April 2002.

   [OSPF-TE]    D.Katz et al., æTraffic Engineering Extensions to
                OSPFÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-katz-
                yeung-ospf-traffic-06.txt, September 2001.

   [RFC-3209]   D.Awduche (Editor) et al., æRSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP
                for LSP TunnelsÆ, Internet RFC 3209, IETF Proposed
                Standard, December 2001.

   [RFC-3212]   B.Jamoussi (Editor) et al. æConstraint-Based LSP Setup
                using LDPÆ, Internet RFC 3212, IETF Proposed Standard,
                January 2002.

7.2 Informative References

   [GMPLS-ARCH] E.Mannie (Editor) et al., æGeneralized Multi-Protocol
                Label Switching (GMPLS) ArchitectureÆ, Internet Draft,
                Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-
                02.txt, February 2002.

   [RFC-2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.

8. Author's Addresses

   Richard Douville (Alcatel)
   Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France
   Phone: +33 1 6963-4431
   Email: richard.douville@alcatel.fr

   Martin Vigoureux (Alcatel)
   Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France
   Phone: +33 1 6963-1852
   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel.fr

   Emmanuel Dotaro (Alcatel)
   Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France
   Phone: +33 1 6963-4723
   Email: emmanuel.dotaro@alcatel.fr

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellesplein 1, B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be




R.Douville et al. - Internet Draft û Expiration December 2002        9
