


Network Working Group                                           B. Leiba
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Updates: 6241 (if approved)                            December 21, 2015
Intended status: Best Current Practice
Expires: June 21, 2016

    Changing the Registration Policy for the NETCONF Capability URNs
                                Registry
                 draft-leiba-netmod-regpolicy-update-02

Abstract

   The registration policy for the Network Configuration Protocol
   (NETCONF) Capability URNs registry, set up by RFC 6241, has turned
   out to be unnecessarily strict.  This document changes that
   registration policy to "IETF Review", allowing registrations from
   certain well reviewed Experimental RFCs, in addition to Standards
   Track RFCs.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction


Leiba                    Expires June 21, 2016                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       NETCONF Capability URNs Policy        December 2015


   The Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) Capability URNs registry
   [RFC6241], was set up with a registration policy of "Standards
   Action" [RFC5226], allowing registrations only from Standards Track
   RFCs.  This provided thorough review of the specifications that are
   requesting NETCONF Capability URNs.  It has turned out to be
   desirable to allocate capability URNs for certain Experimental RFCs
   also, provided those specifications are also carefully reviewed.  The
   existing registration policy is, therefore, unnecessarily strict,
   requiring exception handling by the IESG.  This document changes that
   registration policy to "IETF Review", which also allows registrations
   from certain well reviewed Experimental RFCs, or, for example,
   corrections to registry errors from Informational RFCs, with IETF
   review and consensus.

2.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is asked to change the registration policy for the Network
   Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) Capability URNs registry to "IETF
   Review", and to add this document to the registry's reference field.

   Registrations made from RFCs that are not on the Standards Track need
   to be carefully reviewed through IETF Last Call and consultation with
   relevant working groups, such as NETCONF.  The Operations and
   Management Area Directors should confirm the appropriate level of
   review during IESG Evaluation.

3.  Security Considerations

   This document is purely procedural, and there are no related security
   considerations.

4.  NOTE

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section and make sure the title of
   the references section is "Normative References".  The version of
   xml2rfc that I'm using ignores my section title and just calls it
   "References".]

5.  References

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC6241]  Enns, R., Ed., Bjorklund, M., Ed., Schoenwaelder, J.Ed.,
              and A. Bierman, Ed., "Network Configuration Protocol
              (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, DOI 10.17487/RFC6241, June 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6241>.

Author's Address




Leiba                    Expires June 21, 2016                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       NETCONF Capability URNs Policy        December 2015


   Barry Leiba
   Huawei Technologies
   
   Phone: +1 646 827 0648
   Email: barryleiba@computer.org
   URI:   http://internetmessagingtechnology.org/















































Leiba                    Expires June 21, 2016                  [Page 3]
