詿mass                                                             D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                               Kelkea Inc.
Expires: September 23, 2005                               March 25, 2005


                      MASS impacts upon reputation
                     draft-otis-mass-reputation-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 23, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document responds to findings in the MASS review by Russell
   Housley et al, with additional considerations from the perspective of
   reputation assessment.  This also includes speculations on possible
   solutions and implementations for the MASS proposal: DomainKeys.







Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Security and Email Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.   Filtering erodes integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.   The next steps in policy enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   PKI certificates per user would burden larger domains  . . .   8
   6.   Key size and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.   Protection from Denial of Service attack . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.   Abating the replay attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.   Border Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   10.  Domain Assertions for Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   12.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12.1   References - Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12.2   References - Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  21

































Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


1.  Introduction

   Laws governing email policy allow for broad discretion and do not
   always prohibit unsolicited commercial email (UCE).  However, far
   more stringent email policies may be demanded by mail recipients.
   Signatures, validated by keys published within DNS, allow recipients
   a stronger means to ascertain those entities most directly
   accountable for policies applied to the message offered.  The
   reputation of such entities often determine acceptance of messages,
   although currently this is normally based upon the IP address.
   Signatures by themselves are not a panacea, and the current
   [DomainKeys] specification create challenges when attempting to
   squelch policy breaches, see [ID-Housley-MASS].  In addition, the
   overhead required to implement signatures, compared to the use of an
   IP address for reputation assessment, requires additional defensive
   measures.

   Terminology: Terminology conforms to [ID-email-arch].


2.  Security and Email Policy

   Systems suffering a security breach have become a primary means for
   sending abusive email.  Any scheme that attempts to abate abusive
   email traffic must seek to identify actual sources for determining
   those accountable for maintaining security when abuse is discovered.
   Ensuring the validity of these identifiers requires authentication,
   especially when used as a basis for network protection.  Any
   assumptions regarding sources of abusive email or a presumption of
   security may injure innocent parties and damage the integrity of
   email delivery.

   With tens of millions of good and bad evolving email domains, it
   would be both expensive and ineffective to abate abuse or maintain
   security by having each recipient contemporaneously establish
   permissions.  Creating additional protocol requirements will not
   abate email abuse either, as those wishing to abuse email will be
   among the first ones to employ such newer requirements, once they
   offer greater access.  Pooling a community's experience is an
   effective long-term policy enforcement technique when confronting
   these many sources.

   This pooling or centralization is often accomplished through
   reputation services as a means to establish policy within a
   community, where those with even a brief history of not adhering to
   these policies are thereby excluded from the community.  Real-time
   black-hole lists have become a commonly used mechanism to publish
   reputations, where no record returned indicates a good reputation.  A



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   community wishing to enforce an Opt-In requirement for bulk email, as
   an example, often employs an email reputation service to establish
   such a community-wide policy.

   Reputation service subscription fees, if any, are typically paid by
   the recipient.  With such a service, those sending abusive levels of
   unrequested email to anyone within the community may find subsequent
   messages refused with an error response.  This response often
   indicates which reputation service reported their server as not
   having a good reputation with respect to specific polices.  The
   extent of email abuse has made reputation services an integral
   component of network resource protection as well.

   Some bulk email distributors also utilize a vouching or accreditation
   service which attests their compliance to specific policies.  Such
   accreditation requires that the recipients use and trust this
   service, but fees for this type of service are usually paid by the
   sender.  Mechanisms for accreditation services are often similar to
   real-time black-hole lists, except a record may also assert favorable
   ratings.  Such fee structures for accreditation may provide senders
   greater latitude, and tend to dissuade typical domain administrators,
   who then ignore such accreditation services.  More recipients may use
   an accreditation service, if there were a standardization for the
   response records and a method for the sender to recommend services.

   Larger providers may utilize accreditation services together with
   their own white-listing for bulk email distributors, as an adjunct to
   real-time black-hole listings.  White-listing by IP address is
   difficult to scale, but this is employed for bulk distributors when
   their volumes lead filtering algorithms to categorize them as
   abusers.  Hopefully, reliance upon message signatures and
   technologies such as Really Simple Syndication, RSS, will soon serve
   as viable alternatives to white-listing for the bulk distribution of
   information.  Signatures should depreciate reliance upon filtering,
   and adoption of RSS inherently allows the recipient to create their
   own permissions.  RSS could be fostered by being utilized as feedback
   for commercial transactions.

3.  Filtering erodes integrity

   Filter programs often hide their actions, and this inhibits
   challenges by senders.  The ability to challenge is needed to ensure
   the integrity of email delivery.  A filter program's "Junk" folder
   contains email that has not been properly excluded by policy
   enforcement, but is without a strong basis for rejection.  Even when
   a filtered message is rejected, it may be due to a phrase contained
   within the message.  A doctor's reply to a patient may be steadfastly
   rejected regardless which provider is used.  Unfortunately, many of



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   these filter programs have evolved to also silently discard messages,
   once some level of heuristics has been achieved.  As a result of the
   breakdown in policy enforcement, the resulting reliance upon filters,
   which silently discard, as well as place messages into the often
   ignored "Junk" folder, greatly reduces the integrity of email
   delivery .

   Those, wishing to improve upon filtering, claim mailbox-domain path
   registration using IP address lists will reduce reliance upon
   content.  An often espoused feature is that such path registration
   will thwart phishing and spoofed bounce-address techniques.  Lack of
   consensus regarding which mailbox-domain is constrained makes this
   claim specious.  There is often a high premium willing to be paid to
   assure delivery of commercial transactions.  These transactions are
   also most often affected by phishing, but the strict listings that
   are suggested to affect phishing are incompatible with reliable
   delivery.  Many headers may serve to qualify a message for
   acceptance, but then the mailbox-domain used as a basis for
   acceptance may remain unseen by the user.  Email that conforms to a
   prescribed path still offers little protection for users deceived by
   what they are able to see.  Path registration anti-spoofing or
   anti-phishing claims, even with strict listings, are dangerous by
   creating false assurances.

   More importantly, publishing these path registration address lists
   increases the risk of misapplied reputation by those who assume MTA
   authorization is equivalent to the mailbox-domain having been
   authenticated.  A non-strict list permits any source to send messages
   using the mailbox-domain.  This non-strict approach accommodates
   forwarding by recipients, or some types of list servers, for example.
   Such lists also permit anyone sharing the MTA to send messages that
   will appear to be fully qualified for acceptance.  Even strict lists
   still permit the mailbox-domain to be forged.  The sending MTA
   administrator may ensure the bounce-address is not misused, but the
   recipient might not use the bounce-address and qualify headers
   instead, which circumvents the sending administrator's protection of
   the bounce-address.  Patent licensing issues may constrain the
   sending MTA administrator from also making assurances beyond the
   bounce-address.

   Applying reputations to mailbox-domains falsely presumes
   authentication and intervening security.  Path registration for a
   mailbox-domain offers only MTA authorization and is comparable to
   content filtering based upon weak identifiers.  Although it may take
   time, expect these false assumptions to be fully exploited.  As an
   analogy, consider that an automobile represents the MTA, the driver
   represents the administrator, who's name represents the MTA HELO.
   The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) identifies the vehicle owner



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   and represents the MTA IP address.  A passenger represents the
   mailbox-domain owner, and removable front and rear license plates,
   that identify the passenger, represent the mailbox-domains.  The
   vehicle owner, driver, and passenger may be one in the same, but
   typically these are different individuals, as with a prevalence of
   taxis in some cities.

   Passengers mount both the front and rear license plates before
   entering the vehicle.  After the passenger enters, the driver may
   check which plates have been mounted before proceeding.  A contract
   is required before the driver can check the larger rear plate, and
   therefore the rear plate may not always be checked.  The driver may
   also be lax and fail to check any plate.

   The city is suffering from an excessive number of illegally parked
   automobiles, where in the typical case, the offending vehicle would
   also have a stolen plate.  Stolen front plates often deceive parking
   attendants into directing automobiles to available spaces.  In an
   effort to constrain the use of the plates, passengers are asked to
   register the authorized VIN of one or more automobiles they may use.
   As example, a plate's registration may include all the VINs for
   automobiles owned by Big-City and Small-Town Cab companies.  To
   encourage plate registration, parking tickets will be written against
   either the front or rear plate, rather than against the VIN of the
   automobile, as is the current practice.

   By using the transient plate to assign accountability, the purported
   passenger (plate owner) will be held accountable.  This strategy
   places the plate owner at risk for several reasons.  In the case
   where a passenger deceives the driver, public plate registrations
   allow this dishonest passenger to know which plates are associated
   with the vehicle to further evade detection by drivers that also
   check the plate's registration.  In addition, the driver may be lax
   or unable to check the mounted plates, where some passenger may be
   using the wrong plates while wanting to park at inappropriate
   destinations.

   Although it is the driver who is most able to ensure security, and
   who checks the passengers granted access to the automobile, and who
   monitors the receipt of parking tickets, ticketing against the VIN
   assumes it is the vehicle owner that controls who is driving.  By
   ticketing against either the driver or vehicle owner, those that
   ultimately control access would be held accountable.  However, in
   this analogy of path registration, it is the hapless plate owner
   (purported passenger) that is held accountable.  Drivers may rejoice
   they are not held accountable, but this will certainly lead to abuses
   harming the majority that are only passengers.  It would be
   impractical to suggest everyone should drive.



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   Checking the plates takes time and may require the driver to interact
   with passengers.  Rather than holding the driver or vehicle owner
   accountable, it is now the plate owners that must ensure drivers
   adhere to good practices.  But how will the plate owner even know
   which driver caused them to receive erroneous tickets or which
   drivers have obtained contracts for checking the rear plate? The
   driver may have logs, but the plate owner will not have access to
   these records out of privacy concerns.  Even the tickets will not
   illuminate which driver permitted plate misuse.  The plate owner may
   remain unable to restore their parking record or to discover which
   driver was negligent.  Such a system that holds the passenger
   accountable is inherently unfair since it is the driver who controls
   access, is expected to check the plates, and operates the vehicle.

4.  The next steps in policy enforcement

   Reduce reliance upon filtering that either discards or "junks"
   messages.  A growing loss of integrity in email delivery is eroding
   email's value as a method for conducting transactions.  This loss of
   integrity is largely caused by filtering programs that process
   messages based upon weak identifiers.  A filter program's use of
   heuristics with weak identifiers demands growing resources and may
   cost senders the loss of their messages, even to the point where
   their mailbox-domain becomes unusable, with no clear recourse for
   correcting errant behaviors.

   Remove advantages gained by spoofing the bounce-addresses by not
   returning the original content of the bounced message within the
   Delivery Status Notification (DSN).  This should curtail the
   exploitation of an MTA, that performs checks after accepting the
   message, with spoofed bounce-addresses intended to be bounced.
   Reduce the exposure to the DSN from messages with spoofed
   bounce-addresses by implementing a time constrained cryptographic
   signature within the local-part of the bounce-address for all
   messages sent, as described in [ID-BATV].

   Improve the integrity of email by using reputations based only upon
   authenticated identities, where messages are either fully accepted or
   refused.  In email, there are only three identities that can be
   authenticated: the IP address of the sending MTA, a somewhat stronger
   HELO, and a much stronger message signature.  Authentication of these
   identities provides a means to fairly assess these sources for
   possible abuse.  The IP address and HELO-domain represent the
   administrator for the last step in the message's delivery.  A message
   signature represents the domain administrator granting initial
   access.

   Protect the signature validation process by utilizing an



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   authenticated HELO to establish a reputation for the session prior to
   an exchange of messages and prior to the validation of signatures,
   see [ID-CSV].  The authentication and authorization of the HELO can
   be validated within a single DNS lookup.  It would also be possible
   to combine the HELO authentication and authorization with the query
   to a reputation service by including the HELO domain and the client
   IP address within the request.  The DNS infrastructure that provides
   the signature keys also requires better protections.  Do not expect
   the DNS server to handle active scripts that demand extensive
   lookups.  DNS protections can be enhanced by providing a means to
   verify that the sequence of signature keys is valid.  Ultimately, the
   deployment of [RFC3008] for DNSSEC is required.

   Limit exposure to the replay of signed messages.  Although a message
   signature provides the strongest authentication and offers the
   recipient the best protections from spoofing or phishing, it could be
   abusively repeated beyond the signing domain's control.  As a
   defensive measure, when needed, a message signature also permits
   inclusion of an opaque revocation-identifier.  The
   revocation-identifier would both ease correlation of abuse, and
   enable a means to squelch "replay attacks." For example, when the key
   remains valid for two weeks, publishing a revocation record within
   minutes of an abuse report would reduce replay exposure by a factor
   of 4000 to 1, and would clearly unveil replay sources to all
   recipients.  While message signatures offer little network
   protection, they indicate the administrator most able to prevent
   future breaches of policy.  Message signatures also truly afford
   protections from the initial sources being spoofed.

   Assert email policy for the domain, see [ID-CSVCSA].  Currently this
   DNS record allows a domain to assert that all of their SMTP clients
   will be authorized and authenticated using [ID-CSV].  A signed
   message allows safe assessment of the message source by making no
   presumptions of intervening security.  Adding a domain level
   assertion that all [RFC2822] FROM entities are signed offers a safe
   means to prevent mailbox-domain spoofing or phishing.  At an
   administrative border, policy assertions, as well as the domains
   validated, may need to be communicated to another MTA within the
   administrative domain, where signature validation may occur.  This
   document recommends a possible structure for transferring this
   information.

5.  PKI certificates per user would burden larger domains

   The relative simplicity of the DomainKeys proposal represents an
   essential element needed to sustain the performance demanded by the
   email infrastructure.  While policy enforcement necessitates
   cancellation of access rights, using signatures also necessitate a



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   need to revoke user authorization implied by a valid signature.  This
   is not equivalent to a certificate revocation as defined for PKI in
   [RFC3280].  A proposed method in this document achieves the
   revocation mechanism, and only requires a simple exchange for
   infrequent cases.  In fact, certificates would be unsuitable for
   fulfilling this need, as certificates per-user would represent an
   undue burden.

   For large providers, two certificates per user would be needed to
   accommodate the mail transit time during a certificate change-over.
   A domain with 20 million users would then require close to 7 GB of
   data published on-line.  Even when subsequent certificates are phased
   in stages, any extended period for such staging would increase the
   size of certificate revocation lists (CRL) which, to be effective
   against abuse, would require frequent polling.  Recipients would then
   need to cache this voluminous information for all users exchanging
   messages.  As an alternative, by adding a persistent identifier
   within the message, the amount of information exchanged would
   represent 6 orders of magnitude reduction, while still providing the
   same capabilities.

   For the smaller providers, not incurring the added expense of
   acquiring certificates helps reduce barriers to the deployment of
   message signatures.  A certificate authority typically ensures the
   identity of the certificate holder, but is less concerned about
   adherence to various email policies.  There would still be a need to
   verify the reputation of this identity against desired policies, as a
   basis for accepting their messages.  While using DNS to distribute
   keys reduces what could be a substantial expense, this relatively
   simple mechanism is not without risk.

   To confront infrastructure exploitation tactics, and to take
   advantage of the DomainKeys approach, new signature keys, identified
   by their selectors, could be signed with the same method as used for
   a message.  The key signature is then published in the same manner as
   the key within the DNS.  The new key signature could then be verified
   by using a previous key.  The location of the key signatures would be
   at the same node as the key records.  The Time-To-Live for the key
   records should be sufficiently long to allow their cache retention
   periods to fully overlap the duration of the next key's use.  At the
   receiving SMTP server, retaining a list of valid selectors could
   indicate which selectors are new and are in need of checking.
   Identifying new keys may be achieved by disabling recursion for
   selector lookups.  When not in cache, a recursive lookup would then
   include a check for the validity of a new key against the selector
   included within the matching signature's Key Tag.  This key checking
   process could be offered by reputation services as a temporary
   warning.



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   Establishing a convention for key selectors as a numeric value with a
   range of 0-65,535 would then be compatible with a Key Tag, as
   provided in [RFC2538].  A numeric Key Tag, added to the key header,
   such as v=, would indicate which prior key was used to sign the newer
   key.

      v3._dk.<signing-domain> ; signature of key 00003

      (the CERT Key Tag indicates which private half of a public key was
      used to create the signature.)

      p3._dk.<signing-domain> ; public key 00003 to verify messages.

   This example uses _dk rather than _domainkey to conserve the DNS
   reply.  Noting an instance, where an older key is not already
   captured, could have value in another way.  When there is something
   suspicious, checking the signatures of the keys could offer a means
   to detect a problem.  In general, domains without a retained selector
   offering high levels of traffic may indicate this domain was
   hijacked, or recently acquired.  Temporary refusals for a few hours
   in this situation could be prudent, to allow time for either a
   reputation service to list the domain as bad, or for a possible
   problem to be resolved.

6.  Key size and performance

   RSA keys are used by the proposal and, for this review, are assumed
   to follow the outline in [RFC3447].  The processing to verify a
   signature is roughly dependent upon the square of the key size.  The
   overhead associated with certificate or key handling is ameliorated
   through retention within a cache for extended periods.  In the summer
   of 1995, RSA laboratories recommended a minimum key size of 768 bits
   for user data, 1024 bit keys for enterprise keys, and 2048 bits for
   root keys.  Since that time, with Moore's law providing a doubling of
   performance every 2.5 years, today's system's performance is
   approximately 16 times faster.  At an RSA challenge in August 1999, a
   512-bit value was factored using 35.7 CPU-years.  Other concerns
   regarding the time to factor the key involve the advancement of
   programmable or custom logic.  These hardware advances further
   increases the performance of factoring by thousands of times more,
   especially for smaller keys where the needed memory size remains
   practical.

   Factoring memory requirements: [TWINKLE]







Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+
          | Key Size | Time        | Factor | Sieve | Matrix |
          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+
          | 512      | 1.7 x 10^19 | 3MB    | 128MB | 2GB    |
          | 768      | 1.1 x 10^23 | 240MB  | 10GB  | 160GB  |
          | 1024     | 1.3 x 10^26 | 7.5GB  | 256GB | 10TB   |
          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+

   There are speculative estimates that with as little as $5,000 worth
   of specialized hardware, a 768-bit key could be determined within 95
   days, see [TWIRL].  Extrapolating from this figure, it may take
   $200,000 to do this within 3 days.  With the growing plunder achieved
   by criminal activity that sends email to entice victims, this expense
   may not be an adequate deterrent.  Today's recommended minimum key
   size of 1024-bits seems well justified.  It will change to 2048-bits
   by the year 2015, based on a tentative schedule provided by the NIST,
   see [NIST-Keys].  [RFC3766] provides details relevant to assessing
   key strength.

   A very rough estimate of processing overhead for signatures assumes
   that memory caching and higher processor performance provide about an
   8 times improvement over memory bus rates.  The following formula was
   used to estimate performance:

      (80,000 + 32 (key-bit-size^2) + 448(message-byte-size)) /
      bytes/second memory-speed

      Note: Once actual results are evaluated, constants within this
      formula will need adjustment and should also vary between
      different architectures.

   At 768-bit keys and a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory, the overhead
   for an 8 KB message estimates to be around 10.7 milliseconds.  The
   same parameters with a 1024-bit key would result in 17.8
   milliseconds.  This suggests that when changing from 768-bit to
   1024-bit keys, the resulting overhead should increase by a factor of
   about 1.6.  Such a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory dedicated to
   performing this operation, could then handle daily about 4.8 million
   messages that average 8 KB in size.












Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


            +--------------+----------------+-------------+
            | Message Size | Signature Time | Message/min |
            +--------------+----------------+-------------+
            |     1,000    |      16 ms     |    3,700    |
            |     5000     |      17 ms     |    3,500    |
            |    10,000    |      18 ms     |    3,300    |
            |    50,000    |      27 ms     |    2,300    |
            |    100,000   |      37 ms     |    1,600    |
            +--------------+----------------+-------------+

   This table is for a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory validating
   1024-bit keys.  This shows that beyond 100,000 byte messages, the
   much faster hash function becomes predominately the limiting factor.

7.  Protection from Denial of Service attack

   The growth of UCE messages is becoming a significant burden on both
   the networks and related servers.  Paradoxically, signed messages, if
   not effective at deterring abuse, will add to both the network and
   server burdens.  To ensure protection of the infrastructure,
   signature validation must be performed in concert with a lightweight
   mechanism that also offers an authenticated domain name as a basis
   for reputation validation.  This must be done ahead of message
   transfers and any signature validation operation, see [ID-CSV].  This
   mechanism, used in conjunction with a reputation service, can
   eliminate most DoS attack vectors.  Path registration records catalog
   all outbound MTAs of a domain and demand a minimum of one hundred DNS
   lookups, while also ignoring UDP exponential back-off.  Such path
   registration records can not offer network resource protection.

   A quick and lightweight mechanism for authenticating the HELO domain
   that is checked against a reputation service, would be suitable for
   refusing mail from egregious abusers and provide Denial of Service
   protections.  A domain reputation service used with the HELO could
   also be used with the signature domain, where sub-domains of a domain
   with a bad reputation will also be reported as bad.  Message
   signatures, coupled with a revocation-identifier, also offer the
   signing domain a lightweight means to defeat abusive accounts that
   are staging replay attacks.  With signatures and
   revocation-identifiers, resources can be protected, and abuse need
   not be tolerated simply because the domain is large.

   Lightweight DoS protection mechanisms should be based upon a single
   DNS lookup to confirm both the authorization and authentication of
   the sending SMTP client for the HELO domain name.  When, by
   convention, the HELO is typically within the domain that signs the
   messages, then a few other efficiencies are made possible.  (For
   providers that offer other domains transit, arrangements may be made



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   to allow the forwarding of the HELO.) It becomes possible to skip a
   reputation check for the signing domain following a reputation check
   of a HELO that is contained within this domain.  Most significantly
   however, by finding that the HELO is within the signing domain,
   checking the status of a specific revocation-identifier would not be
   needed.  Had the account been revoked, it should be impossible for
   these messages to be signed with a revoked revocation-identifier.

8.  Abating the replay attack

   One technique could require signed messages to be from an MTA with an
   authenticated HELO within the domain of the signature.  Another
   technique may extend this by allowing signed messages to be from an
   MTA authorized by a list of trusted servers.  Both techniques would
   be comparable solutions that unfortunately will reduce the integrity
   of email delivery.  List servers that pass messages unaltered, or
   recipients that employ forwarding accounts would be fairly common
   scenarios that confound such schemes.  Deterring the replay does not
   require all abusive messages to be stopped.  There must be a way to
   rapidly respond to expose and reduce the profits of this abusive
   behavior.

   The revocation-identifier is a mechanism being suggested by this
   document.  If a persistent identifier were added to an unsigned
   message, this would invite forgery and therefore offer little value.
   A standardized revocation-identifier, included within the validated
   content of a signed message, would offer significant value.  It would
   be an opaque value added to the signature header that would be valid
   as a domain name label.  A persistent revocation-identifier would be
   most useful when derived from the access server that authenticates
   the account being used.

   In such a case, the revocation-identifier would greatly aid the
   correlation of abuse and prove most useful for locating compromised
   systems.  This approach could be effective against systems
   compromised by Trojan programs, stolen passwords, and cracked
   wireless access points, among many other nefarious methods.  Abuse
   reports that catalog signed messages and that are correlated with the
   revocation-identifier would provide incontrovertible evidence of
   where the source of a problem exists.  The publishing of the
   revocation record for the revocation-identifier would also provide
   feedback that actions were taken to rectify a policy breach.

   In odd cases, where the HELO is not contained within the signing
   domain, a single lookup of the revocation-identifier returning no
   record would be an indication that this particular
   revocation-identifier is still authorized by the signing domain.
   This mechanism would be most valuable in those cases where the



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   message may have been forwarded, such as at the typical alma mater,
   or where a mailing list opts to also forward signed messages
   unaltered.  If there is a problem, the signature would offer the most
   expedient domain able to remedy abuse.  People can still safely use
   their forwarding email accounts given to them by their school or
   society.  Mailing lists would be given a strong identifier upon which
   to grant the replication of messages.  The best part, complaints
   would also likely be directed to those most able to curtail future
   episodes of bad behavior, their immediate provider!

   The construction of this revocation record mechanism could take the
   form of a single A record lookup.  The revocation-identifier would be
   composed of 1 to 63 characters and select a record in this fashion:

   Within the signature header, a parameter u=<revocation-identifier>
   would indicate the use of a revocation-identifier.

      <revocation-identifier> ::= <letter> [ [ <ldh-str> ] <let-dig> ]

      <ldh-str> ::= <let-dig-hyp> | <let-dig-hyp> <ldh-str>

      <let-dig-hyp> ::= <let-dig> | "-"

      <let-dig> ::= <letter> | <digit>

      <letter> ::= %x41-5A / %x61-7A

      <digit> ::= %x30-39

      <revocation-identifier>._rl.<signing-domain> IN A 127.0.0.1

   When the signing domain has not revoked authorization for this
   identifier, no record would be returned and the remote DNS cache
   would retain the absence of this record for a brief period of time,
   see [RFC2308].  For the majority of cases, where messages are
   obtained directly from the signing domain, an exception granted by
   the HELO being within the signing domain allows this revocation check
   to be skipped.  When a revocation check is made for the odd cases of
   the HELO being within a different domain, this would be performing
   nearly an identical lookup now ubiquitously done to investigate the
   status of the SMTP client's IP address against a real-time black-hole
   list.  Those addresses or identifiers that warrant refusal are
   granted a long lived address record to ensure their immediate refusal
   and limit DNS traffic resulting from abusive sources.  Otherwise, by
   not offering a record, when the situation regarding a particular
   identifier changes, cessation of its authorization can be prompt.
   The Time-To-Live for negative DNS caching may be determined by the
   recipient, or represent the lesser of the SOA TTL or the SOA MINIMUM



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   field, depending upon the recipient's implementation.

9.  Border Validation

   To provide the conveyance of information obtained at the receiving
   administrative border, a new header is introduced.  This header
   documents the methods and results of message validations performed.
   It is added at the top of the message solely by the Internet facing
   border MTA.  Any previous Border-Validation header introduced at the
   Internet facing MTA should be stripped and may be viewed as an
   attempt to forge this information and cause the message to be
   rejected.  This header has the following format:

      header := "Border-Validation" ":" domain"["address-literal"]"
      1*LWSP *(";" method "=" result)

      domain := Domain as defined in [RFC2821]

      address-literal := Address literal as defined in [RFC2821]

      method := "CSV" | "DK" | "RDNS" | "A-RR"

      result := authen "/" author "/" policy "/" time "/" hash

      authen := "VALID" | "INVALID" | "UNKNOWN" | "ERROR"

      author := "VERIFIED" | "MISSING" | "UNKNOWN" | "ERROR"

      policy := hexadecimal presentation of the CSV-CSA port field.

      time := time value defined by recipient

      hash := defined by recipient to cover domain, address-literal,
      method, and result.

      LWSP := 0x20 / 0x09

   "CSV" refers to the procedures defined in [ID-CSV].  "DK" refers to
   the procedures defined in [DomainKeys].  "RDNS" refers to the
   validation of the HELO by using a reverse DNS lookup of the remote
   client IP address and verifying the HELO name, which will provide
   "UNKNOWN" authorization.  "A-RR" refers to using a lookup of an
   address record for the HELO name, which will also provide "UNKNOWN"
   authorization.

   Authen is for authentication and author is for authorization.  A
   "VALID" authentication indicates the domain has been confirmed by the
   method indicated.  "INVALID" indicates the method attempting



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   authentication has failed.  A message that fails authentication
   should be refused.  An authentication returning "UNKNOWN" indicates
   the client does not conform to a standard which assures
   authentication.  Authentication returning "ERROR" indicates a system
   related failure has prevented a determination.

   A "VERIFIED" authorization indicates the client supports [ID-CSV].  A
   "MISSING" authorization indicates the client supports [ID-CSV] or
   [DomainKeys] but has determined the client or message is not
   authorized.  Normally this should cause the message to be refused.
   "UNKNOWN" authorization indicates the client does not support
   [ID-CSV].  Authorization returning "ERROR" indicates a system related
   failure has prevented a determination.

10.  Domain Assertions for Signatures

   [ID-CSV] provides a means to make domain-wide assertions.  Currently,
   only the use of CSV itself is defined.  The Port field of the CSV-CSA
   record defined in [ID-CSVCSA] can be extended to make signature
   related assertions.  These assertions could be used to prevent
   [RFC2822] FROM from being spoofed.

   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+
   |   Bit Value  | Meaning                                            |
   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+
   |       1      | Explicit: All authorized names have specific       |
   |              | CSV-CSA records.                                   |
   |       2      | All Messages Signed.                               |
   |       4      | All Messages Signed by HELO domain.                |
   |       8      | FROM Signed by HELO domain.                        |
   |       -      | Other bit values are reserved for expansion and    |
   |              | must be set to zero. This range of values should   |
   |              | be ignored by the recipient when their function is |
   |              | unknown.                                           |
   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+

   Asserting that "all messages signed" allows other domain signatures
   to be used, but makes an assurance that all messages sent by the MTA
   will be signed.  Asserting all "messages signed by HELO domain" makes
   an assurance all messages sent by this MTA can be identified by a
   parent domain signature.  The "FROM Signed by HELO domain" assertion
   indicates that [RFC2822] FROM headers with a mailbox-domain being a
   parent of the HELO domain must be signed by the parent domain or
   should be refused.  This mechanism provides a means to prevent
   phishing and should be selectively used by only those experiencing
   the phishing problem.  This assertion may cause messages that have
   been been altered, or re-signed by other domains, to be refused.




Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


11.  Security Considerations

   Signatures hold the promise of enabling safe and strong methods for
   recipients to assert their own policy requirements.  Signatures
   should be used in conjunction with HELO authentication and a
   revocation-identifier to provide a low risk, low impact method to
   improve the integrity of email messages.  Even if consensus could
   have been reached regarding which mailbox-domain is to be constrained
   by a path registration list, and this mailbox-domain is checked
   universally, this still assumes all systems are secure, for any
   resulting conclusion to be valid.  There can be no open system that
   abates abuse, without the application of reputation or accreditation.
   Applying reputations against a mailbox-domain puts consumers in
   extreme jeopardy and the email delivery system at risk.  To ensure
   consumer safety and the integrity of email delivery, reputations MUST
   only be based upon authenticated entities.

   The stronger the authentication, the safer the mechanism is for
   providers and consumers alike.  Signatures can be implemented
   unilaterally and are not premised upon adoption of new universally
   applied checks.  The benefit of complaints being directed to the
   appropriate administrator justify the modest costs for signatures.
   Signed messages add value for customers, especially when signatures
   become a minimum requirement for various services.  Rather than being
   a method that targets the current behavior of abusers, signatures
   offer a real means to ensure the source of a message.  The current
   [DomainKeys] proposal lacks a much needed means to eliminate a replay
   attack risk, but this can be addressed through the inclusion of the
   revocation-identifier.

   The signature's key sizes should be reconsidered, where support for
   512-bit keys should not be required.

   The number of key selectors, when both DNS traffic and protective
   strategies are considered, don't lend themselves to be used on a
   per-user basis, especially for larger domains.  Should such use
   become common, recipient DNS caches could be overwhelmed with key
   information.

   In conclusion, signed messages provide excellent protections for both
   the MTA administrator and the mailbox-domain owner alike.  In
   addition, with a persistent identifier incorporated, signatures offer
   a means to rapidly abate abuse from compromised sources, even within
   large domains.  Using a valid signature, rather than an
   unauthenticated mailbox-domain, for assessing reputation will not
   invite more egregious behavioral changes in criminal activity, nor
   raise legal disputes over who should have been held accountable for
   abuse.



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


12.  References

12.1  References - Normative

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September
              1981.

   [RFC0821]  Postel, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", STD 10, RFC
              821, August 1982.

   [RFC0822]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
              text messages", STD 11, RFC 822, August 1982.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES",
              RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
              Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

   [RFC2234]  Crocker, D., "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications",
              RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC2308]  Andrews, M., "Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS
              NCACHE)", RFC 2308, March 1998.

   [RFC2538]  Eastlake, D., "Storing Certificates in the Domain Name
              System (DNS)", RFC , March 1999.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822, April
              2001.

   [RFC3008]  Wellington, B., "Domain Name System Security (DNSSEC)
              Signing Authority", RFC 3008, November 2000.

   [RFC3207]  Hoffman, P., "SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over
              Transport Layer Security", RFC 3207, February 2002.



Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


   [RFC3280]  Housley, R., "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
              Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL)
              Profile", RFC 3280, April 2002.

   [RFC3447]  Jonsson, J., "Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) #1:
              RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.1.", RFC 3447,
              February 2003.

   [RFC3766]  Orman, H., "Determining Strengths For Public Keys Used For
              Exchanging Symmetric Keys", RFC 3766, April 2004.

12.2  References - Informative

   [DomainKeys]
              Delany, M., "Domain-based Email Authentication Using
              Public-Keys Advertised in the DNS (DomainKeys)", August
              2004.

   [ID-BATV]  Levine, J., Crocker, D., Silberman, S. and T. Finch,
              "Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)", September 2004.

   [ID-CSV]   Crocker, D., Otis, D. and J. Leslie, "Certified Server
              Validation (CSV)", February 2005.

   [ID-CSVCSA]
              Otis, D., Crocker, D. and J. Leslie, "SMTP client
              Authorization (CSA)", June 2004.

   [ID-Housley-MASS]
              Housley, R., "Security Review of Two MASS Proposals",
              January 2005.

   [ID-email-arch]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", July 2004.

   [NIST-Keys]
              http://csrc.nist.gov/, "Key Management Guildline, Workshop
              Document (draft)", November 2001.

   [TWINKLE]  Silverman, R., "An Analysis of Shamir's Factoring Device",
              May 1999.

   [TWIRL]    Shamir, A., "Factoring Large Numbers with the TWIRL
              Device, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2003, Springer,
              Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2729", 2003.






Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


Author's Address

   Douglas Otis
   Kelkea Inc.
   1737 North First Street, Suite 680
   San Jose, CA  94043
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.453.6277
   EMail: dotis@kelkea.com









































Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                      March 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Otis                   Expires September 23, 2005              [Page 21]

