Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft							Ex SUN Employee
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Oct 18, 2019                             		Apr 23, 2019
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Extensions to WHois service to allow query on email identities
                         draft-emailwhois-pradeepkumarxplorer-02


Abstract

    This document describes the need for a WHois email address service
    similar to the internet domainname WHois service. Theres a need for
    a registered email address as opposed to non-registered email address
    to fight internet SPAM, as well as encouraging email use for personal,
    commercial and legal and all kinds of purposes.An internet user 
    can have multiple email identities. 

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Oct 18, 2019.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 18, 2019              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Using Whois to query on Email addresses       Apr 23, 2019

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................4
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................4


1. Introduction

    To implement a WHois email address service similar to whois domain name
    service

2. Background
	Currently a user can go to a service like http://www.whois.net
	and lookup a domainname.If i query explodingmoon.org It would 
	output WHOIS Imformation for explodingmoon.org.

	There has to be a way i can type in a valid email address as well
	as input to WHois service. Currently no such email directory exists.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 18, 2019                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Apr 23, 2019


	
3. General Information of the service
	A user is likely to have several email addresses that he or she
	uses. A concept of primary email address can be used for the 
	Whois service. I am pradeep@explodingmoon.org as well as 
	pradeepan88@hotmail.com and pradeeplugimwidnaus@yahoo.com as well as
        pradeepkumarxplorer@gmail.com.
	A user should be able to register his or her email address with
	WHois registry and add other details about them.
	A location field of the email address can be used to
	implement email security. if my email is pradeep@explodingmoon.org
        and i give my location as Thailand, my email service provider can
	provide me additional security by restricting access from netherlands.
	There could be any level of details. Registration of email addresses
	in the registry can be via email or via webforms.A user choses what
	information he or she choses to reveal. I can chose to reveal my contact
	information.

	The current email protocols SMTP or whatever need to query sender email
	address only if its valid and authorised by the email regsitry, the senders
        email should be delivered. In the last 5 years i have been frauded by emails
        like efcc.nigeria.org@representative.com and they have extorted cash from me
        as if its legal fees to recieve funds and it has resulted in too much harm to me.
        If i can configure my email client to recieve emails from those authorised
        by email registry, i would not have this problem.

	I propose two different applications or apps. 
        VerifyEvnevlope that takes as input an email header and reports if the sender of
        the email is really who the header claims to be.
        WHoisEmail This takes the email and shows information that can be used to identify the sender.
        This can be protected by the senders password or public key. The information retrieved can
        be the location, identiy documents, credentials, certificates, finger prints etc.

	I am adding these
        Its easy to use software to configure email delivery to multiple locations.
        I am pradeep@explodingmoon.org now in palakkad internet can be configured so
        an emails that originates from usa delivered inside USA only. sofwtare like DNS
        tables and routing can be changed to have delivery to a duplicate place.This has
        to be avoided by a central registry or some other techniques. If i am emailing
        tm@enough.com who is in USA, i have to be able to do a whois of tm@enough.com that
        says enough.com is in USA and avoid delivery to spain.I have to add more later.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 18, 2019               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Apr 23, 2019




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeep@explodingmoon.org, pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com




5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. I have used bluehost.com 
    for hosting my website and have found the need to know who views my site,
    their email addresses and not just IP address. Also i have been using
    services of hotmail.com, yahoo.com, facebook.com and found the need for
    a Single SignON to the WWW and an email registry and a concept of
    primary email address is a precursor to that implementation.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 18, 2019               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Apr 23, 2019




