Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Dec 30, 2014                                	Jun 30, 2014
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Need for an httpi intelligent service
                         draft-httpi-03


Abstract

    This document describes the need for an httpi protocol similar to
    https used for intelligent surfing of information.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Dec 30, 2014.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 30, 2014              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service   Jun 30, 2014

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To implement an httpi:// service in browser similar to https

2. Background
	Right now URL's are hardcoded. I propose an httpi:// service
        that would allow dynamic links that can be updated by the httpi
        service in the text that you are viewing. So every time interval like
	a minute or so, the content you are viewing using the httpi:// service
        in your browser can show newer links that you can traverse or navigate
	
3. General Information of the service
	

      Having a parallel beowser realm, that allows intelligent updates of
      navigatable links from WWW intelligent computing realm. Instead of using
      http:// you just need to type httpi:// in your URL and the texts you view
      would not have any hardcoded navigatable links but those suggested by
      the WWW brain.

	A browser user should be able to type httpi:// in URL field and wait. 
	The cache could fill with those suggested by the WWW brain. 

	Please view draft-pkx-wwwogc-02. I have suggested a httpsso:// mode also.
	I am suggesting these modes for http for professional and it should be
	an interface for the user.

	httpssoi - single signon with intelligence
	httpauto - auto mode for browsing
	httpssoiauto - Using the browser like a TV channel
	httpiauto

	Combination of http httpi httpsso and httpauto

	So i launch my browser and type httpsso://www.service.com. In this mode
	for one session you hav to type your username and password only once. IT would
	let you relate multiple accounts in your first session.

	If i launch and type httpi://www.site.info , it would be showing navigatable
	links that are not created manually. The WWW brain would suggest navigatable 
	links. Imagine having a tablet or laptop while you are relaxing and you can
	cruise the intelligently by httpiauto://

	If you type httpauto://www.site.info you can watch the site like a TV channel
	but manually directed by hardcoded URLs or URIs

	


Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 30, 2014                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service            Jun 2014




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info



5.Acknowledgement
	I have not eaten food today because of i am a victim of cybercrime and i need
         that to be solved and does not have any one to acknowledge now. But i typed this
        remembering i suggested a re search mechanism for an Information retrieval tool
        in 1992 where the user highlights the text on the viewing pane and invoke a Re search.

    

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 30, 2014                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service          Jun 2014




