





Network Working Group                                      S. De Cnodder
Internet Draft                                                C. Pelsser
Expiration Date: March 2004

                                                          September 2003

                  Protection for inter-AS MPLS tunnels
             draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document describes a solution for link protection, node
   protection, Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG) protection and fast
   recovery of inter-AS LSPs. These problems are highlighted in [ASREQ].
   The proposed solution is based on RSVP-TE [RFC3209] as recommended by
   [ASREQ].

1. Introduction

   This document describes a solution for the following requirements
   from [ASREQ]:

   1) link protection

   2) node protection




De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 1]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   3) SRLG protection

   4) fast recovery

   5) based on RSVP-TE [RFC3209]

   MPLS Fast-Reroute techniques based on [FRR] together with the RSVP
   objects Exclude Route Object (XRO) and Explicit Exclude Route
   Subobject (EXRS), as defined in [XRO], will be used to fulfill the
   above requirements. Only the protection of links between 2 ASs, the
   protection of their SRLGs and the protection of nodes at the border
   of an AS are in the scope of this document.

   Section 3 proposes to tunnel inter-AS LSPs through intra-AS LSPs
   inside an AS, as described in [HIER]. This tunneling favors the
   confidentiality requirement concerning intra-AS topologies [ASREQ] as
   well as the establishment of inter-AS LSPs. The establishment of
   inter-AS LSPs will not be studied further in this draft. In this
   document it is assumed that ASes define their SRLGs independent from
   the SRLGs in other ASes.

   Section 4 shows that an end-to-end backup LSP can only provide link
   and node protection. For SRLG protection and fast recovery, the
   methods in [FRR] have to be used. These methods are described in
   section 6 for detour LSPs and the use of bypass tunnels to protect
   inter-AS LSPs is introduced in section 7.  Nodes other than those
   mentioned in this document, must use the methods in [FRR] to
   establish detour LSPs or bypass tunnels. This means that these nodes
   establish detour LSPs that merge with the main LSP in the same AS
   where they are originated, or these nodes establish bypass tunnels
   that terminate in the same AS as where they originate.

2. Summary for Sub-IP Area

   <TBD>


3. Inter-AS LSP tunneled through an intra-AS LSP

   To improve scalability and confidentiality (which is outside the
   scope of this document), an inter-AS LSP can be tunneled through an
   intra-AS LSP [HIER]. For instance, in Figure 2, the link between R23
   and R24 could be an LSP passing multiple core routers. And, the
   inter-AS LSP is tunneled through this LSP.

   The procedures described in the following sections apply for inter-AS
   link, node and SRLG protection of inter-AS LSPs whether they are
   tunneled or not.



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 2]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


4. Problems to protect SRLGs with disjoint end-to-end LSPs

   The motivation to support fast-reroute techniques as described in
   [FRR] is twofold: first of all, it supports fast recovery and
   secondly, it can also provide SRLG protection, which is not the case
   for a disjoint end-to-end LSP. The problems to support SRLG
   protection, with the latter method, are described in this section.

   There are different ways to provide end-to-end protection of inter-AS
   LSPs.  A first possibility is to establish a secondary path that
   crosses different ASs than the main LSP. An alternative is to
   establish an LSP that follows the same AS path to the destination as
   the main LSP, i.e. it crosses the same ASs in the same order, but is
   link or node disjoint from the main LSP. However, these two solutions
   do not permit to establish an LSP that is disjoint from the SRLGs of
   the main LSP. That is, it is not possible to protect the main inter-
   AS LSP against SRLGs failures with a single end-to-end link or node
   disjoint LSP. This is due to the fact that ASs may possess links
   belonging to the same SRLG even if these ASs do not have the same
   convention to designate this SRLG.

         AS1             AS2              AS3
    /----------\  /-------------- \  /------------\

           R12 ---- R21 ---- R23 ---- R31
         /              \                 \
        /                \                 \
    R11                  R25                 R33
        \                  \               /
         \                  \             /
           R13 ---- R22 ---- R24 ---- R32

                 Figure 1: end-to-end SRLG protection


   For example, on figure 1, we have a main LSP going from R11 in AS1 to
   R33 in AS3 through R13, R22, R24 and R32. It is not possible to
   protect this LSP against SRLG failures with a backup LSP crossing
   R12, R21, R23 and R31. This is because AS3 could have links which
   have SRLGs in common with links in AS1 and AS1 nor AS3 will be aware
   of it. For example, link R11-R13 and link R31-R33 may belong to the
   same SRLG. This example relies on the fact that different ASs may use
   the same resources to join different nodes in their respective
   domain. A similar situation occurs when the main and the backup LSP
   do not share the same AS path but instead partially cross different
   ASs.

   This document only focuses on local protection as defined in [FRR],



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 3]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   because it is not possible to provide full protection of an inter-AS
   LSP with a single end-to-end LSP.  The solution proposed in this
   document enables the provision of link, node and SRLG protection of
   inter-AS LSPs.

5. Network model and terminology

   To illustrate the procedures described in the next sections, the
   following network model is used:

               AS1                AS2
         /-------------\    /------------\

          +---+   +---+      +---+   +---+
    ------|R11|---|R12|------|R21|---|R22|------
          +---+   +---+      +---+   +---+
            |       |          |       |
            |       |          |       |
            |       |          |       |
          +---+   +---+      +---+   +---+
    ------|R13|---|R14|------|R23|---|R24|------
          +---+   +---+      +---+   +---+

                 Figure 2: a reference network model


   The main LSP is established from a certain node (not shown on the
   figure) and goes over routers R13, R14, R23, and R24 towards the
   destination (also not shown on the figure). AS1 is referred to as the
   upstream AS of AS2, and AS2 is referred to as the downstream AS of
   AS1.

   An "egress AS-BR" or a "primary egress AS-BR" is an Autonomous System
   Border Router (AS-BR) at which the main LSP leaves an AS. In the
   network example, in figure 2, this is router R14, inside AS1.

   An "ingress AS-BR" or a "primary ingress AS-BR" is an AS-BR at which
   the main LSP enters an AS. In the network example, this is router
   R23, inside AS2.

   A "secondary egress AS-BR" is an AS-BR at which the bypass tunnel or
   the detour LSP leaves an AS. In the network example, this could be
   router R12, in AS1.

   A "secondary ingress AS-BR" is an AS-BR at which the bypass tunnel or
   the detour LSP enters an AS. In the network example, this could be
   router R21, in AS2.




De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 4]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   "Inter-AS link protection" is the protection of an LSP against a
   failure of the link connecting two ASs on the path of the LSP. In the
   network example, the inter-AS link R14-R23 is to be protected.

   "Inter-AS node protection" is the protection of an LSP against an
   AS-BR failure. This can be the egress AS-BR, R14, or the ingress AS-
   BR, R23, for the considered example.

   "Inter-AS SRLG protection" is the protection of an LSP against a
   simultaneous failure of all links that belong to certain SRLGs which
   also contain the inter-AS link (R14-R23 in figure 2).

   Other terminology and abbreviations are taken from [FRR].

6. Protection with detour LSPs

 6.1 Link protection with detour LSPs

  6.1.1 Procedures for the egress AS-BR

   The primary egress AS-BR has to establish a detour LSP to protect the
   interdomain link. The destination of the detour LSP will be the same
   as the destination of the main LSP. The detour LSP may merge with the
   main LSP at any downstream node or with other detour LSPs of the same
   main LSP, established by nodes downstream of the link to be
   protected. The egress AS-BR has to determine a secondary egress AS-BR
   and then it can perform a path calculation towards this AS-BR.

   The primary egress AS-BR can select any other AS-BR as secondary
   egress AS-BR but it is recommended to select an AS-BR that is
   connected to the downstream AS of the main LSP (i.e. the AS where the
   primary ingress AS-BR is located). In case this condition is not met,
   it could be for instance possible that the downstream AS of the
   detour LSP chooses a path that goes through the AS where the detour
   LSP was originated which can cause loops. In addition, it is
   recommended that the detour LSP merges in the AS where this
   downstream ingress AS-BR is located (the merging node could be the
   ingress AS-BR itself) if the destination of the main LSP is not in
   the downstream AS (AS2 in Figure 2). This suggestion improves the
   scalability of the solution since merging of LSPs diminishes the
   number of states to be maintained, the bandwidth to be reserved, and
   so on. Therefore, the egress AS-BR should put a portion of the RRO of
   the main LSP inside the ERO of the detour LSP. The last hop in the
   downstream AS (the egress AS-BR in the downstream AS) of the main LSP
   and all hops after that router should be at least in the ERO of the
   detour LSP. In addition to this portion of the RRO of the main LSP,
   the ERO may be further prepended by the egress AS-BR with a strict or
   a loose path towards the selected secondary egress AS-BR. That is,



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 5]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   the ERO of the detour LSP at least contains:  (1) A strict or loose
   path toward the secondary egress ASBR (2) The path of the main LSP
   starting at the last hop inside the downstream AS and ending at the
   destination of the main LSP.  In the example network, we have a main
   LSP with RRO containing routers R11, R12, R21, R22, etc. The ERO of
   the detour LSP protecting link R12-R21 is composed of router R14, R22
   (with loose flag set) and the following routers.

   There are two possible methods to determine the secondary egress AS-
   BR at the primary egress AS-BR. (1) The egress AS-BR can be manually
   configured with other AS-BRs that peer to the same AS or (2) it can
   lookup in its BGP table to find an other entry such that the AS-path
   has the same AS next hop as the currently selected entry. Option (1)
   is feasible because the number of links between 2 ASs is usually
   limited to only a small number of links.

   It could be possible that the primary egress AS-BR is the same router
   as the secondary egress AS-BR and that the primary ingress AS-BR is
   the same router as the secondary ingress AS-BR. In this particular
   case the inter-domain link on the primary path must not be the same
   link used by the detour LSP and no path calculation should be done to
   calculate a (partial) path for the detour LSP.

   The use of the LSP-Merge subobject, defined in Appendix A, is
   optional to provide link protection.

  6.1.2 Procedures for the ingress AS-BR

   No extra procedures are required.

   The detour LSP may merge with the main LSP at this node.

  6.1.3 Procedures for the secondary egress AS-BR

   The secondary egress AS-BR completes the path in the ERO by selecting
   a secondary ingress AS-BR in the downstream AS. If there is no ERO
   present, then the tunnel end point address in the Session object has
   to be used to route the Path message.

  6.1.4 Procedures for the secondary ingress AS-BR

   The secondary ingress AS-BR completes the ERO with a path towards the
   next subobject in the ERO. The LSP should merge with the main LSP at
   the node that processes the LSP-Merge subobject (if that subobject is
   used), if it was not yet merged at this point. If no ERO is present
   inside the Path message of the detour LSP, the path is computed based
   on the tunnel end point address.




De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 6]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


 6.2 Node protection with detour LSPs

   The procedures and recommendations are the same for the protection of
   an ingress AS-BR failure as for link protection, with the exception
   that the egress AS-BR has to include an XRO object or an EXRS
   subobject [XRO] with the ingress AS-BR to exclude.

   For the protection of the egress AS-BR, the same holds except that
   the procedures apply to the router on the path of the main LSP
   preceding the egress AS-BR. The method to determine a secondary
   egress AS-BR is the same as for the egress AS-BR for link protection:
   either manual configuration or by using BGP routing information, if
   it is available. Note that the first solution requires more
   configuration as for link protection in case this router peers with
   more than one AS-BR.

 6.3 SRLG protection with detour LSPs

   Similar procedures as for link protection apply for SRLG protection.
   In addition, the secondary egress AS-BR must be an AS-BR that peers
   with the downstream AS of the primary LSP. And, the detour LSP must
   merge at that AS. The former condition is necessary because only the
   two peering ASs know the SRLGs of the inter-domain link and the
   latter condition implies that the LSP-Merge subobject must be used.
   This subobject is inserted inside the ERO to indicate the node where
   merging needs to be done (see appendix A). The next subsections
   describe in more details the procedures to be performed at the nodes
   involved in the establishment of such detour LSP.

  6.3.1 Procedures for the egress AS-BR

   The egress AS-BR has to include an XRO object or an EXRS subobject to
   exclude the SRLGs of the inter-domain link. The XRO or the EXRS must
   include a list of SRLGs (defined for the AS containing the PLR)
   corresponding to the inter-AS link as well as a reference to this
   link. If the egress AS-BR can calculate a strict path to reach the
   secondary egress AS-BR, then the list of SRLGs may be removed. Only
   the reference to the link for which the detour LSP has to be SRLG
   disjoint is then required (see section 6.3.2). The secondary ingress
   AS-BR has to use the information in the XRO or EXRS to further
   calculate a path for the detour LSP.

   To ensure merging inside the downstream AS, the LSP-Merge subobject
   (see Appendix A) has to be included in the ERO by the egress AS-BR.
   The LSR where the detour LSP is merged with the main LSP has to
   ensure that it can perform a switch-over from the incoming detour LSP
   containing the LSP-Merge subobject to its originating detour LSP in
   case the next link has an SRLG in common with the inter-domain link.



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 7]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   This is because in this case, both links can fail at the same time
   such that both detour LSPs will be activated at the same time.


  6.3.2 Procedures for the secondary egress AS-BR

   The secondary egress AS-BR selects a next hop and the XRO or EXRS
   contains a reference to the link for which the detour LSP has to be
   SRLG disjoint. No list of SRLGs should be included because the SRLG
   IDs are local to an AS, which means that if a list of SRLG IDs would
   be sent to the next hop, then this node would not understand the IDs.
   Therefore only the reference to the inter-AS link is useful. This
   link is referenced by means of its IP address, see [XRO]. The
   secondary egress AS-BR thus removes the list of SRLGs related to the
   inter-AS link, if such a list of SRLGs was present.

  6.3.3 Procedures for the ingress AS-BR

   No extra procedures required.

  6.3.4 Procedures for the secondary ingress AS-BR

   If the secondary ingress AS-BR cannot compute a full path towards the
   node immediately preceeding the LSP-merge subobject, then the
   secondary ingress AS-BR adds the list of SRLGs of the inter-AS link
   present inside the received XRO or EXRS inside these objects. These
   SRLGs are known by the nodes inside this AS. This is required because
   the LSP can cross nodes inside the AS which do not know the SRLGs of
   the inter-AS link, but only the SRLGs of intra-area links. An
   alternative would be to distribute inter-AS links and their SRLGs
   inside the IGP.

  6.3.5 Path calculation

   To allow the egress AS-BR and the secondary ingress AS-BR to
   calculate a path, the SRLGs of the inter-AS links towards the same
   downstream AS (upstream AS, respectively) as the main LSP have to be
   known. This could be achieved through manual configuration of the
   SRLGs of other inter-AS links to the same downstream/upstream AS at
   each AS-BR. For instance, in Figure 2, at R14 and R23, the SRLGs of
   R12-R21 can be configured such that they are known for the path
   calculation, and at R12 and R21, the SRLGs of R14-R23 can be
   configured. An other option is to flood this information via BGP
   extensions to be defined or to distribute these links and their SRLGs
   inside the IGP. It is not assumed that nodes other than AS-BRs having
   a link to the same downstream/upstream AS know the SRLGs of these
   inter-AS links. If this would be the case, then the procedures above
   can be simplified, e.g., the egress AS-BR in Section 6.3.1 does not



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 8]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   have to include a list of SRLGs anymore when only a partial path can
   be computed.

   Also the secondary egress AS-BR has to know the SRLGs of the inter-AS
   link used by the primary LSP. This is to allow the egress AS-BR to
   select a link in case there are multiple links towards the downstream
   AS, and to check if the link is indeed SRLG disjoint from the inter-
   AS link used by the main LSP.

  6.3.6 SRLG and node protection

   Protection of the egress AS-BR and SRLG protection of the link
   preceding the egress AS-BR is best solved by using two detour LSPs at
   the node on the path of the main LSP preceding the egress AS-BR: a
   detour to protect against the SRLGs of the intra-domain link and a
   second detour LSP that is established using the procedures for node
   protection as described in the previous section. The detour
   protecting against the SRLGs has to merge in the same AS, i.e. it has
   to merge with the main LSP at the egress AS-BR. This is because other
   ASs do not know this intra-domain link, nor its SRLGs. To ensure that
   merging occurs at the egress AS-BR, the RRO of the main LSP should be
   fully included in the ERO of the detour LSP together with the LSP-
   Merge subobject. This path should be preceded by a path, which is
   SRLG disjoint with the next link of the main LSP computed towards the
   egress AS-BR. This could only be a partial path towards the egress
   AS-BR in which case an XRO object or an EXRS subobject, containing
   the SRLGs to avoid, has to be added. It has to be ensured that these
   2 detour LSPs do not merge, which means that at least one of the
   detour LSP should be a sender-template specific detour LSP.

   The egress AS-BR must ensure that it can do a switch-over from the
   incoming detour LSP protecting against a failure of the preceding
   link to its originating detour LSP. This is because the preceding
   link and the inter-domain link can belong to the same SRLG, hence
   they can fail at the same time. For this reason, the LSP-Merge
   subobject must be used in this case.

   If protection of the ingress AS-BR is requested, in addition to SRLG
   protection, the egress AS-BR also has to put the ingress AS-BR in the
   XRO or EXRS like it was done for node protection.

   The use of 2 detour LSPs (one for SRLG protection and the other for
   node protection) is also recommended when the ingress AS-BR is to be
   protected. If only 1 detour LSP is used, and the LSP only crosses 1
   hop in the downstream AS (i.e. ingress AS-BR and egress AS-BR in the
   downstream AS are the same router), the detour LSP setup would fail.
   This is because the AS further downstream of the immediate downstream
   AS is not aware anymore of the SRLGs of the link to be protected.



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                   [Page 9]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   In case of node and SRLG protection or in case of SRLG protection
   only, it is recommended to use sender-template specific detour LSPs
   to avoid that detour LSPs merge with each other.

7. Protection with bypass tunnels

   The problem of protection by means of bypass tunnels can be split
   into two parts:

   a) The bypass tunnel has to be signaled over a path that is disjoint
   with the network resources that it protects.

   b) After the bypass tunnels are established, an appropriate bypass
   tunnel has to be selected for each particular main LSP such that the
   protection requirements for that LSP are met.

   The first part is very similar to the establishement of detour LSPs:
   an XRO object or an EXRS subobject can be used to signal the bypass
   tunnel such that it is disjoint from the network resources used by
   the main LSP. The same recommendations as for detour LSPs apply, i.e.
   it is recommended that the downstream AS of the bypass tunnel and the
   main LSP are the same AS.  Additionally, as two detour LSPs are
   required for SRLG protection of the upstream link of an egress ASBR
   and the egress ASBR itself, two bypass tunnels are also required to
   protect these resources. Note that the LSP-Merge subobject is not
   used for bypass tunnels as it was the case for detour LSPs because
   bypass tunnels do not merge with the main LSP at the far-end of the
   bypass tunnel, but they are terminated at that node.

   The difficulty in providing protection with bypass tunnels relies in
   the selection of appropriate bypasses for the protection of given
   resources.

   To select a bypass tunnel, the PLR has to take a bypass tunnel that
   it originates and that fulfills the following requirements:

   a) The bypass tunnel must fulfill the appropriate constraints
   (bandwidth, link affinities, ...).

   b) The bypass tunnel must be disjoint with the link/node/SRLGs to be
   protected.

   c) The destination of the bypass tunnel must be the next-hop node
   (resp. next-next-hop node) of the main LSP, or a node further
   downstream on the path of the main LSP, in case of link protection
   (resp. node protection).

   The first two requirements can be achieved since all required



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 10]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


   information is locally available in the PLR. This is because the PLR
   has established the candidate bypass tunnels, hence it knows the
   bandwidth and the resources protected by the bypass tunnel. Complying
   with the third requirement is more difficult. Generally, the PLR must
   check if the destination of the bypass tunnel belongs to one of the
   nodes listed in the RRO of the Resv message of the main LSP. Usually
   the RRO contains interface addresses and the destination of a bypass
   tunnel may be a different interface address or the node-id of a
   router. This means that the PLR has to map the addresses listed in
   the RRO of the main LSP to the destination address of the bypass
   tunnel. In an intra-area environment this is possible since this
   information is available in the IGP topology, but in the inter-AS
   case, this information is not anymore available locally in the PLR.
   There are multiple methods to solve this problem:

   Solution A: use [NODEID] where the node-id of the routers are put in
   the RRO of the Resv message of the main LSP and the node-id is also
   put in the RRO of the Resv message of the bypass tunnel if the
   destination was not the node-id. In this way, the PLR simply has to
   compare the node-ids in the RRO of the main LSP with the destination
   of the bypass tunnel or with the node-id in the RRO of the bypass
   tunnel.

   Solution B: use the interface address that would be recorded in the
   RRO of the main LSP as destination of the bypass tunnel. For
   instance, when the link between ASBR1 and ASBR2 is to be protected,
   the destination address would be the address of the interface on
   ASBR2 towards ASBR1. If this link is unnumbered, the destination
   address used is the node-id that is mentioned in the RRO of the main
   LSP. This is sufficient to identify the common node on the primary
   and the bypass tunnel. When node protection is to be provided and the
   destination of the Bypass Tunnel is the next-hop of the protected
   node (next-next hop from the PLR point of view), the destination of
   the bypass tunnel should be the address of the interface on the
   next-next-hop router that goes towards the node being protected.
   Multiple bypass tunnels must be used in case of parallel links. We
   also note that a failure of the interface used as destination of the
   bypass tunnel does not lead to the failure of the bypass tunnel
   itself (this is in particular important for link protection).

   Until now, we supposed that the bypass tunnels were manually
   configured, with the destination being part of the configuration.
   But, bypass tunnels can also be signaled automatically when the first
   main LSP is established. Therefore, we have to determine the
   destination of these dynamically established bypass tunnels. In case
   of solution B, the information about the interface addresses in the
   RRO of the main LSP can be used as a destination address. In case the
   node-id is put in the RRO, then this node-id can be used.



De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 11]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


8. Security Considerations

   TBD


Acknowledgments

   This work was partially supported by the European Commission within
   the IST ATRIUM project. The authors would like to thank Dimitri
   Papadimitriou and Olivier Bonaventure for their useful comments.


References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
   3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
   Swallow, G., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209,
   December 2001.

   [ASREQ]  Zhang, R., Vasseur, JP., (Editors), "MPLS Inter-AS Traffic
   Engineering requirements", draft-ietf-tewg-interas-mpls-te-req-
   00.txt, work in progress.

   [FRR]  Pan, P., Atlas, A. (Editors), "Fast Reroute Extensions to
   RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-
   03.txt, work in progress.

   [XRO]  Lee, CY., Farrel, A., De Cnodder, S., "Exclude Routes -
   Extension to RSVP-TE", draft-ietf-ccamp-rsvp-te-exclude-route-00.txt,
   work in progress.

   [HIER]  Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., "LSP Hierarchy with Generalized
   MPLS TE", draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-08.txt, work in progress.

   [NODEID]  Vasseur, J.-P., Ali, Z., Sivabalan, S., "Definition of an
   RRO node-id subobject", draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-01.txt, work
   in progress.












De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 12]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


Authors Addresses

   Stefaan De Cnodder
   Email: stefaan.de_cnodder@alcatel.be

   Cristel Pelsser
   Infonet group (FUNDP)
   Rue Grandgagnage 21, B-5000 Namur, Belgium
   Email: cpe@info.fundp.ac.be










































De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 13]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


Appendix A: LSP-Merge subobject

   The LSP-Merge subobject is a new subobject in the Explicit Route
   Object (ERO). The procedures defined in [RFC3209] section 5.3.4.1 to
   select the next hop are modified as follows: if after step 3 of the
   next hop selection process the node finds an LSP-Merge subobject in
   front of the ERO, i.e. the LSP-Merge subobject is the first subobject
   in the ERO after removing the subobjects belonging to the local
   abstract node, then the LSP has to merge with an LSP with the same
   Session object and LSP ID at the current node, if such an LSP exists.
   If no such LSP exists, then the detour LSP is rejected and a ResvErr
   with errorcode TBD is sent to the originating node.

   The LSP with which the LSP containing the LSP-Merge subobject merges
   must be a main LSP, i.e. it may not contain a DETOUR object. In addi-
   tion the abstract node where the merging occurs must ensure that in
   case of a failure, the traffic can be switched from the LSP contain-
   ing the LSP-Merge subobject to a backup LSP that was established by
   the merging node to protect the main LSP. If these merging conditions
   cannot be met, the "SRLG protection available" flag inside RRO subob-
   jects, of appendix B, is set to zero. This indicates to the source
   that SRLG protection is not provided for the main LSP.


     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |L|    Type     |   Length      |            Resvd              |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

      L

         Set to zero.

      Type

         TBD.

      Length

         The length field is set to 4.

      Resvd

         Set to zero on transmission and ignored on reception.






De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 14]





Internet Draft  draft-decnodder-mpls-interas-protection   September 2003


Appendix B: SRLG protection desired

   Currently [FRR] does not specify how SRLG protection can be requested
   by the Head-End LSR. One way to do this is to define an "SRLG protec-
   tion desired" flag in session attribute object. We will not further
   investigate this since it is outside the scope of this document.  i
   In case two detours or bypass tunnels are available to provide SRLG
   and node protection, then the "local protection available" flag is
   set in the corresponding RRO subobject. Similarly, the "bandwidth
   protection" flag of the RRO subobject is set when both detours or
   bypass tunnels provide the requested bandwidth. Note that in case of
   SRLG protection, it is recommended to use sender-template specific
   detour LSP to avoid merging with other LSPs.






































De Cnodder, Pelsser        Expires March 2004                  [Page 15]


