
INTERNET DRAFT                                                Mark Prior
Guidelines for IETF Meeting Sites             The University of Adelaide
<draft-prior-future-host-guidelines-00.txt>                 Dave Crocker
                                                  Brandenburg Consulting
                                                            Bill Manning
                                                                     ISI
                                                            E. Paul Love
                                          Internet Consulting of Vermont
                                                           Simon Coppins
                                              The University of Adelaide



                   Guidelines for IETF Meeting Sites

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
    areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
    Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
    ``work in progress.''

    To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
    the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
    Drafts Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast),
    nic.nordu.net (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or
    munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

    This Internet Draft expires on 31 December 1995.

    Please send comments to the authors.


Abstract

    The IETF is an international group that conducts most of it's
    business using electronic mail however three times a year it
    contacts an open meeting for one week. For the most part the actual
    mechanics of the meeting are organised by the IETF secretariat but
    there are some requirements placed on the local host.

    This document attempts to provide some guidelines for organisations
    that wish to volunteer to act as host for one of these open
    meetings.


Travel

    The IETF is an international organisation so it is expected that
    meetings will be held in various parts of the globe and that it
    will be necessary to travel to "remote" locations. In order for this
    not to become too onerous but to allow meetings to be held in many
    different countries it is suggested that the site must be located
    within an hours travel of a major airport which must have direct
    (non commuter) connections to the major international airports of
    that country. Ideally this would mean that the host city could be
    reached with at most 2 aircraft transfers for most attendees.


Accommodation

    The host city must have sufficient hotels within walking distance
    (maximum 10 minutes) of the meeting site to accommodate everyone
    that wishes to attend the meeting. At the present time this means
    providing block booking for approximately 350 rooms as not
    everyone attends for the whole week. It is desirable that the
    hotels be of, at least, superior standard with at least one
    offering rates within the current US government employee per diem
    limit and be members of an international chain of hotels (to aid
    booking of rooms from overseas). Information should also be
    provided on other inexpensive hotels that are within walking
    distance of the meeting site. It is also desirable that the hotels
    be located close by to other amenities, such as restaurants. There
    should be a variety of means of reaching the hotel from the
    airport in addition to rental cars, such as taxis, airport
    shuttles and public transport.


Meetings Site

    The IETF is made up of a large number of working groups the majority
    of which will wish to meet during the week, possibly more than once.
    It is therefore a requirement that the meetings site be capable of
    supporting at least 10 simultaneous meetings with meeting rooms
    varying in size from approximately 30 to 180. Two of these room,
    accommodating 100 to 150 people, must be capable of supporting the
    broadcast of proceeding to the Internet. The site must also have a
    plenary hall capable of accommodating approximately 800 people. It
    is preferred that the meeting site be located within one of the
    hotels but if this is not possible it must be located within 5
    minutes walk of the hotels and it must have access for people with
    disabilities.


Terminal Room

    One component of the meeting that must be provided by the local
    host is the "terminal room". This room must be located at the
    meeting site and is in addition to the meetings rooms. It should
    be designed to provide attendees with easy access from the host
    location to the Internet. It is desirable that this facility be
    available on a 24 hour basis 48 hours before the meeting starts
    until 6 hours after it concludes.

    Past experience shows that the following configuration is
    satisfactory
        30 X terminals or PCs (with X windows software), with
             supporting servers
        2 or 3 Localtalk runs, with cabling for at least 25 Macs
        3 Postscript Laser printers (one dedicated to transparencies)
        25 UTP Ethernet ports for laptops
    It would be very desirable to provide 16 dialin lines to the
    terminal room so that attendees at hotels remote from the meeting
    site can readily access the facilities in the terminal room.


MBONE

    Recent IETF meetings have been broadcast over the Internet,
    normally two simultaneous sessions. To broadcast a meeting you
    need a connection to the MBONE (Multicast Backbone) over at least
    an E1/T1 link. As the MBONE is still experimental you will require
    a MBONE router to connect to the MBONE, this may be a
    SPARCstation, or other multicast capable workstation as long as it
    supports pruning, or a cisco router (supporting PIM).

    To broadcast a session you will need a multicast capable
    workstation with a frame grabber as well as video & audio mixing
    equipment suitable for interworking with the sites audio/video
    facility. This facility should be configured so that remote
    participants can contribute to the discussion as well as just
    watch proceedings.

    It is also desirable that sessions be recorded and rebroadcast
    during the night to allow people in other time zones and
    opportunity to watch the session, even if they cannot participate.


Social Event

    Although optional, traditionally the host site has also been
    responsible for arranging a social event for at least 100
    participants, that is held on one evening early in the week. The
    actual scope and content of the event is up to the local host, the
    Secretariat can provide advice on the appropriateness of the event
    but cannot be directly involved.


Authors

    Mark Prior
    Information Technology Division
    The University of Adelaide
    Adelaide, SA 5005
    AUSTRALIA

    Phone: +61 8 303 5680
    Fax:   +61 8 303 4400
    Email: mrp@itd.adelaide.edu.au


    Dave Crocker
    Brandenburg Consulting
    675 Spruce Dr.
    Sunnyvale, CA 94086
    USA

    Phone: +1 408 246 8253
    Fax:   +1 408 249 6205
    Email: dcrocker@brandenburg.com


    Bill Manning
    ISI
    4676 Admiralty Way #1001
    Marina del Rey, CA 90292
    USA

    Phone: +1 310 822 1511
    Email: bmanning@isi.edu


    E. Paul Love
    Internet Consulting of Vermont
    Brattleboro, VT 05301
    USA

    Phone: +1 802 254 9087
    Fax:   +1 802 254 5783
    Email: epl@sover.net


    Simon Coppins
    Department of Architecture
    The University of Adelaide
    Adelaide, SA 5005
    AUSTRALIA

    Phone: +61 8 303 5978
    Fax:   +61 8 303 4377
    Email: coppins@arch.adelaide.edu.au

