
Internet Engineering Task Force                                P. Savola
Internet-Draft                                                 CSC/FUNET
Expires: July 22, 2004                                       R. Lehtonen
                                                             TeliaSonera
                                                                D. Meyer
                                                            Jan 22, 2004


       PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security Issues and Enhancements
                  draft-savola-mboned-mroutesec-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 22, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo describes security threats for the larger (intra-domain, or
   inter-domain) multicast routing infrastructures. Only Protocol
   Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) is analyzed, in its
   three main operational modes: the traditional Any Source Multicast
   (ASM) model, Source-Specific Multicast (SSM) model, and the ASM model
   enhanced by the Embedded RP group-to-RP mapping mechanism.  This memo
   also describes enhancements to the protocol operations to mitigate
   these threats.





Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.    Threats to Multicast Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.1   Receiver-based Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.1.1 Joins to Different Groups  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.2   Source-based Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.2.1 Sending Multicast to Empty Groups  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.2.2 Disturbing Existing Group by Sending to It . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.3   Aggravating Factors to the Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3.1 Distant RP/Source Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3.2 RPF Considers Interface, Not Neighbor  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3.3 No Receiver Information in PIM Joins . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.3.4 Injecting a Bogus Route  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.    Threat Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.1   Summary of the Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.2   Enhancements for Threat Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.    PIM Security Enhancements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.1   Remote Routability Signalling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.2   RPF to Check Neighbor, not Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.3   Rate-limiting Possibilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 16























Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


1. Introduction

   This memo describes security threats to the Protocol Independent
   Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) multicast routing infrastructures,
   and suggests ways to make these architectures more resistant to the
   described threats.

   Only attacks which have an effect on the multicast routing (whether
   intra- or inter-domain) are considered.  For example, attacks where
   the hosts are specifically targeting the Designated Router (DR) or
   other routers of the link, or where hosts are disrupting other hosts
   on the same link are out of scope. Similarly, ensuring
   confidentiality, authentication and integrity of multicast groups and
   traffic is out of the scope [9].

   PIM builds on a model where Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) check is
   (among other things) used to ensure loop-free properties of the
   multicast distribution trees.  As a side effect, this limits the
   effect of using forged source addresses, which is often as a
   component in unicast-based attacks.  However, a host can still spoof
   an address within the same subnet, or spoof the source of a
   unicast-encapsulated PIM Register messages, which a host may send on
   its own.

   We consider PIM-SM [1] operating in the traditional Any Souce
   Multicast (ASM) model (including the use of Multicast Source
   Discovery Protocol (MSDP) [2] for source discovery), in
   Source-Specific Multicast [3] (SSM) model, and the Embedded-RP [4]
   group-to-RP mapping mechanism in ASM model.  If Bidirectional-PIM
   enhancements are globally significant, and have implications, they
   could also be considered.

2. Terminology

      ASM

         Term "ASM" [6] is used to refer to the traditional Any Source
         Multicast model with multiple PIM domains and a signalling
         mechanism (MSDP) to exchange information about active sources
         between them.

      SSM

         Term "SSM" [7] is used to refer to Source-Specific Multicast.

      Embedded-RP

         Embedded-RP refers to ASM model where the Embedded-RP mapping



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


         mechanism is used to find the RP for a group, and MSDP is not
         needed.

      Target Router

         Target Router is used to refer to either the RP processing a
         packet (ASM or Embedded-RP), or DR close to the transmitting
         source (SSM).


3. Threats to Multicast Routing

   We make the broad assumption that the multicast routing networks are
   reasonably trusted.  That is, we assume that the multicast routers
   themselves behave "well", in the same sense that unicast routers are
   expected to behave well, and are not a significant source of abuse.
   This assumption is not entirely correct, but it simplifies the
   analysis of threat models.  If seen important, the threats caused by
   misbehaving multicast routers (including fake multicast routers) may
   be considered separately.

   As the threats described in this memo are mainly Denial of Service
   (DoS) attacks, it may be useful to note that the attackers will try
   to find a scarce resource anywhere in the control or data plane, as
   described in [5].

3.1 Receiver-based Attacks

   These attacks are often referred to as control plane threats and the
   aim of the attacker is usually to increase the amount of multicast
   state information in routers above a manageable level.

   One should note that hosts can also originate PIM messages (e.g. PIM
   Joins) as long as their source address passes the RPF checks.  This
   implies that a willful attacker will be able to circumvent many of
   the potential rate-limiting functions performed at the DR -- as one
   can always send the messages yourself. The PIM-SM specification,
   however, states that these messages should only be accepted from
   known PIM neighbors [1]; if these would be implemented, the hosts
   would have to forge PIM Hello messages as well.

   One should also note that even if a host joins to a group multiple
   times, the DR only sends one PIM Join message, without waiting for
   any acknowledgement; the next message is only sent after the timer
   expires or the state changes at the DR.

   Also, if the host uses IGMPv3 [10] or MLDv2 [11], it is able to join
   multiple sources for the same group and each of these joins for the



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   same group generates new PIM (Source, Group), or (S,G) Joins.

3.1.1 Joins to Different Groups

   Description of the threat: Join Flooding.  This happens when a host
   tries to join, once or a couple of times, to a group or a channel,
   and the DR generates a PIM Join towards the Target Router. The group/
   channel or the Targer Router may or may not exist.

   Example of this is a host trying to join different, non-existent
   groups at a very rapid pace, trying to overload the routers on the
   path with an excessive amount of (*/S,G) state (also refered to as
   "PIM State"), or the Target Router with an excessive number of
   packets.

   This kind of joining causes PIM state to be created, but this state
   is relatively short-lived (260 seconds by default, which is the
   default time that the state is active at DR in the absence of IGMP/
   MLD Reports/Leaves). It should also be noted that the host can join a
   number of different channels with only one IGMPv3/MLDv2 Report as the
   protocol allows to include multiple sources in the same message.
   However, even short-lived state may be harmful, if the intent is to
   cause as much state as possible. The host can continue to send IGMP/
   MLD Reports to these groups to make the state attack more long-lived.
   This results in:

   o  ASM: a (*,G) join is sent towards an intra-domain RP, causing
      state on that path; in turn, that RP joins to the DR of the source
      (if it exists). If the source address was specified by the host in
      the IGMPv3/MLDv2 Report, a (S,G) Join is sent directly towards the
      specified source.

   o  SSM: a (S,G) join is sent inter-domain to the DR of the source S,
      causing state on that path.  If the source does not exist, the
      join goes to the closest router to S as possible.

   o  Embedded RP: a (*,G) join is sent towards an inter/intra-domain RP
      embedded in the group G, causing state on that path. If the RP
      does not exist, the join goes to the closest router to the RP as
      possible.

   If the source or RP does not exist, the multicast routing protocol
   does not have any means to remove the distribution tree if the host
   remains active. Worst case attack could be a host remaining active to
   many different groups (containing either imaginary source or RP).






Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


3.2 Source-based Attacks

   These attacks are often referred to as "data plane" threats; however,
   with traditional ASM and MSDP, these also include an MSDP control
   plane threat.

3.2.1 Sending Multicast to Empty Groups

   Description of the threat: Data Flooding.  This happens when a host
   sends data packets to a multicast group or channel for which there
   are no real subscribers.

   Note that as unicast-encapsulation is not subject to RPF checks, the
   hosts can also craft and send these packets themselves, also spoofing
   the source address of the register messages unless ingress filtering
   [12] has been deployed [13].

   Examples of this are a virus/worm trying to propagate to multicast
   addresses, an attacker trying to crash routers with excessive MSDP
   state, or an attacker wishing to overload the RP with encapsulated
   packets or different groups.  This results in:

   o  ASM: the DR unicast-encapsulates the packets in Register messages
      to the intra-domain RP, which may join to the source and issue a
      Register-Stop, but continues to get the data.  A notification
      about the active source is sent (unless the group or source is
      configured to be local) inter-domain with MSDP and propagated
      globally.

   o  SSM: the DR receives the data, but the data does not propagate
      from the DR unless someone joins the (S,G) channel.

   o  Embedded RP: the DR register-encapsulates the packets to the
      intra/inter-domain RP, which may join to the source and issue a
      Register-Stop.  The data continues to be encapsulated.

   This yields many potential attacks, especially if at least parts of
   the multicast forwarding functions are implemented on a "slow" path
   or with software in the routers, at least:

   o  The MSDP control plane traffic generated can cause a significant
      amount of messages/data which may overload the routers receiving
      it. The thorough analysis of MSDP vulnerabilities can be found
      from [14]. This is only related to the ASM. However, this is the
      most serious threat at the moment, because MSDP will flood the
      multicast group information to all multicast domains in Internet
      including the multicast packet encapsulated to MSDP source-active
      message. This creates a lot of data and state to be shared by all



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


      multicast enabled routers and if the source remains active, the
      flooding will be repeated every 60 seconds by default.

   o  As a large amount of data is forwarded on the multicast tree; if
      multicast forwarding is performed on software, it may be a
      performance bottleneck, and a way to perform DoS on the path.
      Similarly, the DR must always be capable of processing (and
      discarding, if necessary) the multicast packets received from the
      source. These are potentially present in every model.

   o  If the encapsulation is performed on software, it may be a
      performance bottleneck, and a way to perform DoS on the DR.
      Similarly, if the decapsulation is performed on software, it may
      be a performance bottleneck, and a way to perform DoS on the RP.
      Note: the decapsulator may know, based on access configuration, a
      rate-limit or something else, that it doesn't need to decapsulate
      the packet, avoiding bottlenecks.  These threats are related to
      ASM and Embedded RP.


3.2.2 Disturbing Existing Group by Sending to It

   Description of the threat: Group Integrity Violation. This happens
   when a host sends packets to a group or channel, which already
   exists, to disturb the users of the existing group/channel.

   The SSM service model prevents injection of packets to (S,G)
   channels, avoiding this problem.  However, if the source address can
   be spoofed to be a topologically-correct address, it's possible to
   get the packet into the distribution tree -- typically only those
   hosts which are on-link with the source are able to perform this, so
   this is not really relevant in the scope of this memo.

   With ASM and Embedded RP sources can inject bogus traffic through
   RPs, which provide the source discovery for the group. The RP(s) send
   the traffic over the shared tree towards receivers (routers with
   (*,G) state). DR then forwards the bogus traffic to receivers unless
   the legitimate recipients are able to filter out unwanted sources,
   e.g., using MSF API [8].  Typically this is not used or supported by
   the applications using these protocols.

   Note that with ASM and Embedded RP, the RP may exert some form of
   control on who can send to a group, as the first packets are
   unicast-encapsulated in register packets to the RP -- if the RP drops
   the packet based on access-list, rate-limiter or something else, it
   doesn't get injected to an existing group.

   With ASM this "source control" is distributed across all the PIM



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   domains, which decreases it's applicability.  Embedded RP enables
   easier control, because source discovery is done through single RP
   per group.

   So, for this attack to succeed, the RP must decapsulate the packets,
   and join to the source.

3.3 Aggravating Factors to the Threats

   This section describes a few factors, which aggravate the threats
   described in sections Section 3.1 and Section 3.2. These could also
   be viewed as individual threats on their own.

   There are multiple threats relating to the use of host-to-router
   signalling protocols -- such as Internet Group Management Protocol
   (IGMP) or Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) -- but these are outside
   the scope of this memo.

   PIM-SM can also be abused in the cases where RPF checks are not
   applicable, in particular, in the stub LAN networks -- as spoofing
   the on-link traffic is very simple.  For example, a host would get
   elected to become DR for the subnet, but not perform any of its
   functions.  These are described at some length in [1], but are also
   considered out of scope of this memo.

3.3.1 Distant RP/Source Problem

   In the shared tree model, if the RP or a source is distant
   (topologically), then joins will travel to the distant RP or source
   and keep the state information in the path active, even if the data
   is being delivered locally.

   Note that this problem will be exacerbated if the RP/source space is
   global; if a router is registering to a RP/source that is not in the
   local domain (say, fielded by the site's direct provider), then the
   routing domain is flat.

   Also note that PIM assumes that the addresses used in PIM messages
   are valid.  However, there is no way to ensure this, and using
   non-existent S or G in (*,G) or (S,G) -messages will cause the
   signalling to be set up, even though one cannot reach the address.

   This will be analysed at more length in Section 5.1.

3.3.2 RPF Considers Interface, Not Neighbor

   In most current implementations, the RPF check considers only the
   incoming interface, and not the upstream neighbor (RPF neighbor).



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   This can result in accepting packets from the "wrong" RPF neighbor
   (the neighbor is "wrong" since, while the RPF check succeeds and the
   packet is forwarded, the unicast policy would not have forwarded the
   packet).

   This is a problem in the media where more than two routers can
   connect to, in particular, Ethernet-based Internet Exchanges.
   Therefore any neighbor on such a link could inject any PIM signalling
   as long as a route matching the address used in the signalling is
   going through the interface.

3.3.3 No Receiver Information in PIM Joins

   Only DRs, which are directly connected to receivers, know the exact
   receiver information (e.g. IP address). PIM does not forward that
   information further in the multicast distribution tree. Therefore
   individual routers (e.g. domain edge routers) are not able to make
   policy decisions on who can be connected to the distribution tree.

3.3.4 Injecting a Bogus Route

   Hosts that able to inject a bogus route can be used to "steal" PIM
   Joins. This prevents the correct multicast tree forming. If the
   injected route information changes, it causes route flapping and that
   could have harmful effect on multicast routing and packet delivery
   (depending on the group). The threat is similar to unicast case
   meaning that by injecting a bogus route, routing does not work
   correctly.

4. Threat Analysis

4.1 Summary of the Threats

   Trying to summarize the severity of the major classes of threats with
   respect to each multicast usage model, we have a matrix of resistance
   to different kinds of threats:

                 +----------------+------------------+-----------------+
                 | Bogus Join     |   Being a Source | Group Integrity |
   +-------------+----------------+------------------+-----------------+
   | ASM         |    bad 1)      |      very bad    |   bad/mediocre  |
   +-------------+----------------+------------------+-----------------+
   | SSM         |    bad         |     very good    |    very good    |
   +-------------+----------------+------------------+-----------------+
   | Embedded RP |bad/mediocre 2) | good/mediocre 3) |      good       |
   +-------------+----------------+------------------+-----------------+

   Notes:



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   1) in ASM host can directly join also (S,G) groups with IGMPv3/MLDv2
   and thus have same characteristics as SSM (also allows inter-domain
   shared state to be created).

   2) allows inter-domain shared state to be created.

   3) register messages can be sent to long-distance RPs with spoofed
   source addresses and this could create unnecessary joins towards DRs
   (from spoofed source address space).

4.2 Enhancements for Threat Mitigation

   There are several desirable actions ("requirements") which could be
   considered to mitigate these threats; these are listed below. A
   future revision of this memo will describe the best methods and
   parameters at more detail.

   o  Inter-domain MSDP (ASM) should be retired (or not introduced) to
      avoid attacks; or, if this is not reasonable, the DRs should
      rate-limit the unicast-encapsulation (note that the hosts can
      avoid this) and (more importantly) the RPs should rate-limit the
      unicast-decapsulation especially from different sources, or MSDP
      must rate-limit the MSDP data generation for new sources.

   o  DRs should rate-limit PIM Joins and Prunes somehow; there are
      multiple possibilities how exactly this should be considered
      (i.e., which variables to take into the consideration).

   o  DRs could rate-limit unicast-encapsulation somehow; there are
      multiple ways to perform this.  Note that the hosts can avoid this
      by performing the unicast-encapsulation themselves if so inclined.

   o  RPs could rate-limit unicast-decapsulation somehow; there are
      multiple ways to perform this.  Note that if the source of the
      unicast packets is spoofed by the host, this may have an effect on
      how e.g. rate-limiters behave.

   o  RPs should rate limit the MSDP SA messages coming from MSDP peers.

   o  RPs could limit or even disable the SA cache size. However, this
      could have negative effects on normal operation.

   o  RPs should provide good interfaces to reject packets which are not
      interesting; for example, if an Embedded RP group is not
      configured to be allowed in the RP, the unicast-encapsulated
      packets would not even be decapsulated.

   o  DRs could rate-limit the multicast traffic somehow to reduce the



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


      disturbing possibilities; there are multiple possibilities how
      exactly this should be considered.

   o  DRs should rate-limit the number of groups that can be created by
      a given source, S.


5. PIM Security Enhancements

   This section includes in-depth description of the above-mentioned
   rate-limiting etc. functions as well as description of the remote
   routability signalling issue.

5.1 Remote Routability Signalling

   As described in section Section 3.3.1, non-existent DRs or RPs may
   cause some problems when setting up multicast state.  There seem to
   be a couple of different approaches to mitigate this, especially if
   rate-limiting is not extensively deployed.

   With ASM and Embedded RP, Register message delivery could be ensured
   somehow. For example:

      1) At the very least, receiving an ICMP unreachable message (of
      any flavor) should cause the DR to stop the Register packets -- as
      the RP will not be receiving them anyway.

      2) An additional method could be implementing a timer on the RPs
      so that unless nothing is heard back from the RP within a defined
      time period, the flow of Register messages would stop. (Currently,
      the RPs are not required to answer back, unless they want to join
      to the source.)

      3) An extreme case would be performing some form of return
      routability check prior to starting the register messages: first a
      packet would be sent to the RP, testing its existence and
      willingness to serve, and also proving to the RP that the sender
      of the "bubble" and the sender of the registers are the same and
      the source address is not forged (i.e., the RP would insert a
      cookie in the bubble, and it would have to be present in the
      register message.)

   With all the models, PIM Joins and other state management messages
   could also be somehow managed. For example:

      1) At the very least, receiving an ICMP unreachable message (of
      any flavor) should cause the DR to stop the PIM messages toward
      the destination, as the packets will not be received anyway.



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


      (Currently the sending of an ICMP error message in response to a
      multicast packet, even though in this case the PIM message to only
      received by one router, is prohibited.)

      2) A possible method would be limiting the number of PIM messages
      sent towards a destination until some response (e.g. other PIM
      state messages).


5.2 RPF to Check Neighbor, not Interface

   As described in Section 3.3.2, especially Ethernet-based Internet
   Exchange Points (IXP) are susceptible to signalling attacks from any
   member of the IXP, as the RPF considers the Interface, not a
   Neighbor.

   Consequently, PIM must be modified so that on non- point-to-point
   links, the RPF must also consider whether the neighbor is correct.
   Note that in case of IPv6, this requires (an already necessary) a
   mapping between link-local and global addresses.

5.3 Rate-limiting Possibilities

   There seem to be many ways to implement rate-limiting (for
   signalling, data encapsulation and multicast traffic) at the DRs or
   RPs -- the best approach likely depends on the threat model; factors
   in the evaluation might be e.g.:

   o  Whether the host is willfully malicious, uncontrolled (e.g.,
      virus/worm), or a regular user just doing something wrong.

   o  Whether the threat is aimed towards a single group, a single RP
      handling the group, or the (multicast) routing infrastructure in
      general.

   o  Whether the host on a subnet is spoofing its address (but still as
      one which fulfills the RPF checks of the DR) or not.

   o  Whether the host may generate the PIM join (and similar) messages
      itself to avoid rate-limiters at the DR if possible.

   o  Whether unicast RPF checks are applied on the link (i.e., whether
      the host can send unicast-encapsulated register-messages on its
      own).

   o  Whether blocking the misbehaving host on a subnet is allowed to
      also block other, legitimate hosts on the same subnet.




Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   o  Whether these mechanisms would cause false positives on links with
      only properly working hosts if many of them are receivers or
      senders.

   As should be obvious, there are many different scenarios here which
   seem to call for different kinds of solutions.

   For example, the rate-limiting could be performed based on:

   1.  multicast address, or the RP where the multicast address maps to

   2.  source address

   3.  the (source address, multicast address) -pair (or the RP which
       maps to the multicast address)

   4.  data rate in case of rate limiting the source

   5.  everything (multicast groups and sources would not be
       distinguished at all)

   In the above, we make an assumption that rate-limiting would be
   performed per-interface (on DRs) if a more fine-grained filter is not
   being used.

   It should be noted that some of the rate limiting functions can be
   used as a tool for DoS against legimate multicast users. Therefore
   several parameters for rate limiting should be used to prevent such
   operation.

   The next revisions of this document (or separated in other documents,
   if appropriate) will include more explicit discussion of the best
   ways to perform rate-limiting, especially considering the effects on
   the legimate traffic.

6. Security Considerations

   This memo analyzes the security of PIM routing infrastructures in
   some detail, and proposes enhancements to mitigate the observed
   threats.

7. IANA Considerations

   This memo is for informational purposes and does not introduce new
   namespaces for the IANA to manage.

Normative References




Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   [1]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H. and I. Kouvelas, "Protocol
        Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode PIM-SM): Protocol
        Specification (Revised)", draft-ietf-pim-sm-v2-new-08 (work in
        progress), October 2003.

   [2]  Fenner, B. and D. Meyer, "Multicast Source Discovery Protocol
        (MSDP)", RFC 3618, October 2003.

   [3]  Holbrook, H. and B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for IP",
        draft-ietf-ssm-arch-04 (work in progress), October 2003.

   [4]  Savola, P. and B. Haberman, "Embedding the Address of RP in IPv6
        Multicast Address", draft-ietf-mboned-embeddedrp-00 (work in
        progress), October 2003.

   [5]  Barbir, A., Murphy, S. and Y. Yang, "Generic Threats to Routing
        Protocols", draft-ietf-rpsec-routing-threats-04 (work in
        progress), December 2003.

Informative References

   [6]   Deering, S., "Host extensions for IP multicasting", STD 5, RFC
         1112, August 1989.

   [7]   Bhattacharyya, S., "An Overview of Source-Specific Multicast
         (SSM)", RFC 3569, July 2003.

   [8]   Thaler, D., Fenner, B. and B. Quinn, "Socket Interface
         Extensions for Multicast Source Filters",
         draft-ietf-magma-msf-api-05 (work in progress), July 2003.

   [9]   Hardjono, T. and B. Weis, "The Multicast Security
         Architecture", draft-ietf-msec-arch-05 (work in progress),
         January 2004.

   [10]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B. and A.
         Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3",
         RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [11]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2
         (MLDv2) for IPv6", draft-vida-mld-v2-08 (work in progress),
         December 2003.

   [12]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
         Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
         Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.

   [13]  Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


         Networks", draft-savola-bcp38-multihoming-update-03 (work in
         progress), December 2003.

   [14]  Rajvaidya, P., Ramachandran, K. and K. Almeroth, "Detection and
         Deflection of DoS Attacks Against the Multicast Source
         Discovery Protocol", IEEE Infocom 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Pekka Savola
   CSC/FUNET

   Espoo
   Finland

   EMail: psavola@funet.fi


   Rami Lehtonen
   TeliaSonera
   Hataanpaan valtatie 20
   Tampere 33100
   Finland

   EMail: rami.lehtonen@teliasonera.com


   David Meyer

   EMail: dmm@1-4-5.net




















Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     PIM-SM Multicast Routing Security            Jan 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Savola, et al.           Expires July 22, 2004                 [Page 17]



