Internet Draft                                           John Neystadt
                                              Comverse Technology Inc.
                                                         March 19, 2000
                                                 Expires in six months

     Registration of "pages" Media Feature Tag
	<draft-neystadt-pages-media-00.txt>

Status of this memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

This document contains the registration for media feature tag:
"pages". These media feature allow specification of number of pages 
of documents that can be understood by devices and the devices' users. 
The templates in this document are derived from [TAG-REG].
                                   
1. Registration for pages

To: media-feature-tags@apps.ietf.org (Media feature tags mailing list)
Subject: Registration of media feature tag pages

Media feature tag name:
    pages

ASN.1 identifier associated with feature tag:
    New assignment by IANA

Summary of the media feature indicated by this feature tag:
    Number of pages within the media document

Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:

    Rational number


Neystadt                    Internet draft                    [Page 1]

Registration of Pages Media Feature Tag                  March 8, 2000
<draft-neystadt-pages-media.txt>


The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following
applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:

    Any protocol that uses media tags, particulary MIME for Email.

Examples of typical use:
    (pages=8)

Related standards or documents:
    "IANA Charset Registration Procedures", RFC 2278

Considerations particular to use in individual applications,
protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
    None

Security considerations:
    The value can not be relied upon by processing applications, 
	since it can be easily faked. The application should obtain the
	actual value from within the media during media processing.

Name(s) & email address(es) of person(s) to contact for
further information:
    John Neystadt <john@neystadt.org>

Intended usage:
    COMMON

Author/Change controller:
    IETF

Requested IANA publication delay:
    None

Other information:
    None

Author/Change controller:
    IETF

3. Security Considerations

The security considerations are listed in the registration above.

4. IANA Considerations

The bulk of this document is IANA registrations.

5. References

[TAG-REG] "Media Feature Tag Registration Procedure", RFC 2506

6. Author Contact Information

John Neystadt
Comverse Technology Inc.
HaBarzel 29, Ramat-Hahayal
Tel-Aviv, 69710 Israel
john@neystadt.org

Neystadt                    Internet draft                    [Page 2]
