


Network Working Group                                         D. Crocker
Internet-Draft                               Brandenburg InternetWorking
Expires: December 21, 2006                                 June 19, 2006


                DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves
                     draft-crocker-dns-attrleaf-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Historically, any DNS RR may occur for any name.  Recent additions
   have defined DNS leaf nodes that contain a reserved node name,
   beginning with an underscore.  With the underscore construct, the
   choice of valid RRs is limited to a defined set.  The underscore
   construct is a basic paradigm modification to the DNS, because it
   defines a scope-constrained attribute space for the containing domain
   name.  This note defines the nature of this DNS usage and defines the
   procedures for registering new "underscore names" with IANA.




Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  IANA Registration Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8










































Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


1.  Introduction

   Historically, any DNS RR may occur for any name.  Recent additions
   have defined DNS leaf nodes that contain a reserved node name,
   beginning with an underscore.  With the underscore construct, the
   choice of valid RRs is limited to a defined set.  The underscore
   construct is a basic paradigm modification to the DNS, because it
   defines a scope-constrained attribute space for the containing domain
   name.

   The DNS technical specification defines no semantics to domain names
   and no constraints upon which resource records may be associated with
   a particular name.  This freedom in the basic technology has
   permitted a wide range of administrative and semantic policies to be
   used -- in parallel -- with the DNS.  In the DNS specifications, data
   semantics have been limited to the specifications for precise
   resource records, on the expectation that new ones would be added as
   needed.  Although there remains an expectation that this method of
   enhancement is to be preferred, alternative approaches have been
   explored.

   One uses a special class of DNS node name uses a leading underscore
   character to define special contexts for specific resource records.
   An established example is the SRV record, which generalizes concepts
   long-used for email routing, with the MX record.[3][2] The use of
   special DNS names has significant benefits and detriments.  Some of
   these are explored in [1].

   One that has perhaps not been noticed is that the use of the
   underscore construct substantially changes possible concerns for
   scaling effects, when there are different uses for the same RR,
   notably the free-form TXT record.  Within the scope of a defined
   underscore leaf, the specific uses of specific resource records is
   formally constrained.

   The purpose of this note is to attempt to provide an explicit
   definition of this type of DNS naming, and to establish an IANA
   registry for the reserved names beginning with underscore.

   NOTE:

      Apologies for the incomplete state of this note.  It will be
      revised, shortly, to provide more detail.  Given the DNS-related
      activities in the DKIM working group, I thought it worth marking
      the established nature and the significant meaning of the
      underscore construct.





Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


2.  Security Considerations

   This memo raises no security issues
















































Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


3.  IANA Considerations

   Domain node names that begin with an underscore MUST be registered
   with IANA.

   The procedures will be specified in a later version of this note.

4.  Informative

   [1]  "IAB Discussion about alternative methods of adding information
        to the DNS".

   [2]  "Definition of MX record".

   [3]  "Definition of SRV record".




































Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


Appendix A.  IANA Registration Procedures

   TBD
















































Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


Author's Address

   Dave Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking
   675 Spruce Dr.
   Sunnyvale, CA  94086
   US

   Phone: +1.408.246.8253
   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net
   URI:   http://bbiw.net/








































Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves       June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Crocker                 Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 8]

