


       
      IETF Mobile IP Working Group                                  E. Njedjou 
      Internet Draft                                                 P. Bertin 
      Document: draft-njedjou-inter-an-handoffs-00.txt      France Telecom R&D 
                                                                   P. Reynolds 
                                                                     Orange SA 
                                                                     June 2003 
       
       
            Motivation for Network Controlled Handoffs using IP mobility 
                   between heterogeneous Wireless Access Networks 
       
       
      Status of this Memo 
       
         This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
         all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  
          
         Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
         Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
         groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
          
         Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
         and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
         time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
         material or to cite them other than as 'work in progress' 
          
         The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
          
         The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
          
         This Internet Draft will expire on December 2003 
          
         Copyright Notice 
          
         Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All rights reserved. 
          
          
      Abstract 
          
         In the near future, multi-interfaces Mobile Nodes will be used for 
         connecting to the Internet by way of a multitude of Radio Access 
         Networks including 802.11 based WLANs, GPRS, CDMA2000 and 3G based 
         cellular networks. Ensuring the non-disrupted flow of real-time 
         applications data, as well as adhering to subscribed service profiles 
         while the Mobile Node moves between Access Networks of different 
         technologies, is an issue that needs to be addressed. It is assumed 
         that a unified and external IP core network is used to support such a 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 1] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
         multitude of Access Networks. This will probably be the case for a 
         mobile network operator intending to benefit its subscribers with its 
         own hot-spots broadband internet access. Consequently, the need 
         arises to define managed handoff mechanisms between heterogeneous 
         attachment networks, while providing service continuity to the Mobile 
         Node. 
          
         As such, information necessary for the Mobile Node to performing a 
         judicious handoff across Wireless Access Networks, will have to be 
         gathered from the involved Access Networks, transferred across the IP 
         network that interconnects them, to the operators home network. 
          
         This document discusses the desirability of a network controlled 
         handoff process for optimizing inter-Access Network Mobile Node 
         mobility. The approach presented provides the means for the operator 
         home network to achieve the best possible selection of the Mobile 
         Node target Access Network for handoff, on the basis of information 
         gathered on the most relevant nodes. It introduces a new function 
         located in the operator network and referred to as a Mobility 
         Manager. It also introduces the concepts for implementing such a 
         handoff process to make it compatible with Mobile IPv6. Other 
         documents will be needed to specify the protocol structures that are 
         intended for handling the handoff process hereafter described. 
          
          
      Table of Content 
          
          
         1.      Introduction...............................................2 
         2.      Terminology................................................3 
         2.1.    General Terms..............................................4 
         2.2.    Specific terms.............................................5 
         3.      Motivation for a Network Controlled Handoff................5 
         4.      Proposed Concept...........................................7 
         4.1.    Architectural Considerations...............................7 
         4.2.    Protocol Considerations....................................8 
         5.      Scenarios..................................................9 
         5.1.    Scenario 1.................................................9 
         5.2.    Scenario 2................................................10 
         5.3.    Scenario 3................................................10 
         6.      Performances Considerations...............................10 
         7.      Security Considerations...................................11 
         8.      References................................................11 
         9.      Acknowledgments...........................................12 
         10.     Author's Addresses........................................12 
         11.     Intellectual Property Statement...........................12 
          
          
      1. Introduction 
          

       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 2] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
         Next generation multi-interfaces Mobile Nodes (MN) will be able to 
         gain connectivity to the Internet over a multitude of Access Networks 
         (AN) including 802.11 based WLANs, GPRS, CDMA2000 and 3G based 
         cellular networks. Ensuring seamless flow of real-time application 
         traffic as well as adhering to Mobile Node subscribed service 
         profiles whilst in handoff between such heterogeneous access links is 
         the challenge. 
          
         Currently, one way to handle the Layer 3 (L3) mobility of nodes is to 
         make use of such protocols as [MIPV4] or [MIPV6]. These protocols are 
         mainly concerned with describing how a MN can maintain its 
         connectivity to the Internet after a change of its IP point of 
         attachment as a result of its mobility. Using these protocols, the MN 
         is able to attach itself to a variety of ANs regardless of the 
         underlying link technology. The MN then needs to be efficiently 
         assisted in choosing or detecting among several available, the one 
         attachment link suitable for its needs, in the case where a handoff 
         might be unavoidable to achieve a seamless transfer of the sessions 
         features. 
          
         [FMIPV6] [FMIPV4] provide the means to optimize the L3 handoff 
         procedures by taking benefit from timely information available at 
         link-layer, namely Layer 2 (L2) triggers, to anticipate the change of 
         the MN's Access Router (AR) of attachment before the loss of current 
         link connectivity. In this way, handoff delays can be reduced as well 
         as service context information transferred from old to new default 
         router before the MN connects to the new subnet. Prior to performing 
         this Fast Handoff procedure to the new AR, it might be useful to 
         first select the AN where it is better for the MN to attach to, with 
         respect to the criteria that most satisfy its requirements. 
          
         Effectively, in [FMIPV6], for either mobile or network initiated 
         handoff modes, the handoff management is performed within the ANs 
         edge, be it in the MN or in the ARs (previous and candidate). Still, 
         in some situations, from a MN as well as from an AR perspective, the 
         view of the network might not be large and comprehensive enough to 
         make the most pertinent decision about the opportunity for the mobile 
         Node to perform a handoff to a particular AR. It then might appear 
         more effective to convey the link layer trigger information (or any 
         other information relevant to take the handoff decision) into the 
         provider external IP network. In this way, the decision to move the 
         terminal to a new link could be made relatively to information, 
         events or situations for which the AN edge would not have had the 
         knowledge. 
          
          
      2. Terminology 
          
         The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
         "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
         document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.  
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 3] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
          
         The terminology used in this document is in conformance with that 
         given in [TERM]. The definitions of some of the terms are recalled 
         and some additional terms are defined. 
          
      2.1. General Terms 
          
         Access Point (AP)  
              An Access Point is a layer 2 device that is connected to the 
              wired Network and offers the wireless link connection to the MN. 
               
         Access Network Router (ANR)  
              An IP router in the Access Network. An Access Network Router may 
              include Access Network specific functionalities as QoS. 
          
         Access Router (AR)  
              An Access Network Router residing on the edge of an Access 
              Network and connected to one or more APs. An AR offers IP 
              connectivity to Mobile Node. 
          
         Access Network (AN)  
              An IP network which includes one or more Access Network routers  
          
         Access Network Gateway (ANG)  
              An ANR that separates an Access Network from other IP networks. 
          
         Capability of AR  
              A characteristic of the service offered by an AR that may be of 
              interest to a MN when the AR is being considered as a handoff 
              candidate. 
          
         Candidate AR (CAR)  
              An AR to which MN has a choice of performing IP-level handoff. 
              This means that MN has the right radio interface to connect to 
              an AP that is served by this AR. 
          
         GGSN  
              Gateway GPRS Support Node. A router between the GPRS network and 
              an external network (i.e, the Internet). The GGSN is an example 
              of an Access Network Gateway.  
          
         Layer 2 Handoff (L2 Handoff)  
              A process of terminating existing link layer connectivity and 
              obtaining new one. This handoff alone is transparent to the 
              routing at the IP layer.  
          
         Layer 3 Handoff (L3 Handoff) 
              A process of terminating existing network layer connectivity and 
              obtaining new one. 
          
         Link Layer Trigger (L2 Trigger)  
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 4] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
              Information from L2 that informs L3 of the detailed events 
              involved in handoff sequencing at L2. L2 triggers are not 
              specific to any particular L2, but rather represent 
              generalizations of L2 information available from a wide variety 
              of L2 protocols 
          
         Mobile Node (MN) 
              An IP node capable of changing its point of attachment to the 
              network.  
       
         Inter-AN Handoff  
              This handoff occurs when the MN moves to a new AN. This requires 
              some sort of host mobility across ANs, which typically is 
              provided by the external IP core.  
          
         Intra-AN Handoff  
              This handoff occurs when the MN changes ARs inside the same AN. 
          
          
      2.2. Specific terms 
          
         Network Controlled Handoff (NCH)  
              In this handoff, the decision is taken by an external network 
              element 
          
         Inter-AN Network Controlled Handoff 
              A Network Controlled Handoff where the Mobile Node moves to a 
              new AN  
          
         Mobility Manager (MM)  
              A function that serves for the management of inter-AN mobility 
              of hosts. 
          
          
      3. Motivation for a Network Controlled Handoff 
          
         Integrating several access technologies to a single IP based core 
         network requires efficient management of mobility and resources among 
         heterogeneous ANs. In the following, it is assumed that each AN 
         relies on a given access technology at L2. Further, inter-AN handoffs 
         is considered as the main issue to be optimized even if the presented 
         concepts may be further applied to intra-AN handoffs.  
          
         In the near future, Mobile Nodes will be able to integrate and manage 
         different radio access technologies. Using alternatively, or even 
         simultaneously, those different radio access technologies will 
         require to provide new services able to dynamically adapt their 
         features to the capacities of available technologies and resources in 
         any area. Thus it is necessary to manage, efficiently, seamless 
         mobility among heterogeneous ANs in a transparent manner for the end 
         user. This leads one to consider two main issues: 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 5] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
          
           . to manage efficiently handoff schemes at the IP layer. 
          
           . to provide means to select the appropriate AN when at least two 
              distinct ANs are available for a given Mobile Node. These ANs 
              can be based on the same or different L2 technologies. 
          
         For the first issue, the Mobile IP [MIPV4][MIPV6] protocols provide 
         an efficient solution to perform IP based handoff applicable over 
         heterogeneous networks. Mobile IP efficiency can be optimized with 
         the implementation of Fast Handoff Schemes described in [FMIPV4], 
         [FMIPV6] and hierarchical approach described in [HMIPV6]. 
          
         For the second issue, the use of L2 triggers [REQ] needs to be 
         considered in order to provide the MN with information on current 
         access attachment availability and capabilities. As defined in [REQ], 
         L2 triggers can be implemented within a MN or an Access 
         Router and can be carried within L3 protocols. 
          
         Thus handoff triggering is performed either in the MN or the AN, 
         whereas the handoff process involves several entities located in both 
         the AN and the Home Network, especially for inter-AN handoffs. 
         Indeed, with Mobile IP the MN needs to update its association in the 
         Home Agent located in the Home network. It can be noted that Mobile 
         IP Home Agent can be either located in Local 
         Area Networks (for example, corporate LANs), ISP platforms or 
         operators IP core networks. In the last two cases (the ones 
         considered here), the MN will never attach itself to its 
         Home network but move among different Visited Networks that provide 
         AN facilities. 
          
         When managed in the MN and/or AR, AN selection for handoff triggering 
         can be made only with locally available information such as MN radio 
         signal strength and link quality on one or several Interfaces, and AR 
         load and/or capabilities. 
         However, other information registered in the Home Network can be 
         relevant for making such selection: for example, user profiles, 
         global load of Access Networks (acquired for example from ANGs), user 
         preferences, operator policy, peering agreements between access and 
         service providers. Then, it appears that AN information, being 
         restricted to the MN and AR knowledge, provides only a limited view 
         that may lead to a non-optimal AN selection. Such optimal selection 
         can be obtained only when mixing different kinds of parameters 
         available locally and remotely in the home network. 
          
         This leads to the consideration of performing handoff triggering in a 
         specific network handoff control function taking care of several 
         types of parameters as mentioned above. This specific function could 
         be, for example, implemented in a home Network element like a Home 
         Agent (but this is not mandatory) and provided with remote ANs 
         information reported by the MN, ARs and/or ANGs. Such information can 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 6] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
         be reported through a protocol able also to transport handoff 
         triggering messages giving the MN the optimal target AN to handoff 
         to. In the following, the entity responsible for network handoff 
         assistance function is called the Mobility Manager (MM). Hence, MNs 
         can periodically report such information as link quality to the MM 
         which, based on information received from different MNs as well as 
         several parameters registered in a central database such as user 
         profiles and operator policy, evaluates for each MN when triggering 
         inter-AN handoff. It is also necessary to consider in which way 
         communication can be made possible between ARs or ANGs and the MM to 
         help in handoff decision by providing complementary information such 
         as the AR or global AN load. 
          
         Moreover, as the MM by performing AN selection, anticipates the MN 
         movement and potentially the next attachment point, it is able to 
         provide this information to the relevant entity in AN or Home Network 
         for preparing changes in path updates. Such optimization would 
         support planned handoff limiting packet losses.  
          
         Finally, it should be outlined that when handoff need evaluation and 
         decision are completely managed by the MNs, the computation of 
         overloading information is required and may be limited by MN 
         processing capabilities, especially for smart mobile devices. Hence, 
         a Network Controlled handoff scheme limits the computation to be done 
         by the Mobile Nodes. 
          
          
      4. Proposed Concept 
          
      4.1. Architectural Considerations 
          
         The considered reference architecture for an AN is taken from [TERM]. 
         It can be noted that depending on the access technology, some of the 
         considered entities may be present or not. Typically: 
          
           . in a GPRS based AN, the ANG can be considered being implemented 
              at the GGSN so that the rest of the network is viewed as a L2 
              technology from both the MN and GGSN point of views. Thus, 
              neither AR nor ANR are present and intra-AN mobility is managed 
              at L2. 
          
           . in a 802.11 based AN, all the networking elements (AR, ANR and 
              ANG) can be present and allow to manage inter-AR mobility at L3 
              whether intra-AR mobility is done in L2. 
          
         However, this reference architecture permits the hiding of AN 
         entities from the rest of the external network (IP core and Home 
         Network), which allows the management of inter-AN mobility between AN 
         based on the same or even different L2 technologies. 


       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 7] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
          
                               ---        ------                    -------  | 
                  ---  | <-->  | | -------| AR | -------------------|     |  | 
                  | |--[]      ---        /------          \       /| ANG |--| 
                  ---            AP      /                  \     / |     |  | 
                   MN                   /                    \   /  -------  | 
               (+ mobile        ---    /                    -------          | 
                  device(s))    | |----                     | ANR |          | 
                                ---                         -------          | 
                                 AP                          /   \           | 
                                                            /     \ -------  | 
                               ---       ------            /       \|     |  | 
                               | |-------| AR |---------------------| ANG |--| 
                               ---       ------                     |     |  | 
                                AP                                  -------  | 
                                                                             | 
                                    Access Network (AN) 1                    | 
                                                                             | 
          
                          Figure 1: Reference Access Network Architecture 
          
         The complete reference architecture for managing mobility among 
         several 
         ANs is given hereafter. 
          
                    ---------------       --------           ----------- 
                   |         ----- |    (         )          |  Home    | 
                   |        | ANG ||   (           )         |  Agent   | 
                   |         ----- |  (             )        |    (HA)  | 
                   | AN 1          | (               )  ------------    | 
           ---  |   --------------- (    INTERNET     ) | Mobility |---- 
           | |--[]                 (        OR         )| Manager  | 
           ---      --------------- ( IP CORE NETWORK ) |   (MM)   | 
                   |         ----- | (               )  ------------ 
                   |        | ANG ||  (             )  
                   |         ----- |   (           ) 
                   | AN 2          |    (         ) 
                    ---------------      ---------  
          
             Figure 2: Reference Architecture for inter-AN Mobility Management 
          
      4.2. Protocol Considerations 
          
         As already introduced, the considered scheme for inter-AN Mobility 
         Management relies on a protocol between the MN and the MM. It is also 
         considered that communication could be provided between ANs and MM 
         for optimizing network selection with additional information. The 
         general requirements for such a protocol to support are: 
          
           . reporting of locally available information from MN (and maybe 
              AR) to the MM responsible for handoff control. The reported 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 8] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
              information may include radio link quality measured by the MN on 
              different ANs through one or several interfaces as well as 
              capabilities of the ARs, or they may be simple abstracted values 
              for example ôcan see - cant seeö. In order to avoid unnecessary 
              signaling, these reports can be sent only when the MN identifies 
              that current radio link quality is degrading or when new Access 
              Networks become available. 
          
           . delivering of handoff triggering messages from the MM to the MN 
              when the MM identifies the need for such a handoff to occur. 
              These trigger messages should include new AN selection 
              information from the MM to the MN.  
          
           . awareness about handoff triggering from the MM to other logical 
              entity involved in the handoff process such as HA (and maybe AR 
              or ANG) for making them able to prepare the handoff, for 
              example, by reserving adequate resources, establishing relevant 
              tunnels between ARs). 
       
           . transporting said information in standard Mobile IP within newly 
              defined extensions. 
          
          
      5. Scenarios 
          
         The following scenarios illustrate some advantages of a Network 
         Controlled approach compared to the basic scenarios assuming MN or AR 
         control. 
         In these scenarios, one makes the assumption that the MN belongs to a 
         mobile network operator which also provide 802.11 based WLAN access 
         services in hot Spot areas, a situation likely to be encountered in 
         the near future. The 802.11 access is always supposed to be better in 
         terms of access speed. One also considers a multi-interface smart MN, 
         for example, notebook, PDA, etc. 
          
      5.1. Scenario 1 
          
         Consider the case of such a MN that has been under 802.11 coverage 
         for a while. The user of the MN has registered a profile with 
         broadband Internet access preference. Over time, MNs number increases 
         within the AN, leading to saturation of the ANG. With a handoff 
         scheme managed from within the AN edge i.e. between MN and AR, as 
         long as the load and QoS capabilities of the current AR are 
         satisfactory to maintain the MN attachment, no handoff need would be 
         detected. 
          
         However, a Mobility Manager located, for instance, inside the 
         external IP core network of the operator (IP core serving multiple 
         ANs), could get information that the 802.11 AN overall load, and IP 
         QoS, are in a critical state and, having an overall visibility of the 
         situation, decide that the MN should handoff to the GPRS Access 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                 [Page 9] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
         Network because the capabilities measured on that AN could help 
         maintain a service level that match its profile. 
          
      5.2. Scenario 2 
          
         Consider the MN is currently attached to a GPRS AN, and is moving 
         inside 802.11 coverage. One further assumes that sufficient MNs are 
         present in the AR serving the coverage area, for it to be overloaded. 
         A handoff process operated with an AN edge visibility would not 
         permit the MN to gain attachment to the 802.11 AN because of the 
         saturation at the AR. 
          
         However, A Mobility Manager knowing the profiles priorities of the 
         MNs currently attached to the 802.11 AR (as they would have been 
         stored in a home network register), could decide to instruct some of 
         those MNs with lower demanding needs, to handoff to the GPRS access, 
         giving capacity for the MN to attach to that AR. In this way, the MN 
         having higher demanding profiles would be able to benefit from the 
         WLAN facility. 
          
      5.3. Scenario 3 
          
         Consider the MN is currently attached to a GPRS network and assume 
         that it is moving into 802.11 coverage hosting an AN provided by a 
         service provider having peering agreements with the mobile operator. 
         The MN will have knowledge from layer 2 triggers information 
         (acquired from its own or from its current AR) that a 802.11 link is 
         becoming available. A handoff procedure managed between MN and AR 
         edge could then prompt the MN to handoff to a target AR of the 802.11 
         coverage on the sole basis of these L2 triggers information combined 
         to the capabilities of the ARs. 
          
         In the case where the link layer triggers information, and/or 
         capabilities of the ARs, were reported to a Mobility Manager these 
         information could be matched to other features like mobile operator 
         handoff policy, before prompting the terminal to handoff to the 
         802.11 AN or not. 
          
          
      6. Performances Considerations 
          
         The concept introduced below is targeted at optimizing inter-AN 
         handoff scenarios and is not meant to provide any alternative to 
         existing related work as done in [FMIPV6]: it is intended to 
         complement the previous approach with a specific focus on handoff 
         involving the crossing between heterogeneous AN technologies. 
          
         Network Controlled inter-AN handoff as presented here can effectively 
         be implemented so as to co-exist with Fast Handoffs. In which case, 
         once the selection of the candidate AN can be indicated by the MM to 
         the MN, a Fast Handoff process could be initiated with the intent to 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                [Page 10] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
         reduce the latency caused by the Mobile IP protocols operation. 
         Furthermore, it can be noted that the Network Controlled scheme 
         always applies even when such features as Fast Handoffs are not 
         supported at the edge of the access network. 
         However, in this situation, such information as AR capabilities 
         available with [FMIPV6] might not be profitable in the AN candidate 
         choice. 
          
          
      7. Security Considerations 
          
         It is acknowledged that there are new security threats associated 
         with the handoff management concept presented above. 
          
         Authentication of the local information from MN (L2 triggers, 
         capabilities of ARs, etc.) needed to MM to assist in handoff decision 
         needs to be ensured. This will guard against malicious MN pretending 
         to belong to the home network and requesting unauthorized handoff 
         services. The MN reports could contain information on ARs that should 
         be hidden from third parties as eavesdropper could make use of such 
         information to perform denial of service attacks on these sensitive 
         network elements.  
          
         Handoff decision from MM to MN will have to be authenticated as well 
         to prevent against false MMs pretending to assist the MN in its 
         handoff process. This information needs to be encrypted in order to 
         keep the MN location hidden to any eavesdropper, as the handoff 
         instruction message will reveal the identification of the next AN 
         where the MN will handoff to.  
          
         Integrity protection is necessary because of the sensitiveness of the 
         information exchanged between the MM in the home network and the MN. 
         A modified report on AN characteristics could compromise any targeted 
         seamless handoff. 
          
         There also might be other specific security requirements to be 
         fulfilled that are not identified in this document. It should 
         therefore be observed that the architecture and protocols extensions 
         to be defined with the objective to implement the concept have to 
         follow the general mechanisms and guidelines available from IETF 
         security solutions and protocols. 
          
          
      8. References 
          
         [MIPV4] "IP Mobility Support", C. Perkins (Editor), RFC 2002, October 
         1996. 
          
         [MIPV6] "Mobility Support in IPv6", D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and Jari 
         Arkko, draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-21.txt, work in progress, February 
         2003. 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                [Page 11] 
       
       
      Internet Draft     Motivation for Network Controlled          June 2003 
                        Inter-AN Handoffs using IP mobility 
                                           
          
         [FMIPV6] "Fast Handoffs for Mobile IPv6", MIPv6 handoff Design Team, 
         draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-06.txt, work in progress, March 2003. 
          
         [HMIPV6] "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management", H Soliman, C 
         Castellucia, K El-Maki, L Bellier, draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-07.txt, 
         work in progress, October 2002. 
          
         [REQ] "Requirements for Layer 2 Protocols to Support Optimized 
         Handoff for IP Mobility" J Kempf Ed, draft-manyfolks-l2-mobilereq-
         00.txt, work in progress, January 2000. 
          
         [TERM] "Mobility Related Terminology", J. Manner, M. Kojo, draft-
         ietf-seamoby-mobility-terminology-01.txt, work in progress, 
         November 2002. 
          
          
      9. Acknowledgments 
          
          
          
      10. Author's Addresses 
          
         Eric Njedjou 
         France Telecom R & D 
         4, Rue du Clos Courtel 
         35512 CESSON SEVIGNE 
         Phone: +33 2 99 12 48 78 
         Email: eric.njedjou@france.telecom.com 
          
         Philippe Bertin 
         France Telecom R & D 
         4, Rue du Clos Courtel 
         35512 CESSON SEVIGNE 
         Phone: +33 2 99 12 41 57 
         Email: philippe.bertin@france.telecom.com 
          
         Paul Reynolds 
         Orange SA 
         Bradley Stoke  
         Bristol BS32 4QJ 
         Phone: +44 7973 746 050 
         Email: paul.reynolds@orange.co.uk 
          
          
      11. Intellectual Property Statement 
          
         France Telecom is the owner of pending patent applications  that may 
         relate to this Internet Draft. See France Telecom's notice Regarding 
         Intellectual Property Rights: http://www.ietf.org/ietf/IPR/FRANCE-
         TELECOM.txt 
       
      Njedjou                  Expires December 2003                [Page 12] 
       
       
