


Network Working Group                                     N.D. McBurnett
Internet-Draft                                                Avaya Inc.
Expires: August 13, 2001                               February 12, 2001


                            SACRED Scenarios
                     draft-ietf-sacred-scenarios-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 13, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo presents scenarios for securely acquiring credentials.
   This ID is an interim product of work-in-progress within the
   Securely Available Credentials (sacred)[1] working group. 












McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.1  Obtaining Root Certs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.2  Home Desktop Computer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.3  Work Desktop Computer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   2.4  Public Lab / On-campus Shared Workstation  . . . . . . . . .   6
   2.5  Public Kiosk Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   2.6  Platforms with Limited Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   2.7  Uploading Credentials  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   2.8  Changing authentication information  . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   2.9  User Self-Enrollment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   2.10 Bulk Initialization of a Credential Server's Repository  . .   9
   2.11 Possible scenarios to justify time-to-live requirement . . .   9
        References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   A.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
































McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


1. Introduction

   The scenarios below are intended to provoke discussion of what
   SACRED should and shouldn't do.  It is not necessarily true that
   SACRED should support all of these or to what extent SACRED should
   support them. These scenarios should encompass most of the sorts of
   things that we expect SACRED to play a part in. 

   [These scenarios are collected mostly as-is from several
   individuals. From an editorial standpoint, no effort has been made
   to hammer them into a coherent style, pending feedback on their
   general utility, the preferred style, and additional input.] 







































McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


2. Scenarios

2.1 Obtaining Root Certs

   A new student, Carol, needs to configure her browser so it will work
   in the campus environment.  The campus has deployed their own
   self-signed root certificate which is used to sign things like TLS
   certificates for campus web servers, SACRED server certs, etc. They
   have bundled this root certificate up as a SACRED credential named
   ExampleU-Root (possibly along with trust policies of some sort,
   etc.) and published the name and fingerprint of this bundle in some
   paper medium (her acceptance letter, the campus newspaper, or the
   like.) 

   Carol connects to the SACRED server and gets the ExampleU-Root
   credential.  Her client calculates and displays the fingerprint, and
   since it matches the published fingerprint, Carol tells the client
   to accept the credential.  She can be confident that it authentic
   without even needing to authenticate the SACRED server or present
   any credentials of her own. 

   Note that other mechanisms may offer an alternative to checking a
   fingerprint - e.g. the Password Derived Moduli (PDM) scheme could
   work if the server had a userid and password for the user, and the
   user could thus use these to authenticate the server, and accept the
   root credentials simple on the basis of trusting an authenticated
   server. 

2.2 Home Desktop Computer

   Scenario Overview 

   A university utilizing a PKI infrastructure for various applications
   and services on-campus is likely to find that many of its users
   would like to make use of the same PKI-enabled services and
   applications on computers located in their residence.  These home
   computers may be owned either by the university or by the individual
   but are permanently located at the residence as opposed to laptop
   systems that may be taken home.  The usage depicted in this scenario
   may be motivated by formal telecommuting arrangements or simply by
   the need to catch up on work from home in the evenings. The basic
   scenario should apply equally well to the commercial, health care,
   and higher education environments. 

   Assumptions 

      This scenario assumes that the institution has not implemented a
      hardware token-based PKI mobility solution 



McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


      The home computer has a dial-up as opposed to a permanent network
      connection. 

      The PKI applications, whenever practical, should be functional in
      both on-line and off-line modes.  For example, the home user
      signing an email message to be queued for later bulk sending and
      the reading of a received encrypted message may be supported
      off-line while composing and queuing of an encrypted message
      might not be supported in off-line mode. 

      Applications using digital signatures will require
      nonrepudiation. 

      There institution prefers that the user be identified via a
      single certificate / key-pair from all computers used by the
      individual. 

      The home computer system can not be directly supported by the
      institution's IT staff.  Hardware, operating system versions, and
      operating system configurations will vary widely.  Significant
      software installations or specialized configurations will be
      difficult to implement. 

   Uniqueness of Scenario 

   The PKI mobility support needed for this scenario is, in general,
   similar to the other mobility scenarios.  However, it does have
   several unique aspects: 

      The home-user scenario differs from the general public
      workstation case in that it provides the opportunity to
      permanently store the user's certificate and key-pair on the
      workstation. 

      Likewise the appropriate CA certificates and even certificates
      for other users can be permanently stored or cached on the home
      workstation. 

      Another key difference is the need to support off-line use of the
      PKI credentials given the assumed dial-up network connection. 

      The level of hardware and software platform consistency
      (operating system versions and configurations) will vary widely. 

      Finally, the level of available technical support is
      significantly less for home systems than for equivalent systems
      managed by the IT staff at the office location. 




McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


2.3 Work Desktop Computer

   This will usually involve a subset of the requirements of the Home
   Desktop Computer scenario. 

2.4 Public Lab / On-campus Shared Workstation

   Scenario Overview 

   Many colleges and universities operate labs full of computer systems
   that are available for use by the general student population.  These
   computers are typically configured with identical hardware and an
   operating system build that is replicated to all of the systems in
   the lab.  Many typical configurations provide no permanent storage
   of any type while others may offer individual disk space for
   personal files on a central server.  Some scheme is generally used
   to ensure that the configuration of the operating system is
   preserved across users and that temporary files created by one user
   are removed before the next user logs in.  Students generally sit
   down at the next available workstation without any clear pattern of
   usage. 

   The same basic technical solutions used to operate public labs are
   often also used in general environments where several people share a
   single workstation.  This is often found in locations with shift
   work such as medical facilities and service bureaus that provide
   services to multiple time zones. 

   Assumptions 

      This scenario assumes that the institution has not implemented a
      hardware token-based PKI mobility solution. 

      The computer systems are permanently networked with LAN
      connections. 

      The configuration of the computer system is centrally maintained
      and customizations are relatively easy to implement.  For example
      it would be easy to load enterprise root certificates, LDAP
      server configurations, specialized software, and any other needed
      components of the PKI infrastructure on to the workstations. 

      Applications using digital signatures will require nonrepudiation
      in some of the anticipated environments. Examples of this might
      include homework submission in a public lab environment or
      medical records in a health care environment. 

      The institution prefers that the user be identified via a single
      certificate / key-pair from all computers used by the individual. 


McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


      Many anticipated implementations of this scenario will not
      implement any user authentication at the desktop operating system
      level.  Instead, user authentication will occur at during the
      startup of networked applications such as email, web-based
      services, etc.  Login at the desktop level may be with generic
      user names that are more targeted at matching printouts to
      machines than identifying users. 

      Users, with almost ridiculous frequency, will walk away from a
      system forgetting to first logout from running authenticated
      applications. 

   Uniqueness of Scenario 

   The PKI mobility support needed for this scenario is, in general,
   similar to the other mobility scenarios.  However, it does have
   several unique aspects: 

      Unlike situations with personal workstations, there is no
      permanent storage available to hold user key pairs and
      certificates. 

      Appropriate CA certificates and custom software are easily added
      and maintained for these types of shared systems. 

      The workstations are installed in public locations and users will
      frequently forget to close applications before permanently
      walking away from the workstation. 

2.5 Public Kiosk Mobility

   Overview 

   This scenario describes the needs of the traveler or the shopper.
   This person  is traveling light (no computer) or is burdened with
   everything but a computer. It recognizes the increasing availability
   of internet access points in public spaces, such as libraries,
   airports, shopping malls, and "cyber cafes". 

   The Need 

   In  our increasingly mobile society,  the chances of needing
   information when away from the  normal computing place are great.
   One may need to look up a telephone number. Have you tried to find 
   a phone book at a public phone lately? It may become necessary to
   use a data device to find the  next place to rush to. Mapquest to
   the rescue. With the proliferation  of  wireless devices (electronic
   leashes), others have the ability to  create a need for quick access
   to  electronic information. A pager can generate a  need to  check


McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


   the email inbasket or address book. A cell phone can drive you to
   your database to answer a pressing question. 

   The ability to quickly access sensitive or protected information or
   services from publicly available devices will  only  become more
   necessary as we become more and more "connected". 

   The Device 

   The access device is more a function of the best discount or
   marketing effort than of design. Any number of Intel based hardware
   platforms will be encountered. Macintosh is encountered from time to
   time. Linux has been spotted in a couple of local internet coffee
   shops. 

   Since these devices are open to the public I/O ports are not likely
   to be. In order to protect the device and it's immediate network
   environment, most devices will be in some sort of protective
   container. Access to serial, parallel, USB, firewire, SCSI, or
   PCMCIA connections will not be possible. Likewise floppy, zip, or cd
   drives. Therefore, any software "token" must be obtained from the
   network itself. 

   The Concerns 

   1. Getting the "token". Since it will be necessary to obtain the
   token (key, certificate, credential) from across the network. How
   can it be protected during transit? 

   2. Where did you get it? One of the primary controls in the Public
   Key Infrastructure is protection of the private key. Placing the key
   on a host that is accessible from a public network means that there
   is an inherent exposure from that network. The access controls and
   other security measures on the host machine are an area of concern. 

   3. How did you get it? When you obtained the token from the server,
   how did it know that you are you? Authentication becomes critical. 

   4. What happens to the token when you leave? You've checked your
   mail, downloaded a recipe from that super-secure recipe server,
   found out how to get to the adult beverage store for the... uh...
   accessories... for the meal, and you're off! Is your token? Or is it
   still sitting there on the public kiosk waiting for those youngsters
   coming out of the music store to notice and cruise the information
   highway on your ticket? 

2.6 Platforms with Limited Capabilities

   Cell Phones, PDAs, Appliances, etc. 


McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


2.7 Uploading Credentials

2.8 Changing authentication information

2.9 User Self-Enrollment

2.10 Bulk Initialization of a Credential Server's Repository

2.11 Possible scenarios to justify time-to-live requirement

   [Under what circumstances should the protocol or SACRED credential
   format get involved in time-to-live criteria? Does it imply that the
   client software and host are trusted to enforce the restriction,
   even though it is not part of the underlying certificates or
   whatever in a way that can be validated by the party that relies on
   the credential?] 



































McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


References

   [1]  <http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/sacred-charter.html>

   [2]  <http://www.educause.edu/hepki/>

   [3]  <http://bcn.boulder.co.us/~neal/ietf/>


Author's Address

   Neal D. McBurnett
   Avaya Inc.
   1300 W 120th Ave.
   Westminster, CO  80234
   US

   Phone: +1 303-538-4852
   EMail: nealmcb@avaya.com
   URI:   http://bcn.boulder.co.us/~neal/































McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   The editor gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Jim Jokl,
   Kevin Unrue and Internet2's HEPKI-TAG[2] (Higher Education PKI
   Technical Advisory Group). 

   The XML source[3] for this document is available and can be
   formatted into text or html via xml2rfc or via the web thanks to the
   folks at http://xml.resource.org/. 










































McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              SACRED Scenarios               February 2001


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















McBurnett               Expires August 13, 2001                [Page 12]


