Network Working Group                                    R. Austein, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       ISC
Expires: May 16, 2005                                     B. Wijnen, Ed.
                                                     Lucent Technologies
                                                       November 15, 2004


      Structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
                         draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 16, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and ISOC in the fiscal
   and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It also



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   defines how the IAOC will be comprised and selected.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Editors' Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Alphabet Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Structure of the IASA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1   IAD Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2   IAD Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3   IAOC Responsibilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4   Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership . . .  7
     3.5   IAOC Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability  . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1   Initial IAOC Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IASA Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1   IETF meeting revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2   Designated donations, monetary and in-kind . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3   Other ISOC support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.4   Operating Reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  IASA Budget Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11.   Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   12.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   12.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 17




















Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and ISOC in the fiscal
   and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It also
   defines how the IAOC is comprised and selected.

   The IETF undertakes its technical activities as an ongoing, open,
   consensus-based process.  This document defines an administrative
   support structure intended to be responsive to the administrative
   needs of the IETF technical community, and describes how that support
   structure fits under ISOC's organizational umbrella.  This document
   does not affect the ISOC-IETF working relationship as it relates to
   standards development or the communication of technical advice
   relevant to the policy and educational goals of ISOC.

   The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides the
   administrative structure required to support the IETF standards
   process and to support the IETF's technical activities.  At the time
   of writing of this document, this includes the work of IETF working
   groups, the IESG, the IAB, and the IRTF; it will include any
   successors to these which have been described by the Internet
   standards process as part of the technical activities of the IETF.
   This includes, as appropriate, undertaking or contracting for the
   work described in [RFC3716], including IETF document and data
   management, IETF meetings, and any operational agreements or
   contracts with the RFC Editor and IANA.  The IASA is also ultimately
   responsible for the financial activities associated with IETF
   administrative support such as collecting IETF meeting fees, paying
   invoices, managing budgets and financial accounts, etc.

   The IASA is responsible for ensuring that the IETF's administrative
   needs are met and met well; it is not expected that the IASA will
   undertake the bulk of this work directly, but rather that IASA will
   contract this work from others, and manage the contractual
   relationships in line with key operating principles such as
   efficiency, transparency and cost effectiveness.

   The IASA is distinct from other IETF-related technical functions,
   such as the RFC Editor, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   (IANA), and the IETF standards process itself.  The IASA has no
   influence on the technical decisions of the IETF or on the technical
   contents of IETF work.  This in no way prevents people who form part
   of the IASA participating as individuals in IETF activities.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


1.1  Editors' Notes

   This document is still a work in progress, and, due to time pressure,
   the editors
 have not yet been able to incorporate all of the
   outstanding change requests.  Among other, more substantive issues,
   the entire document probably ought to be recast in the present tense.
   Work will continue after this version has shipped.

   In some cases the best way to handle a particular suggestion (in the
   editors' opinion, at any rate) has been to incorporate new text with
   an "Editors' note" which attempts to explain the change.

   The editors request that substantive comments and requested changes
   be sent, one per message, with a clear and meaningful subject line on
   each message, as this will make it easier for the editors to keep
   track of change requests.

2.  Alphabet Soup

   Although most of the terms, abbreviations, and acronyms used in this
   document are reasonably well-known, first-time readers may find this
   alphabet soup confusing.  This section therefore attempts to provide
   a quick summary.

   IAB Internet Architecture Board (see [RFC2026]).

   IAD Internet Administrative Director, defined by this document.

   IAOC Internet Administrative Oversight Committee, defined by this
      document.

   IESG Internet Engineering Steering Group (see [RFC2026]).

   ISOC Internet Society (see [????]).


3.  Structure of the IASA

   The IASA will be structured to ensure accountability and transparency
   of the IETF administrative and fiscal activities to the IETF
   community.  The IASA will be directed and overseen by the IETF
   Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC).  The IAOC will consist of
   volunteers, all chosen directly or indirectly by the IETF community,
   as well as appropriate ex officio appointments from ISOC and IETF
   leadership.  The IAOC will be accountable to the IETF community for
   the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of the IASA.

   The IASA will initially consist of a single full-time ISOC employee,



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   the IETF Administrative Director (IAD), who will be an officer
   entitled to act on behalf of the IASA at the direction of the IAOC.
   The IAD is likely to draw on financial, legal and administrative
   support furnished by ISOC support staff or consultants.  Allocation
   of costs for ISOC support staff and consultants will be based on an
   actual expenses or on some other allocation model determined by
   consultation between the IAOC and ISOC.

   Although the IAD will be an ISOC employee, he or she will work under
   the direction of the IAOC.  The IAD will be selected and hired by a
   committee of the IAOC.  The members of this committee will be
   appointed by the IAOC, and will consist minimally of the ISOC
   President and the IETF Chair.  This same committee will be
   responsible for periodically reviewing the performance of the IAD and
   determining any changes to his or her employment and compensation.

   In principle, IETF administrative functions will be outsourced via
   well-defined contracts or equivalent instruments.  The IAD will be
   responsible for negotiating and maintaining those contracts, as well
   as providing any coordination that is necessary to make sure the IETF
   administrative support functions are properly covered.  The IAOC is
   accountable for the structure of the IASA and thus decides which
   functions are to be outsourced.  If any functions are done in-house,
   then they will be clearly specified and documented with well-defined
   deliverables, service level agreements, and transparent accounting
   for the cost of such functions.

3.1  IAD Responsibilities

   The IAD will be responsible for working with the IAOC and others to
   understand the administrative requirements of the IETF and for
   managing the IASA to meet those needs.  This will include determining
   the structure of the IASA effort, establishing an operating budget,
   negotiating contracts with service providers, managing the business
   relationship with those providers and establishing mechanisms to
   track their performance.  The IAD may also manage other contractors
   or ISOC employees (such as support staff) as necessary, when such
   contractors or employees are engaged in IASA-related work.

   The IAD will be responsible for running IASA in an open and
   transparent manner and for producing regular (monthly, quarterly and
   annual) financial and operational updates for IAOC and IETF community
   review.

   The IAD will be responsible for administering the IETF finances,
   managing a separate financial account for the IASA, and establishing
   and administering the IASA budget.  While it is understood that ISOC
   will need to put some financial controls in place to protect ISOC's



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   fiscal stability, the IAD (with IAOC approval, as appropriate) should
   have signing authority consistent with carrying out IASA work
   effectively, efficiently and independently.  If there are any
   problems regarding the level of financial approval granted to the
   IAD, the IAOC and ISOC commit to working out a policy that is
   mutually agreeable, and to doing so within a reasonable timeframe.

   Service contracts will be negotiated by the IAD (with input from any
   other appropriate bodies) and reviewed, as appropriate, by the IAOC.
   It is expected that the IAOC will establish guidelines for what level
   of review is expected based on contract type, size, cost, or
   duration.  The contracts will be executed by ISOC, on behalf of the
   IASA, after whatever review ISOC requires in order to ensure that the
   contracts meet ISOC's legal and financial requirements.

   Although the approval of the ISOC President/CEO or ISOC Board of
   Trustees may be required for some contracts, their review should be
   limited to protecting ISOC's liabilities and financial stability.
   The IAD and IAOC are responsible for making all business decisions
   regarding the IASA.  In particular, the ISOC Board of Trustees will
   not have direct influence over the choice of IASA contractors or IETF
   meeting sponsors.  This restriction is meant to enforce the
   separation between fund raising and the actual operation of the
   standards process.

   The IAD will prepare an annual budget, which will be reviewed and
   approved by the IAOC.  The IAD will be responsible for presenting
   this budget to the ISOC Board of Trustees, as part of ISOC's annual
   financial planning process.  The IAOC is responsible for ensuring the
   suitability of the budget for meeting the IETF community's
   administrative needs, but the IAOC does not bear fiduciary
   responsibility for ISOC.  Therefore, the ISOC Board also needs to
   review and understand the budget and planned activity in enough
   detail to properly carry out their fiduciary responsibility.  Each
   year, the complete IASA budget will published to the IETF community.

   Unless explicitly delegated with the consent of the IAOC, the IAD
   will also fill the role of the IETF Executive Director, as described
   in various IETF process BCPs.

3.2  IAD Committees

   The IAD may constitute special-purpose, chartered committees to bring
   in expertise (on topics such as finance, IETF process, or tools), to
   engage volunteers in IASA activities, or to gain additional
   perspectives.  These committees may consist of subsets of the IAOC,
   IAB or IESG, selected IETF participants, or external experts,
   depending on the need.  These committees are advisory in nature --



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   the IAD is responsible for the outcome, including presenting and
   supporting any decisions or work items to the IAOC and t
he IETF
   community, as appropriate.

3.3  IAOC Responsibilities

   The role of the IAOC is to provide appropriate direction to the IAD,
   review the IAD's regular reports, and oversee the IASA functions to
   ensure that the administrative needs of the IETF community are being
   properly met.  The IAOC is not expected to be regularly engaged in
   the day-to-day administrative work of IASA, but rather to provide
   appropriate direction, oversight and approval.

   Therefore, the IAOC's responsibilities are:

   o  Select the IAD and provide high-level review and direction for his
      or her work.  It is expected that this task will be handled by a
      sub-committee, as described above.

   o  Review the IAD's plans and contracts to ensure that they will meet
      the administrative needs of the IETF.

   o  Track whether the IASA functions are meeting the IETF community's
      administrative needs, and work with the IAD to determine a plan
      for corrective action if they are not.

   o  Review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
      the IETF's needs, and review the IAD's regular financial reports.

   o  Ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
      manner.  While the work may be delegated to the IAD and others,
      the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA finances and
      operational status are appropriately tracked and that monthly,
      quarterly and annual financial and operational reports are
      published to the IETF community.

   The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
   IAD and IASA.  It is expected the IAOC will have periodic
   teleconferences and face-to-face meetings, as needed to efficiently
   and effectively carry out their duties.

3.4  Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership

   The IAOC will be directly accountable to the IETF Community.
   However, the nature of the IAOC's work will involve treating the IESG
   and IAB as internal customers.  The IAOC and the IAD should not
   consider their work successful unless the IESG and IAB are satisfied
   with the administrative support that they are receiving.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


3.5  IAOC Decision Making

   The IAOC attempts to reach all decisions unanimously.  If unanimity
   cannot be achieved, the IAOC chair may conduct informal polls to
   determine the consensus of the group.  In cases where it is
   necessary, some decisions may be made by voting.  For the purpose of
   judging consensus or voting, only the "voting members" (as defined in
   Section 4) shall be counted.  If voting is used and the votes are
   equally split, then the IAOC chair decides.

   Decisions of IAOC members or the entire IAOC are subject to appeal
   using the procedures described in RFC 2026 [RFC2026].  Appeals of
   IAOC decisions will go to the IESG and continue up the chain as
   necessary (to the IAB and the ISOC Board).  The IAOC will play no
   role in appeals of WG Chair, IESG or IAB decisions.

4.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability

   The IAOC will consist of eight voting members who will be selected as
   follows:

   o  2 members chosen by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom)

   o  1 member chosen by the IESG

   o  1 member chosen by the IAB

   o  1 member chosen by the ISOC Board of Trustees

   o  The IETF Chair (ex officio)

   o  The IAB Chair

   o  The ISOC President/CEO (ex officio)

   There will also be a non-voting, ex officio liaison:

   o  The IETF Administrative Director

      Editors' note: There has been some question about whether the IAB
      Chair should be a liaison or a voting member of the IAOC.  There
      are multiple trade-offs here, and this should be discussed by the
      community.  Discussion up till November 15th seems to indicate to
      go for voting member, as currently described in the text above.

   The members of the IAOC will serve two year terms.  IAOC terms will
   normally end at the first IETF meeting of a year, similar to IAB and
   IESG terms.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   The members of the IAOC will choose their own chair each year using a
   consensus mechanism of their choosing.  Any appointed voting member
   of the IAOC may serve as the IAOC Chair; liaisons, the IETF Chair,
   the IAB Chair, or the ISOC President/CEO may not serve as IAOC Chair.
   The role of the IAOC Chair is to manage the IAOC.  The IAOC Chair has
   no formal duties for representing the IAOC, except as directed by
   IAOC consensus.

   The two NomCom selected members will be selected using the procedures
   described in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  For the initial IAOC selection, the
   IESG will provide the list of desired qualifications for these
   positions.  In later years, this list will be provided by the IAOC.
   The IESG will serve as the confirming body for IAOC appointments by
   the NomCom.

   While there are no hard rules regarding how the IAB and the IESG
   should select members of the IAOC, it is not expected that they will
   typically choose current IAB or IESG members, if only to avoid
   overloading the existing leadership.  They should choose people with
   some knowledge of contracts and financial procedures who are familiar
   with the administrative support needs of the IAB, the IESG, or the
   IETF standards process.  It is suggested that a fairly open process
   be followed for these selections, perhaps with an open call for
   nominations or a period of public comment on the candidates.  The IAB
   and IESG are encouraged to look at the procedure for IAB selection of
   ISOC Trustees for an example of how this might work.  After we gain
   some experience with IAOC selection, these selection mechanisms
   should be more formally documented.

   Although the IAB, IESG and ISOC BoT will choose some members of the
   IAOC, those members will not directly represent the bodies that chose
   them.  All members of the IAOC are accountable directly to the IETF
   community.  To receive direct feedback from the community, the IAOC
   will hold an open meeting at least once per year at an IETF meeting.
   This may take the form of an open IAOC plenary or a working meeting
   held during an IETF meeting slot.  The form and contents of this
   meeting are left to the discretion of the IAOC Chair.  The IAOC
   should also consider open mailing lists or other means to establish
   open communication with the community.

   In the event that an IAOC member abrogates his duties or acts against
   the bests interests of the IETF community, IAOC members are subject
   to recall.  Any appointed IESG member, including those appointed by
   the IAB, IESG or ISOC Board of Trustees, may be recalled using the
   recall procedure defined in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  IAOC members are not
   subject to recall by the body that appointed them.





Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


4.1  Initial IAOC Selection

   The initial IAOC selection will start after this document is approved
   as a BCP by the IESG and accepted by the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The
   IESG, IAB and ISOC should make their selections within 45-days of BCP
   approval, and the NomCom should make their selections as quickly as
   possible while complying with the documented NomCom procedures.  The
   IAOC will become active as soon as a majority (three or more) of the
   appointed members are selected.

   Initially, the IESG and ISOC Board will make one-year appointments,
   the IAB will make a two-year appointment, and the NomCom will make
   one one-year appointment and one two-year appointment to establish a
   pattern 
where approximately half of the IAOC is selected each year.

5.  IASA Funding

      Editors' note: Changes were made to this section to be more
      specific about funding sources and where they go.  Some text has
      also been added or changed regarding the reserve funds.

   The IASA will manage money from three sources:

   1.  IETF meeting revenues.

   2.  Designated ISOC donations, monetary and in-kind.

   3.  Other ISOC support.

   Note that the goal is to achieve and maintain a viable IETF support
   function based on meeting fees and specified donations, and the IAOC
   and ISOC are expected to work together to attain that goal.  For
   example, dropping the meeting fees to $0 and expecting ISOC to pick
   up the slack is not desirable; neither is raising the meeting fees to
   prohibitive levels to fund all non-meeting-related activities.

5.1  IETF meeting revenues

   Meeting revenues are an important support mechanism for IETF
   functions.  The IAD, in consultation with the IAOC, sets the meeting
   fees as part of the budgeting process.  All meeting revenues go into
   the IASA account.

5.2  Designated donations, monetary and in-kind

   Donations are an essential component of funding.  The IASA undertakes
   no direct fund-raising activities.  This establishes a practice of
   separating IETF administrative and standards activities from



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   fund-raising activities, and it helps ensure that no undue influence
   may be ascribed to those from whom funds are raised.

   ISOC will create and maintain appropriate structures and programs to
   coordinate donations intended to support the work of the IETF, and
   these will include mechanisms for both in-kind and direct
   contributions to the work supported by IASA.  Since ISOC will be the
   sole entity through whom donations may be made to the work of the
   IETF, ISOC will ensure that those programs are not unduly
   restrictive.  For the benefit of individuals, smaller organizations
   and countries with developing economies, it will maintain programs
   that allow for designated donations to the IETF either using an
   overhead model or other unrestricted donation program.

   ISOC will create appropriate administrative structures to coordinate
   such donations with the IASA.  In particular, it is important that
   in-kind contributions be "useful".  In-kind resources are owned by
   the ISOC on behalf of the IETF and shall be reported and accounted
   for in a manner that identifies them as such.  Designated monetary
   donations will be deposited in the IASA account.

5.3  Other ISOC support

   Other ISOC support shall be based on the budget process as specified
   in Section 6.  ISOC will deposit the yearly amount (as agreed to in
   approved budget) in equal portions.  At a minimum such deposits will
   be made quarterly.

   If ISOC directly funds any other IETF expenses, such as the IETF
   share of ISOC's liability insurance premium, this will be documented
   together with the other IASA accounts.

5.4  Operating Reserve

   In normal operating circumstances, the IASA would look to have an
   operating reserve for its activities sufficient to cover 6-months of
   non-meeting operational expenses, plus twice the recent average for
   meeting contract guarantees.  Rather than having the IASA attempt to
   accrue that reserve in its separate account, the IASA looks to ISOC
   to build and provide that operational reserve (through whatever
   mechanisms ISOC deems appropriate -- line of credit, financial
   reserves, meeting cancellation insurance, etc).  Such reserves do not
   appear instantaneously; the goal is to reach this level of reserves
   by 3 years after the creation of the IASA.  Such funds shall be held
   in reserve for use by IASA for use in the event of IETF meeting
   cancellation or other unexpected fiscal emergencies.  These funds
   shall be dedicated to IETF support functions.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


6.  IASA Budget Process

   While the IASA sets a budget for the IETF's administrative needs, its
   budget process clearly needs to be closely coordinated with ISOC's.
   The specific timeline will be established each year.  A general
   annual timeline for budgeting will be:

   July 1: The IAD presents a budget proposal for the following fiscal
      year, with 3 year projections, to the IAOC.

   August 1: The IAOC approves the budget proposal for IETF purposes,
      after any appropriate revisions.  As the ISOC President is part of
      the IAOC, the IAOC should have a preliminary indication of how the
      budget will fit with ISOC's own budgetary expectations.  The
      budget proposal is passed to the ISOC Board of Trustees for review
      in accordance with their fiduciary duty.

   September 1: The ISOC Board of Trustees approves the budget proposal
      provisionally.  During the next 2 months, the budget may be
      revised to be integrated in ISOC's overall budgeting process.

   November 1: Final budget to the ISOC Board for approval.

   The dates described above are subject to change, and will most likely
   be modified based on the dates of the Second and Third IETF meetings.

   The IAD will provide monthly accountings of expenses, and will update
   forecasts of expenditures quarterly.  This may necessitate the
   adjustment of the IASA budget.  The revised budget will need to be
   approved by the IAOC, the ISOC President/CEO and, if necessary, the
   ISOC Board of Trustees.

7.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA

   Within ISOC, support for the IASA should be structured to meet the
   following goals:

   Transparency: The IETF community should have complete visibility into
      the financial and legal structure of the ISOC standards activity.
      In particular, the IETF community should have access to a detailed
      budget for the entire standards activity, quarterly financial
      reports and audited annual financials.  In addition, key contract
      material and MOUs should be publicly available.  Most of these
      goals are already met by ISOC today.  The IAOC will be responsible
      for providing the IETF community with regular overviews of the
      state of affairs.





Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   Unification: As part of this arrangement, ISOC's sponsorship of the
      RFC Editor, IAB and IESG will be managed as part of the IASA under
      the IAOC.

   Independence: The IASA should be financially and legally distinct
      from other ISOC activities.  IETF meeting fees should be deposited
      in a separate IETF-specific financial account and used to fund the
      IASA under the direction and oversight of the IAOC.  Any fees or
      payments collected from IETF meeting sponsors should also be
      deposited into this account.  This account will be administered by
      the IAD and used to fund the IASA in accordance with a budget and
      policies that are developed as described above.

   Support: ISOC may, from time to time, choose to transfer other funds
      into this account to fund IETF administrative projects or to cover
      IETF meeting revenue shortfalls.  There may also be cases where
      ISOC chooses to loan money to the IASA to help with temporary cash
      flow issues.  These cases should be carefully documented and
      tracked on both sides.  ISOC will work to provide the operational
      reserve for IASA functioning described above.

   Removability: While there is no current plan to transfer the legal
      and financial home of the IASA to another corporation, the IASA
      should be structu
red to enable a clean transition in the event
      that the IETF community decides, through BCP publication, that
      such a transition is required.  In that case, the IAOC will give
      ISOC a minimum of six-months notice before the transition formally
      occurs.  During that period, the IAOC and ISOC will work together
      to create a smooth transition that does not result in any
      significant service outages or missed IETF meetings.  All
      contracts that are executed by ISOC as part of the IASA should
      either include a clause allowing termination or transfer by ISOC
      with six months notice, or should be transferable to another
      corporation in the event that the IASA is transitioned away from
      ISOC in the future.  Any accrued funds, and IETF-specific
      intellectual property rights concerning administrative data or
      tools would also be expected to be transitioned to the new entity,
      as well.

   Within the constraints outlined above, all other details of how to
   structure this activity within ISOC (whether as a cost center, a
   department, or a formal subsidiary) shall be determined by ISOC in
   consultation with the IAOC.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document describes the structure of the IETF's administrative
   support activity.  It introduces no security considerations for the



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   Internet.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations in the traditional sense.
   However, some of the information in this document may affect how the
   IETF standards process interfaces with IANA, so IANA may be
   interested in the contents.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The editors would like to thank the following people for their
   feedback on the original "Scenario O" e-mail message or intermediate
   versions of this document: Bernard Aboba, Harald Alvestrand, Brian
   Carpenter, Dave Crocker, Tony Hain, Joel Halpern, John Klensin, and
   Eliot Lear.

   Particular thanks are due to Leslie Daigle and Margaret Wasserman,
   who wrote the original "Scenario O" message and edited the earliest
   versions of this document.

   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
   2629 [RFC2629].

   No doubt the above list is incomplete.  We apologize to anyone whom
   we left out.

11.  Change Log

   This document was produced as part of the overall IETF Administrative
   Restructuring (AdminRest) effort.  Information about the effort and
   related documents can be found at:

   http://www.alvestrand.no/ietf/adminrest

   We are using an issue tracker to track the editorial and substantive
   feedback on this document.  It can be found at:

   https://rt.psg.com (user: ietf, password: ietf, queue: iasa-bcp).

   Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-00.txt:

   o  Modified the text of the section on Funding.

   o  Added text on Reserve funds.

   o  Made IAB chair a voting member of IAOC; added tie-breaker rule
      that if voting results in equal split, then IAOC chair decides.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


   o  Changed 2nd para in "Structure of IASA" sect to replace the fuzzy
      term "executive-level" and to be clear about cost aspects.

   o  Made it explicit that IESG only conforms the IAOC appoints made by
      the NomCom.

   o  Editorial changes at various places in the document.

   Changes in draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-01.txt:

   o  Adjusted the description of the IAD role and reporting structure
      to make it clear that the IAD is expected to serve as
      executive-level management for IASA, with only high-level
      direction (not day-to-day management) from the IAOC.

   o  Removed some troublesome wording regarding termination of the IAD
      by the ISOC President/CEO.

   o  Moved the initial IAOC selection into a separate section and added
      some text describing how and when the initial IAOC will be seated.

   o  Added the concept of IAD committees, largely taken from Leslie
      Daigle's original AdminRest proposal.

   o  Performed some general text editing and clean-up.

   Origination of draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt:

   draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt was derived from an e-mail message
   written by Leslie Daigle and Margaret Wasserman and posted to the
   IETF by Leslie Daigle.  The original message can be found at:

   http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg31326.html

   This document was derived from the "Draft BCP" portion of that
   message and has been updated based on comments received.

12.  References

12.1  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3716]  Advisory, IAB., "The IETF in the Large: Administration and
              Execution", RFC 3716, March 2004.

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and



Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.

12.2  Informative References

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3667]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC
              3667, February 2004.

   [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Rob Austein (editor)
   Internet Systems Consortium
   950 Charter Street
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   USA

   EMail: sra@isc.org


   Bert Wijnen (editor)
   Lucent Technologies
   Schagen 33
   3461 GL Linschoten
   NL

   EMail: bwijnen@lucent.com


















Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               November 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTIC
ULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires May 16, 2005                 [Page 17]