DISPATCH Working Group                                 Sunil Kumar Sinha
Internet Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended Status: Informational                            Sankar Raman V
Expires: January 2, 2017                                           Cisco
                                                            June 3, 2016

Only Incremented header transmitted in Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
               draft-sunil-sankar-dispatch-sip-incr-00.txt

Abstract

   This document outlines a new optional tag called "incr" as an
   extension for the SIP Message indicating that only those header(s)
   will be present in the subsequent request or response whose attribute
   is changed. This is necessary to increase the processing speed of any
   proxy server and also prevents fragmentation of messages over UDP and
   provides congestion control for larger messages in the Session 
   Initiation Protocol.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is at
   http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction............................................02
   2.   Terminology.............................................02
   3.   Motivation..............................................02
   4.   Over all operation......................................03
   5.   Security Considerations.................................03
   6.   IANA Considerations.....................................03


Sunil_&_Sankar            Expires January, 2017                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SIP incr Option Tag                 June 2016


        6.1.   IANA Registration of the incr Option Tag.........03
   7    Normative References....................................03
   8.   Authors' Address........................................04

1 Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (RFC 3261 [1]) is a request-response
   protocol for initiating and managing communications sessions. This
   request-response contains a number of headers. There are six
   mandatory headers (To, From, CSeq, Call-ID, Max-Forwards and Via)
   which are the fundamental building blocks of a SIP message. They
   jointly provide for most of the critical message routing services
   including the addressing of messages, the routing of responses,
   limiting message propagation, ordering of messages, and the unique
   identification of transactions. The main motivation of addition
   headers in SIP message to provide facility in finding and establish a
   session with desire destination.

   It is observed that there is a less need of additional headers once
   the session is established successfully. The request-response which
   is sent after the session is established is actually a burden over
   the network as it consumes the network bandwidth. Proxy has to
   process these additional header each time which results in the
   resource consumption and delay in processing. Therefore, a
   negotiation mechanism is needed to eliminate unnecessary headers from
   the SIP message which is described in this specification. This
   negotiation is intended to work between end-to-end SIP entities. 

2 Terminology

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119[2].

3 Motivation

   Over the course of last decade, the demand for SIP has increased
   significantly among enterprises and individuals due to its low cost.
   This increasing demand in turn puts load and reduces the network
   bandwidth. The problem arrives when sip proxy is busy with the client
   requests and more requests arrive from new clients. At such times the
   server starts to drop the calls.  The challenge is to find out the
   ways by which the latency and packet loss of SIP messages can be
   decreased. Various investigation models were suggested for the sip
   proxy entity on overcoming this issue. The negotiation mechanism
   described in this document can be implemented so that the resources
   can be freed up from all of the intermediate network elements
   involved in the SIP session so that more calls can be attempted due
   to high bandwidth availability without any additional cost. 


Sunil_&_Sankar            Expires January, 2017                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SIP incr Option Tag                 June 2016

4 Over all Operation

   The Operation of this extension is straightforward. For User's sake,
   let us consider a simple case where both sides support this
   extension. The User Agent Client (UAC) starts the dialog by sending
   an INVITE Method. This Method includes a Supported header field with
   the option tag "incr", indicating the support for this extension.
   This request passes through intermediate proxies and eventually
   arrives at the User Agent Server (UAS). The UAS, which also support
   this extension, will also include a require header field with the
   option tag "incr" in the 2XX response. The 2xx response travels back
   through the proxy chain and both UA will know each of their
   capabilities. Once the dialog is established, either User Agent (UA)
   can (apart from six mandatory headers) include only those headers
   whose field value has been changed or being added or new header which
   is required in the subsequent request-response. If any one of the UAS
   do not support this extension, then the current behavior of dialog is
   followed as mentioned in RFC 3261.

5 Security Considerations

   The option tag "incr" in this document does not have security
   considerations by itself. However, as mentioned in RFC 5727[3], an
   important reason for the IETF to manage the extensions of SIP is to
   ensure that all extensions and parameters are able to provide secure
   usage.

6 IANA Considerations

   This document registers a new option tag based on the IANA
   registration process of RFC 3261.

6.1 IANA Registration of the "incr" Option Tag

   This specification registers a single option tag, incr.  The required
   information for this registration, as specified in RFC 3261, is:

    Name: incr

    Description: This option tag is for informing the UA that only
                 header having increment field value will be
                 transmitted after the session established.  When
                 present in a Supported header, it indicates that the
                 UA can send or receive only header having increment
                 field value. When present in a Require header in a
                 request, it indicates that the UAS MUST send or receive
                 only header having increment field value.
         

7 Normative References


Sunil_&_Sankar            Expires January, 2017                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SIP incr Option Tag                 June 2016

    [1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

    [2] S. Bardner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

    [3] J. Peterson, C. Jennings, and R. Sparks, "Change Process for the
        Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Real-time Applications
        and Infrastructure Area", RFC 5727, March 2010.

8 Authors' Addresses

     Sunil Kumar Sinha
     SEZ Unit, Cessna Business Park, 
     Kadubeesanahalli Village, Varthur
     Hobli, Sarjapur - Marathahalli
     Outer ring road, Bengaluru, 
     Karnataka 560087   

     EMail:  sunsinha@cisco.com


     Sankar Raman. V
     SEZ Unit, Cessna Business Park, 
     Kadubeesanahalli Village, Varthur
     Hobli, Sarjapur - Marathahalli
     Outer ring road, Bengaluru, 
     Karnataka 560087 

     EMail:  sramanv@cisco.com



















Sunil_&_Sankar            Expires January, 2017                [Page 4]
