                                                           D. Gustafson 
                                                      Future Foundation 
                                                                M. Just 
                                                      Treasury Board of 
                                                                 Canada 
   Internet Draft                                            M. Nystrom 
   Document: draft-ietf-sacred-framework-06.txt            RSA Security 
   Expires: December 2003                                     June 2003 
 
 
       Securely Available Credentials - Credential Server Framework 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the 
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow 
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe), 
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or 
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast). 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   As the number, and more particularly the number of different types, 
   of devices connecting to the Internet increases, credential mobility 
   becomes an issue for IETF standardization. This document responds to 
   the requirements on protocols for secure exchange of credentials 
   listed in [RFC3157] by presenting an abstract protocol framework.














   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 1]

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
Table of Contents

STATUS OF THIS MEMO...................................................1
COPYRIGHT NOTICE......................................................1 
ABSTRACT..............................................................1 
1 INTRODUCTION........................................................3 
2 FUNCTIONAL OVERVIEW.................................................3 
  2.1 DEFINITIONS.....................................................3 
  2.2 CREDENTIALS.....................................................5 
  2.3 NETWORK ARCHITECTURE............................................6 
3 PROTOCOL FRAMEWORK..................................................7 
  3.1 CREDENTIAL UPLOAD...............................................9 
  3.2 CREDENTIAL DOWNLOAD............................................10 
  3.3 CREDENTIAL REMOVAL.............................................11 
  3.4 CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT..........................................12 
4 PROTOCOL CONSIDERATIONS............................................13 
  4.1 SECURE CREDENTIAL FORMATS......................................13 
  4.2 AUTHENTICATION METHODS.........................................13 
  4.3 TRANSPORT PROTOCOL SUITES......................................16 
5 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS............................................18 
  5.1 COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY........................................18 
  5.2 SYSTEMS SECURITY...............................................19 
6 REFERENCES.........................................................20 
  6.1 NORMATIVE REFERENCES...........................................20 
  6.2 INFORMATIVE REFERENCES.........................................21 
7 AUTHORS ADDRESSES..................................................22 
FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT.............................................22 



























   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 2] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
    
1 Introduction 
    
   Digital credentials, such as private keys and corresponding 
   certificates, are used to support various Internet protocols, e.g. 
   S/MIME, IPSec, and TLS. In a number of environments end users wish to 
   use the same credentials on different end-user devices. In a 
   "typical" desktop environment, the user already has many tools 
   available to allow import/export of these credentials.  However, this 
   is not very practical. In addition, with some devices, especially 
   wireless and other more constrained devices, the tools required 
   simply do not exist. 
    
   This document proposes a general framework for secure exchange of 
   such credentials and provides a high level outline that will help 
   guide the development of one or more SACRED credential exchange 
   protocols. 
    
2 Functional Overview 
    
   Requirements for Securely Available Credentials are fully described 
   in [RFC3157].  These requirements assume that two distinctly 
   different network architectures will be created to support credential 
   exchange for roaming users: 
    
   a) Client/Server Credential Exchange 
   b) Peer-to-Peer Credential Exchange 
    
   This document describes the framework for one or more client/server 
   credential exchange protocols. 
    
   In all cases, adequate user authentication methods will be used to 
   ensure credentials are not divulged to unauthorized parties. As well, 
   adequate server authentication methods will be used to ensure that 
   each clients authentication information (see Section 2.1) is not 
   compromised, and to ensure that roaming users interact with 
   intended/authorized credential servers. 
 
2.1 Definitions 
    
   This section provides definitions for several terms or phrases used 
   throughout this document. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", 
   "RECOMMENDED" and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as 
   described in [RFC2119]. 
    
   client authentication information: information that is presented by 
           the client to a server to authenticate the client. This may 
           include a password token, a registration string that may have 
           been received out-of-band (and possibly used for initially 
           registering a roaming user) or data signed with a signature 
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 3] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
           key belonging to the client (e.g. as part of TLS [RFC2246] 
           client authentication). 
         
   credentials: cryptographic objects and related data used to support 
           secure communications over the Internet. Credentials may 
           consist of public/private key pairs, symmetric keys, X.509 
           public key certificates, attribute certificates, and/or 
           application data. Several standardized formats for the 
           representation of credentials exist, e.g. [PKCS12], [PKCS15] 
           (see "secured credentials" below). 
    
   passkey: a symmetric key, derived from a password. 
         
   password: a string of characters known only to a client and used for 
           the purposes of authenticating to a server and/or securing 
           credentials.  A user may be required to remember more than 
           one password. 
    
   password token: a value derived from a password using a one-way 
           function that may be used by a client to authenticate to a 
           server. A password token may be derived from a password using 
           a one-way hash function, for example. 
 
   secured credentials: a set of one or more credentials that have been 
           cryptographically secured, e.g. encrypted/MACed with a 
           passkey. Secured credentials may be protected using more than 
           one layer of encryption, e.g. the credential is secured with 
           a passkey corresponding to a user's password and also by a 
           key known only to the server (the credential's stored form).  
           During network transfer, the passkey-protected credential may 
           be protected with an additional encryption layer using a 
           symmetric key chosen by the Credential Server (e.g., the 
           transmitted form). 
    
   strong password protocol: a protocol that authenticates clients to 
           servers securely (see e.g. [SPEKE] for a more detailed 
           definition of this), where the client need only memorize a 
           small secret (a password) and carries no other secret 
           information, and where the server carries a verifier 
           (password token) which allows it to authenticate the client. 
           A shared secret is negotiated between client and server and 
           is used to protect data subsequently exchanged. 
    
   Note the distinction between an "account password" and a "credential 
   password."  An account password (and corresponding password token) is 
   used to authenticate to a Credential Server and to negotiate a key 
   that provides session level encryption between client and server. 
    
   A credential password is used to derive a passkey thats used to 
   provide persistent encryption and authentication for a stored 
   credential. Applicable secured credential standards documents (e.g. 
   [PKCS#15]) describe the technical details of specific password-based-
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 4] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   encryption (pbe) techniques that are used to protect credentials from 
   unauthorized use. 
    
   Although the same password value may be used to provide both 
   services, it is likely that different, algorithm specific passkeys 
   would be generated from this password (i.e. because of different salt 
   values, etc.). 
    
   In addition, although it may be more convenient for a user to 
   remember only a single password, differing security policies (e.g. 
   password rules) between the credential server and the credential 
   issuers may result in a user having to remember multiple passwords.  
 
2.2 Credentials 
    
   This document is concerned with the secure exchange and online 
   management of credentials in a roaming or mobile environment. 
   Credentials MAY be usable with any end user device that can connect 
   to the Internet, such as: 
    
   - desktop or laptop PC 
   - mobile phone 
   - personal digital assistant (PDA) 
   - etc. 
    
   The end user system may, optionally, store its credential information 
   on special hardware devices that provide enhanced portability and 
   protection for user credentials. 
    
   Since the credential usually contains sensitive information that is 
   known only to the credential holder, credentials MUST NOT be sent in 
   the clear during network transmission and SHOULD NOT be in the clear 
   when stored on an end user device such as a diskette or hard drive. 
   For this reason, a secured credential is defined.  Throughout this 
   document we assume that, at least from the point of view of the 
   protocol, a secured credential is an opaque (and at least partially 
   privacy and integrity protected) data object that can be used by a 
   network connected device. Once downloaded, clients must be able to 
   recover their credentials from this opaque format. 
    
   At a minimum, all supported credential formats SHOULD provide privacy 
   and integrity protection for private keys, secret keys, and any other 
   data objects that must be protected from disclosure or modification.  
   Typically, these security capabilities are part of the basic 
   credential format such that the credential (e.g., a data file) is 
   protected when stored on hard drives, flexible diskettes, etc. 
    
   During network transmission, the secured credential is protected with 
   a second (outer) encryption layer.  The outer encryption layer is 
   created using a session-level encryption key that was derived during 
   the mutual authentication process.  Effectively, secured credentials 
   traverse an "encrypted tunnel" that provides an additional layer of 
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 5] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   privacy protection for credentials (and any other) information 
   exchanged. 
    
2.3 Network Architecture 
    
   The network diagram below shows the components involved in the SACRED 
   client/server framework.  
    
                     +--------+           +------------+ 
                     | Client +-----------| Credential | 
                     +--------+     1     |   Server   | 
                          \               +-----+------+ 
                           \                    | 
                            \                   | 2 
                             \                  | 
                              \    3      +-----+------+ 
                               -----------| Credential | 
                                          |  Store(s)  | 
                                          +------------+ 
    
    
   Client - The entity that wants to retrieve their credentials from a 
             credential server. 
    
   Credential Server - The server that downloads secure credentials to 
             and uploads them from the client.  The server is 
             responsible for authenticating the client to ensure that 
             the secured credentials are exchanged only with an 
             appropriate end user. The credential server is 
             authenticated to the client to ensure that the client's 
             authentication information is not compromised and so that 
             the user can trust the credentials retrieved. 
    
   Credential Store - The repository for secured credentials. There 
             might be access control features but those generally aren't 
             sufficient in themselves for securing credentials.  The 
             credential server may be capable of splitting credentials 
             across multiple credential stores for redundancy or to 
             provide additional levels of protection for user 
             credentials. 
    
   Protocol 1 - The protocol used to authenticate the client and 
             credential server, and download and upload user credentials 
             from a credential server. 
                           
   Protocol 2 - The protocol used by the Credential Server to store and 
             retrieve user credentials (LDAP, LDAP/SSL, or other). 
    
   Protocol 3 - The protocol used by the client to store and retrieve 
             user credentials from the credential store (LDAP, LDAP/SSL, 
             or other).  
    
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 6] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   This framework describes the high level design for protocol 1. 
   Protocols 2 and 3 are closely related (but out of scope for this 
   document) and could be implemented using standard protocols, such as 
   LDAP or secure LDAP, or other standard or proprietary protocols.  
   Note also that any administrator-credential server protocols are 
   assumed to be server vendor specific and are not the subject of 
   SACRED standardization efforts at this time. 
    
   Clients are not precluded from exchanging credentials directly with a 
   credential store (or any other server of its choosing). However, 
   mutual authentication with roaming users and a consistent level of 
   protection for credential data while stored on network servers and 
   while in transit is provided by SACRED protocols exchanged with the 
   credential server.  Depending on credential server design, user 
   credentials may flow through the credential server to the credential 
   store or directly between the client and the credential store. 
    
   Also, users may upload their credentials to several credential 
   servers to obtain enhanced levels of availability.  Coordination 
   (automatic replication) of user information or credential data among 
   several credential servers is currently beyond the scope of this 
   document. 
    
3 Protocol Framework 
    
   This section provides a high level description of client/server 
   protocols that can be used to exchange and manage SACRED credentials. 
    
   The client/server credential exchange protocol is based on three 
   basic and abstract operations; "GET", "PUT", and "DELETE". The 
   secured credential exchange protocol is accomplished as follows: 
    
        connect - the client initiates a connection to a credential 
                server for the purpose of secure credential exchange. 
         
        mutual authentication/key negotiation - using a strong password 
                protocol (or equivalent) the client authenticates to the 
                server, the server authenticates to the client, and a 
                session level encryption key is negotiated. The details 
                of the mutual authentication protocol exchange are 
                dependent upon the particular authentication method 
                used. In all cases, the end result is to authenticate 
                the client to the server and server to the client, and 
                establish a strong, shared secret between the two 
                parties. 
 
        client request(s) - the SACRED client issues one or more high 
                level credential exchange requests (e.g., GET, PUT, or 
                DELETE). 


    



   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 7] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
        server response(s) - the SACRED credential server responds to 
                each request, either performing the operation 
                successfully or indicating an appropriate error. 
         
        close - the client indicates it has no more requests for the 
                server at this time. The security context between client 
                and server is no longer needed. Close is a logical, 
                session management operation. 
         
        disconnect - the parties disconnect the transport level 
                connection between client and server. Note that 
                "connect" and "disconnect" are logical, transport-layer 
                dependent operations that enclose the protocol exchange 
                between the two communicating processes. 
         
        Each high-level credential exchange operation is made up of a 
        series of request-response pairs. The client initiates each 
        request, which the server processes before returning an 
        appropriate response. Each request must complete (server reports 
        success or failure) before the client issues the next request. 
        The server SHOULD be willing to service at least one upload or 
        download request following successful mutual authentication but 
        either party can terminate the logical connection at any time. 
         
   In the following sections, secured credentials and related values are 
   represented using the following notation: 
    
        SC-x is the secured credential file, which includes a format 
                identifier field and credential data.  The credential 
                data is an opaque, encrypted data object (e.g. PKCS#15 
                or PKCS#12 file). The format identifier is needed to 
                correctly parse the credential data. 
         
        Name-x is an account-defined selector or locator (a user 
                friendly name) that is used to indicate a specific 
                secured credential. The name of each credential stored 
                under a given user account MUST be unique e.g. there may 
                be one credential called "financial" and another called 
                "healthcare", etc. At a minimum, credential names MUST 
                be unique across a given account/user name. When no name 
                is supplied for a GET operation, all credentials stored 
                for the given username will be returned. 
                 
        ID-x is a distinct credential version indicator that MAY be used 
                to request a conditional GET/PUT/DELETE operation. This 
                credential-ID value SHOULD contain the servers "last-
                modified" date and time (e.g. the time that this 
                particular credential version was stored on the server) 
                and MAY contain additional information such as a 
                sequence number or a (complete or partial) credential 
                fingerprint that is used to ensure the credential-ID is 
    



   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 8] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
                unique from other credential versions stored under the 
                same user account and credential name. 
         
   All named credentials may be accessed by authenticating under a 
   single username. If a user needs or prefers to use more than one 
   distinct authentication password (and/or authentication method) to 
   protect access to several secured credentials, he/she SHOULD register 
   those credentials under distinct user/account names, one for each 
   different authentication method used. 
    
3.1 Credential Upload 
    
   The purpose of a credential upload operation is to allow a client to 
   register new credentials, or replace currently stored credentials 
   (e.g. credentials that may have been updated by the client using 
   appropriate key management software). 
    
   The framework for the credential upload, as implemented using the PUT 
   operation, is: 
    
   - The client and server establish a mutually authenticated session 
     and negotiate a shared secret. 
    
   - The client will then issue a PUT message that contains the upload 
     credential and related data fields. 
    
   - The server will respond to the PUT, indicating the credential was 
     successfully stored on the server or that an error occurred. 
    
   The clients PUT request MAY contain an optional identifier 
   (credential-ID) field. If present, the new credential will only be 
   stored if a credential with the same name and credential-ID is 
   currently stored on the server (e.g. a logical REPLACE operation is 
   performed). The server MUST return an error if a client attempts to 
   replace a credential that does not exist on the server. 
    
   The credential servers response to a PUT request MUST contain a 
   credential version identifier (credential-ID) for the newly stored 
   credential that MAY be used by clients to optimize subsequent 
   download operations and avoid credential version mismatches. 


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                 [page 9] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
 3.1.1 Credential Upload Protocol Sequence 
    
   The following gives an example of a "credential upload" protocol 
   sequence: 
    
        client                                         server 
        -------                                        ------- 
         
        < connect >                       -->    
    
        <--- mutual authentication ---> 
       
        < PUT SC-1, Name-1, [ID-1] > --> 
                                              <--     < Name-1, new-ID-1 > 
        < PUT SC-2, Name-2, [ID-2] > --> 
                                              <--     < Name-2, new-ID-2 > 
    
                                               ... 
    
        < close >                           --> 
                                               <--     OK (+ disconnect) 
    
   new-ID-x is the credential-ID of the newly stored credential. 
 
3.2 Credential Download 
    
   Roaming clients can download their credentials at any time after they 
   have been uploaded to the server. 
    
   The framework for a credential download, as implemented using the GET 
   operation, is: 
    
   - The client SHOULD authenticate the server.  
   - The user MUST be authenticated (by the server). 
   - A GET request for the credential download is issued. 
   - The response contains the credential and format identifier. 
    
   The specific user credential being requested may be identified by 
   name in the message sent to the credential server.  If successful, 
   the response MUST contain the requested credential data element 
   (format ID and data) as defined above. 
    
   If the user issues a GET request with a NULL credential name field, 
   the server SHOULD return all credentials stored under the current 
   user account. 
    
   Optionally, the client MAY include a credential-ID to indicate a 
   conditional download request. In this case, the server will return 
    





   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 10] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   the requested credential if and only if the ID of the credential 
   currently stored on the server does NOT match the ID specified. 
    
   The server should return either the requested credential or a 
   distinct response indicating that the conditional download was not 
   performed (e.g., the client already has a copy of this exact 
   credential). 
    
   3.2.1 Credential Download Protocol Sequence 
    
   The following gives an example of a "credential download" protocol 
   sequence: 
    
          client                                 server 
          -------                               -------- 
    
        < connect >                   -->    
    
        <--- mutual authentication --> 
    
        < GET Name-1, [ID-1] >    --> 
                                         <--     < SC-1, ID-1' > 
        < GET Name-2, [ID-2] >    --> 
                                         <--     < GET response > 
    
                               ... 
    
        < close >                     --> 
                                         <--     OK (+ disconnect) 
    
   Notice that for the second request, no credential has been returned 
   since ID-2, as included in the clients request, matched the 
   identifier for the Name-2 credential. 
    
3.3 Credential Removal 
    
   The framework for the credential removal, as implemented with the 
   DELETE operation, is: 
    
   - The credential server MUST be authenticated (by the client) using 
     a method-dependent protocol sequence. 
    
   - The user MUST be authenticated (by the server) using a method-
     dependent protocol sequence. 
    
   - The user then sends a DELETE request message that contains the 
     credential name indicating which credential to remove. 
      
   - Optionally, the client may include a credential-ID in the DELETE 
     request. In this case, the credential will be deleted if the 
     request ID matches the ID of the credential currently stored on 
     the server. This may be done to ensure that a client intending to 
    
   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 11] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
     delete their stored credential does not mistakenly delete a 
     different version of the credential. 
  
   3.3.1 Credential Removal Protocol Sequence 
 
   The following gives an example of a credential removal protocol 
   sequence: 
    
         client                            server 
         -------                          -------- 
    
       < connect >              -->    
    
       <-------- mutual authentication --------> 
    
       < DEL Name-1, [ID1] >     --> 
                                <--     < Name-1 deleted > 
       < DEL Name-2, [ID2] >     --> 
                                <--     < Name-2 deleted > 
                                ... 
        < close >               --> 
                                <--     OK (+ disconnect) 
    
3.4 Credential Management 
    
   Note that the three operations defined above (GET, PUT, DELETE) can 
   be used to perform the basic credential management operations: 
    
   - add a new credential on the server, 
   - update (replace) an existing credential, and 
   - delete an existing credential. 
    
   The information provided for these basic operations might be used to 
   help guide the design of more complex operations such as user 
   registration (add account), user deregistration (remove account), 
   change account password, or list all credentials. 
    
   Note that, in the case where a credential with the same name exists 
   on the server, uploading a NULL credential is logically equivalent to 
   removing a previously stored credential. 












   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 12] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
4 Protocol Considerations 
 
4.1 Secure Credential Formats 
    
   To ensure that credentials created on, and uploaded from, one device 
   can be downloaded and used on any other device, there is a need to 
   define a single "mandatory to implement" credential format that must 
   be supported by all conforming client implementations. 
    
   At least two well-defined credential formats are available today: 
   [PKCS12] and [PKCS15]. 
    
   Other optional credential formats may also be supported if necessary. 
   For example, additional credential formats might be defined for use 
   with specific (compatible) client devices. Each credential format 
   MUST provide adequate privacy protection for user credentials when 
   they are stored on flexible diskettes, hard disks, etc. 
    
   Throughout this document, the credential is treated as an opaque 
   (encrypted) data object and, as such, the credential format does not 
   affect the basic credential exchange protocol. 
 
4.2 Authentication Methods 
    
   Authentication is vitally important to ensure that credentials are 
   accepted from and delivered to the authorized end user only.  If an 
   unsecured credential is delivered to some other party, the credential 
   may be more easily compromised.  If a credential is accepted from an 
   unauthorized party, the user might be tricked into using a credential 
   that has been substituted by an attacker (e.g. an attacker might 
   replace a newer credential with an older credential belonging to the 
   same user).  
    
   Ideally, the list of authentication methods should be open ended, 
   allowing new methods to be added as needs are identified and as they 
   become available. For all credentials, the user authentication method 
   and data is defined when a user is first registered with the 
   credential server and may be updated from time to time thereafter by 
   the authorized user. 
    
   To adequately protect user credentials from unauthorized disclosure 
   or modification in a roaming environment, all SACRED authentication 
   methods MUST provide protection for user credentials in network 
   environments where attackers might attempt to exploit potential 
   security vulnerabilities. See SACRED Requirements [RFC3157], Section 
   3.1, Vulnerabilities.  
    
   At a minimum, each SACRED authentication method SHOULD ensure that: 
    
        - The server authenticates the client 
        - The client authenticates the server 
    



   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 13] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
        - The client and server securely negotiate (or derive) a 
          cryptographically strong, secret key (e.g., a session key). 
        - The exchange of one or more user credentials is protected 
          using this session key. 
    
   It is expected that all SACRED client/server protocols will provide 
   each of these basic security functions.  Some existing authentication 
   protocols that might be used for this purpose include:  
    
   - Strong password protocols 
   - TLS 
    
   Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 provide some guidance about when to use 
   these authentication methods based on the generic security 
   capabilities they provide and the security elements (passwords, key 
   pairs, user certificates, CA certificates) that must be available to 
   the SACRED client. 
    
   4.2.1 Strong Password Protocols 
    
   Strong password protocols such as those described in [RFC2945], 
   [BM92], [BM94], and [SPEKE] MAY be used to provide mutual 
   authentication and privacy for SACRED protocols.   
    
   All strong password protocols require that user-specific values (i.e. 
   a passtoken and related values) be configured within the server. Only 
   a party who knows the password can calculate the verifier value. It 
   must be securely delivered to the server at a time when the client 
   establishes a relationship with the server.  At connect time, 
   messages are exchanged between the two parties and complementary 
   algorithms are used to compute a shared common value known only to 
   the legitimate user and the server.  Both parties derive a strong 
   (symmetric) key that may be used to secure communications between the 
   two parties. 
    
   4.2.2 TLS Authentication 
    
   TLS authentication may either be mutual between the client and server 
   or unilateral where only the server is authenticated to the client. 
   These options are described in the next two subsections. 
    
   In both cases, TLS can be used to authenticate the server whenever 
   the TLS client has been pre-configured with the necessary 
   certificates needed to validate the servers certificate chain 
   (including revocation status checking). 
    
   TLS Server Authentication (sTLS) 
    
   TLS provides a basic secure session capability (sometimes called 
   server-side TLS) whereby the client authenticates the server and a 
   pair of session level encryption keys is securely exchanged between 
   client and server. Following server authentication and security 
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 14]

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   context setup, all client requests and server responses exchanged are 
   integrity and privacy protected. 
    
   Protocol designers and implementors should be aware that the 
   flexibility of the certificate-based TLS server authentication method 
   creates security risks that need to be mitigated. Specifically, the 
   need to ensure the user is connected to the intended credential 
   server (secure site), and no other. The TLS v1.0 standard [RFC2246] 
   identifies the basis for managing this risk in section F.3 (see also 
   Section 5.2 in this document): 
    
        "Implementations and users must be careful when deciding which 
        certificates and certificate authorities are acceptable; a 
        dishonest certificate authority can do tremendous damage." 
    
   Note also that a faulty implementation of (increasingly complex) TLS 
   server certificate chain processing, by the SACRED client, could lead 
   to similar compromise, allowing successful credential server 
   masquerade or man-in-the-middle attacks. 
    
   An engineering approach that provides an enhanced or augmented server 
   authentication method may be warranted for SACRED protocol designs. 
   It is also important to understand that simple layering of 
   independently developed security protocols (e.g. using BEEP or 
   similar layering techniques) produces a complex, multilayer security 
   protocol that might be easily defeated by a combination-specific 
   attack that is able to expose and exploit known weaknesses of the 
   individual protocol(s). 
    
   When necessary, and after a TLS session has been established between 
   the two parties, the credential server can request that the client 
   provide her user id and password information to authenticate the 
   remote user. Preferably, client and server can cooperate to perform 
   an authentication operation that allows the server to authenticate 
   the client (and perhaps vice-versa) in a "zero knowledge manner". In 
   such cases, the client need not have a security credential. 
    
   TLS with Client Authentication (cTLS) 
    
   TLS provides an optional, secure session capability (sometimes called 
   client-side TLS) whereby the TLS server can request client 
   authentication by verifying the clients digital signature. 
    
   In order to use cTLS to provide mutual authentication, the client 
   must also be configured with at least one security credential that is 
   acceptable to the TLS server for remote client authentication 
   purposes. 
    
   4.2.3 Other Authentication Methods 






   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 15]

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   Other authentication methods that provide the necessary security 
   capabilities MAY also be suitable for use with SACRED credential 
   exchange protocols. 
    
4.3 Transport Protocol Suites 
    
   It is intended that one or more underlying protocol stacks may carry 
   the SACRED credential exchange protocols.  It is recognized at the 
   outset that the use of several underlying protocol suites, although 
   not ideal from an interoperability standpoint, may well be required 
   to support the wide variety of needs anticipated. 
    
   The SACRED list members have discussed several protocol suites that 
   have been considered on their technical merits, each with distinct 
   benefits and protocol design/implementation costs. Among these 
   protocols are: 
    
        - TCP 
        - BEEP 
        - HTTP 
    
   All protocol suites listed here depend on TCP to provide a reliable, 
   end-to-end transport layer protocol. Each of these building block 
   approaches provides a different way of handling the remaining 
   application layer issues (basic session management, session level 
   security, presentation/formatting, application functionality). 
    
   4.3.1 TCP 
    
   This approach (layering a SACRED credential exchange protocol 
   directly on top of a TCP connection) requires the development of a 
   custom credential exchange messaging protocol that interfaces to a 
   TCP connection/socket. The primary benefit of this approach is the 
   ability to provide exactly the protocol functionality needed and no 
   more. Most server and client development environments already provide 
   the socket level API needed. 
    
   4.3.2 BEEP 
    
   This approach builds on the Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol 
   (BEEP) described in [RFC3080].  BEEP provides general purpose, peer-
   to-peer message exchange over any of several transport mechanisms 
   where the necessary transport layer mappings have been defined for 
   operation over TCP, TLS, etc. See also [RFC3081]. 
 
   BEEP provides the necessary user authentication/session security and 
   session management capabilities needed to support SACRED credential 
   exchange operations. 
    
   4.3.3 HTTP 

    



   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 16] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   This approach builds on the Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP) 
   described in [RFC1945] and [RFC2616].  HTTP provides general purpose 
   typing and negotiation of data representation, allowing systems to be 
   built independently of the data objects being transferred.  HTTP 
   support is available in a wide variety of server and client 
   platforms, including portable devices that apply to roaming 
   environments (laptop PCs, PDAs, mobile phones, etc.). 
    
   HTTP is layered over TCP and can be used, optionally, with TLS to 
   provide authenticated, session level security.  Either or both TLS 
   authentication options, sTLS or cTLS, may be used whenever TLS is 
   supported. 


    








































   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 17] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
5 Security Considerations 
    
   The following security considerations identify general observations 
   and precautions to be considered for a framework supporting 
   credential mobility. When designing or implementing a protocol to 
   support this framework, one should recognize these security 
   considerations, and furthermore consult the SACRED Requirements 
   document [RFC3157] Security Considerations.  
    
5.1 Communications Security  
    
   A SACRED PDU will contain information pertaining to client or server 
   authentication, or communication of credentials. 
   This information is subject to the traditional security concerns 
   identified below.  
    
   5.1.1 Confidentiality  
    
   The password or password verifier should be protected when 
   communicated from the client to credential server. The communicated 
   value should be resistant to a dictionary attack.  
    
   Similarly, the entity credentials must be confidentiality protected, 
   when communicated from the client to the server and 
   vice-versa. The communicated value should also resist a dictionary 
   attack.  
    
   5.1.2 Integrity 
    
   Communication integrity between the client and the credential server 
   is required.  In this way, intended client operations may not be 
   altered (e.g. from an update to a deletion of credentials), nor may 
   clients be maliciously given "old" credentials (e.g. possibly by an 
   attacker replaying a previous credential download). 
    
   5.1.3 Entity Authentication  
    
   Proper authentication of the client and server is required to achieve 
   communication confidentiality and integrity.  
    
   The server must properly authenticate the client, so that credentials 
   are not mistakenly revealed to an attacker.  
   The client must ensure the proper identification of the credential 
   server so as to prevent revealing their password to an 
   attacker. These goals may be achieved implicitly with a strong 
   password-based protocol or explicitly. If the server is identified 
   explicitly, the user or client must ensure that the user password is 
   conveyed to a trusted server. This might be achieved by installing 
   appropriate trusted key(s) in the client.  
    
   5.1.4 Non-repudiation  
    
    


   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 18] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   Although credential confidentiality is one of many factors required 
   to support non-repudiation, there are no requirements 
   upon the SACRED protocol itself to support non-repudiation.  
 
5.2 Systems Security  
    
   Systems security is concerned with protection of the protocol 
   endpoints (i.e. the client and server) and information 
   stored at the server in support of the SACRED protocol.  
    
   5.2.1 Client Security  
    
   As with most security protocols, secure use of the client often 
   relies, in part, upon secure behavior by the user. In the 
   case of a password-based SACRED protocol, users should be educated, 
   or enforced through policy, to choose passwords with a reasonable 
   amount of entropy. Additionally, users should be made aware of the 
   importance of protecting the confidentiality of their account 
   password.  
    
   In addition, the client interface should be designed to thwart 
   "shoulder surfing" where an attacker can observe the password as 
   entered by a user. This is often achieved by not echoing the exact 
   characters of the password when entered.  
    
   As well, the interface should encourage the entering of the password 
   in the appropriate interface field so that protections can be 
   properly enforced. For example, a user should be guided to not 
   mistakenly enter their password in the "username" field (since their 
   password would likely be echoed to the screen in this case, and might 
   not be encrypted when communicated to the server). This might be 
   accomplished via the automatic insertion of the user name or several 
   user name choices in the appropriate on-screen dialog field, for 
   example.  
    
   5.2.2 Client Security, TLS Server Authentication 
    
   When TLS is used as the SACRED transport protocol, the client 
   interface should be designed to allow the user to verify that she is 
   connected to the intended credential server. For example, client 
   software should allow for the visual display of identifying 
   components from the TLS servers x.509 certificate, like the server's 
   name, the certificate fingerprint, etc. 
    
   Users should be guided to verify this information regularly, allowing 
   ready recognition of trusted credential servers. In addition, users 
   should be made aware of the importance of verifying their credential 
   servers identity before initiating any credential exchange 
   operations. 






   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 19] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   A SACRED client SHOULD only be configured with those trusted SACRED 
   roots that are to be used by the client. Re-use of roots from other 
   applications, e.g. Internet browsers is NOT RECOMMENDED. 
    
   5.2.3 Server Security 
    
   Password verifiers and user credentials must be afforded a high level 
   of protection at the credential server. In addition to salting and 
   super-encrypting each (to ensure resistance to offline dictionary 
   attacks), a system should ensure that credential server keys are 
   protected using sufficient procedural and physical access controls.  
    
   The login to the credential server should be resistant to replay 
   attacks.  
    
   Online attempts to access a particular user account should be 
   controlled, or at least monitored. Control might be enforced by 
   incorporating a time delay after a number of unsuccessful logins to a 
   particular account, or possibly the locking of the account 
   altogether. Alternatively, one might simply log unsuccessful attempts 
   where an administrative notice is produced once a threshold of 
   unsuccessful credential access attempts is reached. 
    
   5.2.4 DoS  
      
   As with most protocols, Denial of Service (DoS) issues must also be 
   considered. In the case of SACRED, most DoS issues are a concern for 
   the underlying transport protocol. However, some concerns may still 
   be mitigated.  
    
   Service to a user might be denied in case their account is locked 
   after numerous unsuccessful login attempts. Consideration of 
   protection against online attacks must therefore be considered (as 
   described above).  Proper user authentication should ensure that an 
   attacker does not maliciously overwrite a user's credentials. 
   Credential servers should be wary of repeated logins to a particular 
   account (which also identifies a possible security breach, as 
   described above) or abnormal volumes of requests to a  
   number of accounts (possibly identifying a DoS attack). 
    
    
6 References 
 
6.1 Normative references 
 
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process - Revision 3", 
             BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 20] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
   [RFC3157] Arsenault, A., Farrell, S., "Securely Available Credentials 
             - Requirements", RFC 3157, August 2001. 

6.2 Informative references 
    
   [BM92]    S. Bellovin and M. Merritt, "Encrypted Key Exchange: 
             Password-based protocols secure against dictionary 
             attacks", Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Research in 
             Security and Privacy, May 1992. 
    
   [BM94]    S. Bellovin and M. Merritt, "Augmented Encrypted Key 
             Exchange: a Password-Based Protocol Secure Against 
             Dictionary Attacks and Password File Compromise, ATT Labs 
             Technical Report, 1994. 
    
   [PKCS12]  "PKCS 12 v1.0: Personal Information Exchange Syntax", RSA 
             Laboratories, June 24, 1999 

   [PKCS15]  "PKCS #15 v1.1: Cryptographic Token Information Syntax 
             Standard", RSA Laboratories, June 2000. 

   [RFC1945] Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and H. Frystyk, "Hypertext 
             Transfer Protocol-- HTTP/1.0", RFC 1945, May 1996. 

   [RFC2246] Dierks, T., Allen, C., "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 
             2246, January 1999. 

   [RFC2289] Haller, N., Metz, P., Nesser, P., & Straw, M., "A One-Time 
             Password System", RFC 2289. 

   [RFC2444] Newman, C., "The One-Time-Password SASL Mechanism", RFC 
             2444, November 1997. 

   [RFC2616] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul,, H. Frysyk, L. Masinter, 
             M. Leach, T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol - 
             HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616. 

   [RFC2945] Wu, T., "The SRP Authentication and Key Exchange System", 
             RFC 2945, September 2000. 

   [RFC3080] Rose, M., "The Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Core", 
             RFC 3080, March 2001. 

   [RFC3081] Rose, M., "Mapping the BEEP Core onto TCP", RFC 3081, March 
             2001. 

   [SPEKE]   Jablon, D., "Strong Password-Only Authenticated Key 
             Exchange", September 1996. 






   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 21] 

                   Securely Available Credentials -          June 2003 
                     Credential Server Framework 
    
    

7 Authors addresses 
         
        Dale Gustafson  
        Future Foundation Inc. 
        degustafson@attbi.com 
         
        Mike Just 
        Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat 
        Just.Mike@tbs-sct.gc.ca 
         
        Magnus Nystrom 
        RSA Security Inc. 
        magnus@rsasecurity.com 
         
         
   Full Copyright Statement 
         
        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
         
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished 
        to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
        explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
        copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
        restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright 
        notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 
        derivative works. However, this document itself may not be 
        modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or 
        references to the Internet Society or other Internet 
        organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
        defined in the Internet Standards process shall be followed, or 
        as required to translate it into languages other than English. 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not 
        be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
        This document and the information contained herein is provided 
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
        IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE 
        OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY 
        IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
         










   Gustafson, Just, & Nystrom                                [page 22]
