Internet Draft                                          J. Levine
Expiration: May 16, 2005                     Taughannock Networks
Anti-Spam Research Group                        November 16, 2004


           DNS Based Blacklists and Whitelists for E-Mail
                    draft-irtf-asrg-dnsbl-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
   provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 16, 2005.

   This document is intended to evolve, based on comments from
   the Anti-Spam Research Group (ASRG).  Comments and corrections
   are welcome, and may be sent to the ASRG BCP subgroup mailing
   list at <bcp@asrg.sp.am>.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have
   been disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which I
   become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights
   Reserved.

Abstract

   The rise of spam and other anti-social behavior on the
   Internet has led to the creation of shared blacklists and
   whitelists of IP addresses or domains.  The DNS has become a
   de-facto standard method of distributing these blacklists and
   whitelists.  This memo documents the structure and usage of
   DNS based blacklists and whitelists, and the protocol used to



Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 1]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


   query them.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ............................................ 2

   2. Structure of an IP address DNSBL or DNSWL ............... 3
     2.1. IP address DNSxL .................................... 3
     2.2. IP address DNSWL .................................... 3
     2.3. Combined IP address DNSxLs .......................... 3
     2.4. Test and contact addresses .......................... 4

   3. Domain name DNSxLs ...................................... 5

   4. Typical usage of DNSBLs and DNSWLs ...................... 5

   5. Security Considerations ................................. 6

   6. Informative References .................................. 6

   7. Authors' Address ........................................ 6


1. Introduction

   In 1997, Paul Vixie, a well known Internet software engineer,
   started keeping a list of IP addresses that had sent him spam
   or engaged in other behavior that he found objectionable.
   Word of the list quickly spread, and he started distributing
   it as a BGP feed for people who wanted to block all traffic
   from listed IP's at their routers.  The list became known as
   the Real-time Blackhole List (RBL).[3]

   Many network managers wanted to use the RBL to block unwanted
   e-mail, but weren't prepared to block all IP traffic from
   lists in the RBL.  Vixie created a DNS-based distribution
   scheme that quickly became more popular than the original BGP
   distribution.  Other people created other DNS-based blacklists
   either to compete with the RBL or to complement it by listing
   different categories of IP addresses.  Although some people
   refer to all DNS-based blacklists as ``RBLs'', that term
   properly is used for the MAPS RBL, the descendant of Vixie's
   original list, and the standard term is now DNS Blacklist or
   Blocklist, or DNSBL.  Some people also publish DNS-based
   whitelists or DNSWLs.

   This document describes the structure, operation, and use of
   DNSBLs and DNSWLs but does not describe or recommend policies
   for adding or removing addresses to DNSBLs and DNSWLs, nor
   does it recommend policies for using them, nor does it take a
   position whether the DNS is the best way to distribute such
   data.

2. Structure of an IP address DNSBL or DNSWL


Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 2]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


   Originally, DNSBLs only listed IP addresses, and most DNSBLs
   and DNSWLs still list IP addresses.  A few DNSBLs and DNSWLs
   now list domain names instead.  The structure of a DNSBL and
   DNSWL are the same, so in the subsequent discussion we use the
   abbreviation DNSxL to mean either.

2.1. IP address DNSxL

   An IP address DNSxL has a structure adapted from that of the
   rDNS.  Each IP address listed in the DNSxL has a corresponding
   DNS entry created by reversing the order of the octets of the
   text representation of the IP address, and appending the
   domain name of the DNSxL.  If, for example, the DNSxL is
   called bad.example.com, and the IP address to be listed is
   192.0.2.99, the name of the DNS entry would be
   99.2.0.192.bad.example.com.  Each entry in the DNSxL has an A
   record and often a TXT record.  The A record conventionally
   has the value 127.0.0.2, but may have other values as
   described below.  The TXT record describes the reason that the
   IP is listed in the DNSxL, and is often used as the text of an
   SMTP error response when an SMTP client attempts to send mail
   to a server using the list as a DNSBL.  Some DNSxLs use the
   same TXT record for all entries, while others provide a
   different TXT record for each entry or range of entries that
   describes the reason that entry or range is listed, The reason
   often includes the URL of a web page where more information is
   available.

   If an IP address is not listed in the DNSxL, there is no
   record for the address.  If a /24 or larger range of addresses
   is listed, and the zone's server uses traditional zone files
   to represent the DNSxL, the DNSxL may use wildcards to limit
   the size of the zone file.  If for example, the entire range
   of 192.0.2.0/24 were listed, the DNSBL's zone could contain a
   single wildcard for *.2.0.192.bad.example.com.

2.2. IP address DNSWL

   Since SMTP has no standard way for a server to advise a client
   why a request was accepted, TXT records in DNSWLs are not very
   useful.  Some DNSWLs contain TXT records anyway to document
   the reasons that entries are present.

   It is possible and occasionally useful for a DNSxL to be used
   as a DNSBL in one context and a DNSWL in another.  For
   example, a DNSxL that lists all of the IP addresses assigned
   to dialup or DHCP users on a particular network might be used
   as a DNSWL on that network's outgoing mail server or intranet
   web server, and used as a DNSBL for mail servers on other
   networks.

2.3. Combined IP address DNS
xLs

   In many cases, a single organization maintains a variety of


Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 3]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


   DNSxLs for different purposes.  There are three common methods
   of representing multiple sublists, subdomains, multiple A
   records, and bit encoded entries.  Most multiple lists use
   both subdomains and one of the other methods.

   Subdomains are merely subdomains of the main DNSxL domain.  If
   for example, bad.example.com had two sublists ugly and smelly,
   entries for 192.0.2.99 would be
   99.2.0.192.ugly.bad.example.com or
   99.2.0.192.smelly.bad.example.com.  Sublist names consist of
   letters, so there is no problem of name collisions with
   entries in the main domain, where the IP addresses consist of
   digits.

   To minimize the number of DNS lookups, multiple sublists can
   also be encoded as bit masks or multiple A records.  With bit
   masks, the A record entry for each IP is the logical OR of the
   bit masks for all of the lists on which the IP appears.  For
   example, the bit masks for the two sublists might be 127.0.0.1
   and 127.0.0.2, in which case an entry for an IP on both lists
   would be 127.0.0.3.  With multiple A records, each sublist has
   a different assigned value such as 127.0.1.1 to 127.0.1.10 for
   ten sublists, and there is an A record for each sublist on
   which the IP appears.  There is no widely used convention for
   mapping sublist names to bits or values, beyond the convention
   that all A values are in the 127/8 range to prevent unwanted
   network traffic if the value is accidentally used as an IP
   address.

   DNSxLs that return multiple A records generally return
   multiple TXT records as well; other combined DNSxLs return a
   single TXT record.

   The per-record time-to-live and zone refresh intervals of
   DNSBLs and DNSWLs vary greatly depending on the management
   policy of the list.  A list of IP addresses assigned to
   dynamically allocated dialup and DHCP users could be expected
   to change slowly, so the TTL might be several days and the
   zone refreshed once a day.  On the other hand, a list of IP
   addresses that had been observed sending spam might change
   every few minutes, with comparably short TTL and refresh
   intervals.

2.4. Test and contact addresses

   Nearly all IP based DNSxLs contain an entry for 127.0.0.2 for
   testing purposes.  DNSBLs that return multiple values often
   have multiple test addresses so that, for example, the entry
   for 127.0.0.5 returns a 127.0.0.5 A record and corresponding
   TXT record.

   Most DNSxLs also contain an A record at the DNSxL's name that
   points to a web server, so that anyone wishing to learn about



Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 4]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


   the bad.example.net DNSBL can check http://bad.example.net.

3. Domain name DNSxLs

   A few DNSxLs list domain names rather than IP addresses.  The
   names of their entries contain the listed domain name followed
   by the name of the DNSxL.  If the DNSxL were called
   doms.example.net, and the domain invalid.edu were to be
   listed, the entry would be named invalid.edu.doms.example.net.
   A few named-based DNSBLs encode e-mail addresses using a
   convention adopted from DNS SOA records, so an entry for
   fred@invalid.edu would have the name
   fred.invalid.edu.doms.example.net.

   Name-based DNSBLs are far less common than IP based DNSBLs,
   There is no agreed convention for a test entry nor for
   wildcards.  Name-based DNSWLs cam be created in the same
   manner as DNSBLs, and have been used as simple reputation
   systems with the values of bit fields in the A record
   representing reputation scores and confidence values.

4. Typical usage of DNSBLs and DNSWLs

   DNSxLs can be served either from standard DNS servers, or from
   specialized servers like rbldns[2] and rbldnsd[4] that accept
   lists of IP addresses and CIDR ranges and synthesize the
   appropriate DNS records on the fly.  Organizations that make
   heavy use of a DNSxL usually arrange for a private mirror of
   the DNSxL, either using the standard AXFR and IXFR or by
   fetching a file containing addresses and CIDR ranges for the
   specialized servers.

   DNSBL clients are most often mail servers or spam filters
   called from mail servers.  There's no requirement that DNSBLs
   be used only for mail, and other services such as IRC use them
   to check client hosts that attempt to connect to a server.

   In practice, mail servers that test combined lists usually
   handle them the same as single lists and treat any A or TXT
   record as meaning that an IP is listed without distinguishing
   among the various reasons it might have been listed.

   Most often they check a list of DNSBLs and DNSWLs on every
   incoming SMTP connection, with the names of the DNSBLs and
   DNSWLs configured into the server.  The server checks each
   list in turn until it finds one with a DNSBL entry, in which
   case it rejects the connection, or a DNSWL entry in which case
   it accepts the connection.  If the address appears on no list
   at all (the usual case for legitimate mail), it accepts the
   connection.  The mail server uses its normal local DNS cache
   to limit traffic to the DNSxL servers and to speed up retests
   of IP addresses recently seen Long-running mail servers may
   cache DNSxL data internally.  When using combined DNSxLs,
   clients usually only test for the presence or absence of an


Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 5]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


   IP, without regard to the particular value returned.

   An alternate approach is to check DNSxLs in a spam filtering
   package after a message has been received.  In that case, the
   IP(s) to test are usually extracted from Received: headers.
   The DNSxL results may be used to make a binary accept/reject
   decision, as when they're tested at SMTP time, or may be used
   as components in a system that computers an overall score for
   each message.  Packages that test multiple headers need to be
   able to distinguish among values in lists with sublists since,
   for example, an entry indicating that an IP is assigned to
   dialup users might be treated as a strong indication that a
   message should be rejected if the IP sends mail directly to
   the recipient system, but not if the message were relayed
   through an ISP's mail server.

5. Security Considerations

   Any system manager that uses DNSxLs is entrusting part of his
   or her server management to the parties that run the lists.  A
   DNSBL manager that decided to list 0/0 (which has actually
   happened) would cause every server that uses the DNSBL to
   reject all mail.  Conversely, if a DNSBL manager removes all
   of the entries (which has also happened), systems that depend
   on the DNSBL will find that their filtering doesn't work as
   they want it to.

   As with any other DNS based services, DNSBLs and DNSWLs are
   subject to various types of DNS attacks which are described in
   [1].

6. Informative References

   [1] D. Atkins et al, "Threat Analysis of the Domain Name
   System", RFC 3833, August 2004.

   [2] D. J. Bernstein, rbldns, in "djbdns",
   http://cr.yp.to/djbdns.html.

   [3] Mail Abuse Prevention System, "MAPS RBL", http://mail-
   abuse.org/rbl/

   [4] Michael Tokarev,"rbldnsd: Small Daemon for DNSBLs",
   http://www.corpit.ru/mjt/rbldnsd.html.

7. Authors' Address

   John R. Levine
   Taughannock Networks
   PO Box 727
   Trumansburg NY 14886 USA
   E-mail: johnl@taugh.com
   Phone: +1 607 330 5711



Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 6]

Internet Draft                                  November 16, 2004


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights
   Reserved.  This document is subject to the rights, licenses
   and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth
   therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE
   ORGANIZATION HE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE
   INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE
   DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   $Id: draft-irtf-asrg-dnsbl-01.n,v 1.7 2004/11/16 14:33:40
   johnl Exp $






































Internet Draft    DNS Blacklists and Whitelists          [Page 7]