
INTERNET Draft                                           George Tsirtsis

Expires:  Jan 2007                                        Hesham Soliman

                                                                Qualcomm

                                                               June 2006

 
                                      
 
              Mobility management for Dual stack mobile nodes 
                            A Problem Statement 
                  <draft-ietf-mip6-dsmip-problem-02.txt> 
    
Status of this memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other

   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months

   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This document is a submission of the IETF MIP6 WG. Comments should be

   directed to the IPv6 WG mailing list, mip6@ietf.org. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This draft discusses the issues associated with mobility management 
   for dual stack mobile nodes. Currently, two mobility management 
   protocols are defined for IPv4 and IPv6. Deploying both in a dual 
   stack mobile node introduces a number of inefficiencies. Deployment 
   and operational issues motivate the use of a single mobility 
   management protocol. This draft discusses such motivations. The draft

   also hints on how the current [MIPv4] and [MIPv6] protocols could be 
   extended so that they can support mobility management for a dual 
   stack node. 
    
    
 
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
 
1. Terminology 
    
   In addition to [KEYWORDS], this draft uses the following terms as 
   defined in [SIIT]: IPv4-capable node, IPv4-enabled node, IPv6-capable

   node, IPv6-enabled node. 
    
   The following terms are introduced in this document: 
    
   - MIPv4-capable node: A node that supports [MIPv4] in its  
                         implementation. This allows the mobile node to 
                         configure a home address (statically or 
                         dynamically) and use such address in its Mobile

                         IPv4 signaling. A MIPv4-capable node may also 
                         be IPv6-capable or IPv6-enabled and must be 
                         IPv4-capable.  
    
   - MIPv6-capable node: A node that supports [MIPv6] by configuring a  
                         home address and using such address in its 
                         Mobile IPv6 signaling. A MIPv6-enabled node may

                         also be IPv4-capable or IPv4-enabled and must 
                         be IPv6-capable. 
    
    
2. Introduction and motivation 
    
   A MIPv4-capable node can use Mobile IPv4 [MIPv4] to maintain 
   connectivity while moving between IPv4 subnets. Similarly, a MIPv6-
   capable node can use Mobile IPv6 [MIPv6] to maintain connectivity 
   while moving between IPv6 subnets. 
    
   One of the ways of migrating to IPv6 is to deploy nodes that are both

   IPv4 and IPv6 capable. Such nodes will be able to get both IPv4 and 
   IPv6 addresses and thus can communicate with the current IPv4 
   Internet as well as any IPv6 nodes and networks as they become 
   available. 
 
   A node that is both IPv4 and IPv6 capable can use Mobile IPv4 for its

   IPv4 stack and Mobile IPv6 for its IPv6 stack so that it can move 
   between IPv4 and IPv6 subnets. While this is possible, it is also 
   clearly inefficient since it requires: 
    
   - Mobile nodes to be both MIPv4 and MIPv6 capable. 
   - Mobile nodes to send two sets of signaling messages on every   
     handoff. 
   - Network Administrators to run and maintain two sets of mobility   
     management systems on the same network. Each of these systems  
     requiring their own sets of optimizations that may include 
     hierarchical Mobile IPv4, hierarchical Mobile IPv6 and Fast  
     Handoffs for Mobile IPv4, mechanisms that are currently in  
     development in the IETF. 
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
   This draft discusses the potential inefficiencies, IP connectivity 
   problems, and operational issues that are evident when running both 
   mobility management protocols simultaneously. It also proposes a work

   area to be taken up by the IETF on the subject and hints on a 
   possible direction for appropriate solutions. 
    
3.0 Problem description 
    
   Mobile IP (v4 and v6) uses a signaling protocol (Registration 
   requests in [MIPv4] and Binding updates in [MIPv6]) to set up tunnels

   between two end points. At the moment Mobile IP signaling is tightly 
   coupled with the "address family (i.e., IPv4 or IPv6)" used in the 
   connections it attempts to manipulate. There are no fundamental 
   technical reasons for such coupling. If Mobile IP were viewed as a 
   tunnel setup protocol, it should be able to setup IP in IP tunnels, 
   independently of the IP version used in the outer and inner headers. 
   Other protocols, for example SIP, are able to use either IPv4 or IPv6

   based signaling plane to manipulate IPv4 and IPv6 connections.  
    
   A node that is both MIPv4 and MIPv6 capable, will require the 
   following to roam within the Internet: 
    
   - The network operator needs to ensure that the home agent supports  
     both protocols or that it has two separate Home Agents supporting 
     the two protocols, each requiring its own management. 
   - Double the amount of configuration in the mobile node and the home

     agent (e.g., security associations).  
   - Local network optimizations for handovers will also need to be  
     duplicated. 
    
   We argue that all of the above will hinder the deployment of Mobile 
   IPv6 as well as any dual stack solution in a mobile environment. We 
   will discuss some of the issues with the current approach separately 
   in the following sections.  
    
3.1. Implementation burdens 
    
   As mentioned above, a node that is IPv4 and IPv6 capable must also be

   MIPv4 and MIPv6 capable to roam within the Internet. Clearly this 
   will add implementation efforts, which, we argue, are not necessary.

    
   In addition to the implementation efforts, some vendors may not 
   support both protocols in either mobile nodes or home agents. 
   Although this is more of a commercial issue, it does affect the 
   large-scale deployment of mobile devices on the Internet.  
    
3.2. Operational burdens 
 
    
   As mentioned earlier, deploying both protocols will require managing 
   both protocols in the mobile node and the home agent. This adds 
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
   significant operational issues for the network operator. It would 
   certainly require the network operator to have deep knowledge in both

   protocols which is something an operator may not be able to justify 
   due to the lack of substantial gains.  
   In addition, deploying both protocols will require duplication of 
   security credentials on mobile nodes and home agents. This includes, 
   IPsec security associations, keying material, and new authentication 
   protocols for Mobile IPv6, in addition to the security credentials 
   and associations required by Mobile IPv4. Such duplication is again 
   significant with no gain to the operator or the mobile node. 
    
3.3. Mobility management inefficiencies 
    
   Suppose that a mobile node is moving within a dual stack access 
   network. Every time the mobile node moves it needs to send two mobile

   IP messages to its home agent to allow its IPv4 and IPv6 connections 
   to survive. There is no reason for such duplication. If local 
   mobility optimizations were deployed (e.g., hierarchical Mobile IP, 
   Fast handovers or local MIPv4 HA), the mobile node will need to 
   update the local agents running each protocol. Ironically, one local 
   agent might be running both HMIPv6 and local MIPv4 home agent. 
   Clearly, it is not desirable to have to send two messages and 
   complete two sets of transactions for the same fundamental 
   optimization.  
    
   Hence, such parallel operation of Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6 will 
   complicate mobility management within the Internet and increase the 
   amount of bandwidth needed at the critical handover time for no 
   apparent gain.  
    
3.4. The impossibility of maintaining IP connectivity 
    
   A final point to consider is that even if a mobile node is both MIPv4

   and MIPv6 capable, connectivity across different networks would not 
   in fact be guaranteed since that also depends on the IPv4/IPv6 
   capabilities of the networks the mobile is visiting; i.e., a node 
   attempting to connect via a IPv4 only network would not be able to 
   maintain connectivity of its IPv6 applications and vice versa. This 
   is potentially the most serious problem discussed in this document. 
 
4. Conclusion and recommendations 
    
   The points above highlight the tight coupling in both Mobile IPv4 and

   Mobile IPv6 between signaling and the IP addresses used by upper 
   layers. Given that Mobile IPv4 is currently deployed and Mobile IPv6 
   is expected to be deployed, there is a need for gradual transition 
   from IPv4 mobility management to IPv6. Running both protocols 
   simultaneously is inefficient and has the problems described above.  
   The gradual transition can be done when needed or deemed appropriate 
   by operators or implementers. In the mean time, it is important to 
   ensure that the problems listed above can be avoided. Hence, this 
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
   section lists some actions that should be taken by the IETF to 
   address the problems listed above, without mandating the use of two 
   mobility management protocols simultaneously. 
    
   In order to allow for a gradual transition based on current standards

   and deployment, the following work areas seem to be reasonable:  
    
   - It should be possible to run one mobility management protocol that 
   can manage mobility for both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses used by upper 
   layers. Both Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6 should be able of performing

   such task. It may not be possible to support route optimization for 
   Mobile IPv6 in all cases; however, mobility management and session 
   continuity can be supported. 
 
   - It should be possible to create IPv4 extensions to Mobile IPv6 so 
   that an IPv4 and IPv6 capable mobile node can register its IPv4 and 
   IPv6 home addresses to an IPv4 and IPv6 enabled Home Agent using 
   MIPv6 signaling only. 
   - It should be possible to create IPv6 extensions to Mobile IPv4 so 
   that an IPv4 and IPv6 capable mobile node can register its IPv4 and 
   IPv6 home addresses to an IPv4 and IPv6 enabled Home Agent using 
   Mobile IPv4 signaling only. 
   - It should also be possible to extend [MIPv4] and [MIPv6] so that a 
   mobile node can register a single care-of address (IPv4 or IPv6) to 
   which IPv4 and/or IPv6 packets can be tunneled. 
    
   Following the steps listed above, a vendor can choose to support one 
   mobility management protocol while avoiding the incompatibility and 
   inefficiency problems listed in this document. Similarly, operators 
   can decide to continue using one mobility management protocol while 
   addressing the transition scenarios that a mobile node is likely to 
   face when roaming within the Internet.  
    
   Further work in this area, possibly independent of Mobile IP, may 
   also be of interest to some parties in which case it should be dealt 
   with separately from the incremental Mobile IP based changes. 
    
5. Authors Addresses 
    
   George Tsirtsis 
   Qualcomm Flarion Technologies 
   Phone:  +1 908 947 7059 
   E-Mail:  Tsirtsis@Qualcomm.com 
   E-Mail2: tsirtsisg@yahoo.com 
 
   Hesham Soliman 
   Qualcomm Flarion Technologies 
   Phone:  +1 908 997 9775 
   E-mail: HSoliman@Qualcomm.com 
    
    
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
6. References 
    
   [KEYWORDS]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [MIPv4]      Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344, 
                August  2002. 
    
   [MIPv6]      Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Generic Packet Tunneling in 
                IPv6 Specification", RFC 2473, December 1998. 
    
   [SIIT]       Nordmark, E., "Stateless IP/ICMP Translator (SIIT)", RFC

                2765, February 2000. 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to

   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can

   be found in RFC 3667 (BCP 78) and RFC 3668 (BCP 79). 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of

   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at

   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an

   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS

   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT           Dual stack MIP problem               June, 2006

 
 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
 
This Internet-Draft expires January, 2007. 













































 
 
 
Tsirtsis and Soliman                                            [Page 7]


