

P2P-SIP BOF                                                   J. Quittek
Internet-Draft                                            M. Stiemerling
Expires: August 31, 2006                                        T. Dietz
                                                            S. Niccolini
                                                                     NEC
                                                       February 27, 2006


 Problem Statement for SIP-signalled Peer-to-Peer Communication across
                              Middleboxes
                   draft-quittek-p2p-sip-middlebox-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 31, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Middleboxes, particularly firewalls and network address translators,
   are essential components of today's Internet infrastructure.  They
   are designed to support client-server applications well, but very
   often they are obstacles for peer-to-peer communication.  This memo
   discusses middlebox traversal issues of SIP-based peer-to-peer



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   communication.  Required communication steps are analyzed concerning
   their potential constraints caused by middleboxes.  The requirements
   derived from this analysis are compared with the capabilites of
   currently available middlebox traversal methods and SIP signaling
   standards.  The comparison identifies open issues that need to be
   considered when designing standards for a SIP-based peer-to-peer
   communication infrastructure.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Middlebox Issues of SIP-based Peer-to-Peer Communication . . .  3
     2.1.  Step 1: Middlebox Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.1.1.  Communication Means Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.1.2.  NAT Parameter Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Step 2: Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Step 3: Search and Connect Relay . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Step 4: Address Lookup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Step 5: Connection Establishment and termination . . . . .  7
   3.  Middlebox Traversal Methods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Tunneling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Network-initiated Middlebox Signaling  . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Terminal-initiated Middlebox Signaling . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.1.  STUN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.2.  UPnP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.3.  SOCKS and RSIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.4.  NSIS NATFW NSLP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Open Issues for SIP-based Peer-to-Peer Communication . . . . . 10
     4.1.  SIP-related Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.1.  Terminal Reachability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.2.  Communication Service Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.3.  Communication Service Offering . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  SIP-unrelated Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.2.1.  Middleobox Detection Beyond UDP  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15











Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


1.  Introduction

   Firewall and Network Address Translators (NATs) are essential
   components of today's Internet infrastructure.  They belong to the
   class of middleboxes [RFC3234] and are widely used for protecting
   networks, connecting private networks to the public Internet, and
   further purposes.  They are designed to support client-server
   applications well, but very often they are obstacles for peer-to-peer
   communication.

   This memo analyzes middlebox traversal issues and problems of SIP-
   based peer-to-peer communication.  The analysis concerns signaling
   across middleboxes as well as data streaming.  It is conducted for
   each individual step that is expected to be required for SIP-based
   peer-to-peer communication.  Required steps are derived from
   observation of existing peer-to-peer applications and from the
   general requirements for SIP-based peer-to-peer Internet telephony
   described in [I-D.baset-sipping-p2preq].  The analysis considers
   requirements for middlebox control as well as for SIP signaling
   required specifically for traversing middleboxes and it is performed
   for the terminal side as well as for the peer-to-peer infrastructure
   side.

   The analysis in section Section 2 is followed by an overview of
   existing middlebox traversal techniques in section Section 3.
   Section Section 4 compares existing SIP capabilities and available
   common middlebox traversal methods against the requirements
   identified in section Section 2.  The result describes four issues,
   three SIP-related, one SIP-unrelated, that should be considered when
   designing standards for a SIP-based peer-to-peer communication
   infrastructure.


2.  Middlebox Issues of SIP-based Peer-to-Peer Communication

   This section discusses steps of SIP-based peer-to-peer communication
   across middelboxes.  Not all steps are required for all possible
   scenario variations and depending on design and implementation of
   SIP-based peer-to-peer communication infrastructures and terminals,
   the sequence of steps may be varied.

   The steps discussed in the following subsections are

      *  middlebox detection,
      *  registration,
      *  search for relays,





Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


      *  address lookup,
      *  call setup,
      *  call termination.

2.1.  Step 1: Middlebox Detection

   Detecting middleboxes in the signaling path or the data streaming
   path is a step that usually should be performed by a general SIP
   terminal each time it gets connected to an access network.  The step
   is not required if the terminal receives this information by manual
   configurations or by interaction with a management system.

   This step can be carried out explicitly and separately by using
   special protocols and/or servers designed and deployed for this
   particular purpose.  But it can also be integrated in the steps
   described in the following subsections.

   The information gathered by middlebox detection concerns available
   communication means and NAT parameters.  Efficient methods may
   perform both checks at once.

   Existing SIP terminals and peer-to-peer terminals for voice over IP
   use special protocols for this detection step, such as the STUN
   protocol [RFC3489].  The availability of detections techniques is
   discussed in section Section 3.3

2.1.1.  Communication Means Detection

   The terminal needs to detect the communication means that are
   available for

      *  registering with the peer-to-peer infrastructure,
      *  incoming and outgoing signaling within the peer-to-peer
         infrastructure,
      *  data streaming to and from other terminals or relays.

   Depending on the requirements for the actions listed above, checks
   will include the availabilbity of

      *  sending and receiving UDP packets,
      *  the capability of opening incoming and outgoing TCP
         connections,
      *  the options to use certain fixed port numbers that are used
         within the peer-to-peer infrastructure,
      *  the option to relay or tunnel signaling messages and streamed
         data if the means for regular transport are too restrictive.

   Many existing SIP solutions need UDP for signaling as well as for



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   data streaming.  They do not need any support by TCP.  However, this
   is expected to change.  In order to protect SIP signaling from
   several kinds of attacks, SIP signaling over TLS [RFC2246] or other
   more secure protocols is currently considered.  If the chosen secure
   solution is based on TCP or uses IPsec [RFC4301], then more than just
   UDP connectivity needs to be checked.

2.1.2.  NAT Parameter Detection

   If a NAT was detected between the terminal and the peer-to-peer
   infrastructure, then it may be necessary to explore the properties of
   the present network address translation.  Particularly, the type of
   NAT and the assigned public IP address and port number need to be
   determined if a NAT is present.

   Basic types of NATs are described in [RFC2663].  Further types are
   described in the terminology section of [RFC3489].

2.2.  Step 2: Registration

   Once the terminal has sufficient information about middleboxes
   between itself and other parts of the peer-to-peer infrastructure, it
   can register itself using a communication means that has proven to be
   available.

   Typically, a registration would be performed as a client-server
   operation that is permitted by most NAT and firewall configurations.
   However, in highly restrictive environments, there might be a need
   for relaying or tunneling the registration, because direct access to
   registration servers or the agreed port number for this purpose is
   blocked.  In such a case, the search for a relay that is described in
   the following section needs to be made before registering.

   The registration step includes up to four actions

      *  authentication of the user
         The authentication can be integrated into SIP signaling or into
         another protocol that is used within the peer-to-peer
         infrastructure.  In general, also peer-to-peer infrastructures
         without authentication could be used, but the practical use
         might be limited in today's Internet.  It is recommendable that
         the user authenticates itself at the peer-to-peer
         infrastructure.  However, in oder to increase security (and
         avoid potential man-in-the-middle attacks) it is desirable that
         the peer that receives the user authentication authenticates
         itself at the user.





Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


      *  notification of communication capability and willingness
         The user need to notify the peer that receives its registration
         about its communication capabilities and its willingness to
         receive session invitations.
         If during the middlebox detection step it was found that a
         relay is needed for communication with other terminals, then it
         might be required for the registration to indicate that the
         terminal is not at all able to communicate.  If this problem
         can be solved by connecting to a relay in step 3, the
         registration of communication capabilities can be updated.

      *  registration of contact parameters
         The user needs to register its contact parameters, such as IP
         address and port numbers at which it can receive invitations to
         calls.  These values might depend on the result of the
         middlebox detection performed in step 1.  If a relay is
         required for signaling or for data streaming, then this
         information cannot be provided before the relay has been found
         and connected.

      *  notification of service provisioning capability and willingness
         The user need to notify the peer that receives its registration
         about its capabilities and willingness to offer services to
         other users of the peer-to-peer infrastructure, such as
         authentication relaying, signaling relaying, lookup service
         provisioning, data stream relaying, etc.

   These actions can be performed separately using different protocols,
   but in an efficient solution, they are all fully integrated into SIP
   signaling.

2.3.  Step 3: Search and Connect Relay

   In case the middlebox detection in step 1 indicated that there is a
   need for relaying signaling and/or data streaming, the terminal can
   request suggestions for or assignment of a relay of the peer-to-peer
   infrastructure In implementations this step can be integrated with
   the registration, but logically, it is a separate action.

   There are several ways of finding a suited relay, but since relays
   are considered parts of the peer-to-peer infrastructure, the
   selection of the relay to use will probably be based on a list of
   suggested relays that the terminal receives from the peer at which it
   registered or via a lookup service that was made available by the
   registration.  The actual choice of a relay may depend on the results
   of the middlebox detection in step 1.

   The requirements for SIP-based peer-to-peer Internet telephony in



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   [I-D.baset-sipping-p2preq] suggest that a relay should be located
   such that the communication delay is not significantly increased.
   This may imply that different relays are chosen for calls to
   different other peers which requires a call-by-call search for a
   relay.

   After a suited relay has been found, the terminal connects to it and
   receives from the relay the address parameters (IP address and port
   number) that the relay provides for the terminal.  With this
   information, the terminal can update its initial registration and
   register itself as ready to receive invitations to sessions.

2.4.  Step 4: Address Lookup

   After registering with the peer-to-peer infrastructure and before
   intiating a call, the terminal needs to lookup addresses of concrete
   and potential callees.  There are two common ways to do so: per call
   look-up of the callee's address or call-independent lookup of the
   addresses for a predefined "buddy list".

   In both cases, the peer-to-peer infrastructure needs to be contacted
   and a lookup of a single address or a list of addresses needs to be
   initialized.  Because of the client-server nature of this lookup
   procedure, it should be permitted by most NAT and firewall
   configurations.  However, in case it is not, relaying is required
   also for this step.

2.5.  Step 5: Connection Establishment and termination

   After step 1-4 have been performed (as far as necessary), the
   terminal should be prepared to establish connections across the
   detected middleboxes either by using direct peer-to-peer
   communication or via a relay server.

   When exchanging addresses for data streaming with another peer,
   addresses and port numbers provided by a NAT or relay need to be
   considered.

   In some cases direct communication with middleboxes is required for
   this step.  For example, if the terminal assumes that affected
   middleboxes support the NSIS NATFW NSLP [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw],
   then signaling between terminal and firewall would be required at
   call establishment and at termination.


3.  Middlebox Traversal Methods

   This section discusses standardized and/or well known existing



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   middlebox traversal methods.  They are grouped into tunneling
   methods, network-initiated methods and terminal-initiated methods.

   Tunneling methods work around existing firewall and NAT
   configurations that intend to block certain kinds of traffic.
   Therefore, they should be used only, if there is no doubt that their
   use is appropriate and does not violate any service agreement.

   Network-initiated methods use explicit signaling between a
   controlling entity in the network, such as a network or service
   management system or a "call agent", and one or more middleboxes.

   Terminal-initiated methods use explicit or implicit signaling between
   the terminal and one or more middleboxes.

3.1.  Tunneling

   Tunneling is a highly controversial means for traversing firewalls
   and NATs.  It is discussed, because it exists, is well known and -
   unfortunately - used by common applications for Internet telephony.

   Most problematic is tunneling using well known port numbers used for
   other services, such as DNS and HTTP.  Most commonly, these port
   numbers are open to be used for DNS and HTTP services.  Using them
   for other purposes might be considered as illegal use of the network.
   But for obvious reasons, many tunneling tools concentrate on port
   numbers that are most commonly open.

   A more legitimate tunneling technology is Traversal Using Relay NAT
   (TURN) [I-D.rosenberg-midcom-turn].  TURN does not mis-use fixed port
   numbers, but provide an network address translation for terminals
   behind a NAT that is not peer-to-peer-friendly.  TURN is particularly
   helpful in the presence of symmetric NATs.  But also if more than one
   terminals of a session are located behind a NAT, TURN can be very
   helpful.  This case is described in more detail in [I-D.srisuresh-
   behave-p2p-state].

3.2.  Network-initiated Middlebox Signaling

   Network-initiated middlebox signaling is based on the assumption that
   there is an entity in the network that manages sessions.  Such a
   system could be a service management system or a special call agent.
   This system directly controls middleboxes in order to enable sessions
   by using a control protocol, such as SNMP [RFC3410] and the MIDCOM
   MIB [I-D.ietf-midcom-mib] or the SIMCO protocol [I-D.stiemerling-
   midcom-simco].  Both provide sufficient means to an authenticated
   entity to configure the middlebox such that sessions can be
   established across them.



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


3.3.  Terminal-initiated Middlebox Signaling

   Terminal-initiated signaling is performed between the terminal and
   one or more middleboxes.  Terminal-initiated signaling is suggested
   to be used for SIP-based Internet telephony by [I-D.baset-sipping-
   p2preq].

   Signaling may be performed explicitly or implicitly.  Explicit
   signaling requires specific support at the middleboxes for the used
   signaling protocol and method, for example, the NSIS NATFW NSLP
   [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw], while implicit signaling configures the
   firewall rather by a side-effect as, for example, the STUN protocol
   [RFC3489] does it.

   Network-initiated signaling methods exist for middlebox detection
   purposes as well as for middlebox configuration.

   The following methods are discussed commonly used or currently under
   standardization:

      *  STUN
      *  UPnP
      *  SOCKS and RSIP
      *  NSIS

3.3.1.  STUN

   The Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) Through Network
   Address Translators (NATs) [RFC3489], also referred to as STUN, gives
   the terminal the ability to test NATs on the path for their UDP
   properties and to determine the terminal's publicly reachable IP
   address and port number.  It is limited to UDP flows only.  This
   technique is widely used by deployed SIP user agents to determine
   their reachability.

3.3.2.  UPnP

   UPnP [UPNP] is a link broadcast technique used to locate services in
   a small office/home office network.  One of the services is home
   gateway detection, i.e., locating your home gateway/NAT.  UPnP is
   well integrated into the Windows operating system and may home
   gateways.  It is not well supported on other operating system
   platforms.

3.3.3.  SOCKS and RSIP

   SOCKS [RFC1928] enables authenticated NAT traversal for terminals.
   The protocol enables terminals located behind a single NAT to



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   authenticate itself and to request NAT traversal service.  SOCKS has
   been partially deployed in the past, especially in enterprise
   networks, but is not so much used by today anymore.  UDP support is
   very rudimentary at best.

   RSIP [RFC3103] is a tunnel mechanism, where a RSIP-aware terminal can
   request allocation of a publicly reachable IP address and other
   parameters at RSIP-aware firewalls and NATs.  The other parameters
   are UDP/TCP ports, IPsec SPIs, etc.  A tunnel for the requested flow
   is created between the terminal and the NAT.  As for SOCKS, RSIP
   supports only a single NAT on one side of the network.

3.3.4.  NSIS NATFW NSLP

   A recent protocol proposal for locating and configuring NATs and
   firewalls is the NAT and firewall NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol
   (NATFW NSLP) [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw] defined by the IETF NSIS
   working group.  NAT/firewall signaling shares a property known from
   Quality of Service (QoS) signaling.  The signaling of both must reach
   any device on the data path that is involved in QoS or NATFW
   treatment of data packets.  Therefore, the NATFW NSLP signaling
   follows the data path and configures any NATFW NSLP-enabled firewall.
   This protocol requires at least one side of the network to support
   NSLP signaling, but works end-to-end if supported by both ends.


4.  Open Issues for SIP-based Peer-to-Peer Communication

   This section lists open issues of middlebox traversal for SIP-based
   peer-to-peer communication.  The issues are grouped into issues that
   concern SIP signaling and issues that concern middlebox traversal
   methods outside of SIP.

4.1.  SIP-related Issues

   This section describes three SIP-related issues of middlebox
   traversal.  They concern missing capabilities of SIP for signaling

      *  terminal reachability,
      *  communication service requirements,
      *  communication service offers.

4.1.1.  Terminal Reachability

   The relevance of this open issue depends on design decisions
   concerning the registration and relay selection process.  If a
   terminal in an restricted environment needs to register before it can
   select a relay, then it needs to express within its registration that



Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   it is currently unreachable.  Currently, the SIP protocol does not
   provide explicit means for signaling such a state.

4.1.2.  Communication Service Requirement

   A terminal in a restricted environment needs to be able to express
   its needs for communication services provided by other peers, such as
   relaying signaling messages, lookup requests, and/or data streams.
   Currently, the SIP protocol does not provide explicit means for
   signaling such requirements.

4.1.3.  Communication Service Offering

   A terminal in an unrestricted environment (or just slightly
   restricted) environment might be able (and the user willing) to offer
   services to other peers, such as relay services and lookup services.
   Currently, the SIP protocol does not provide explicit means for
   signaling such offers.

4.2.  SIP-unrelated Issues

   There is only one SIP-unrelated issue identified by this document.
   It concerns middlebox detection for protocols other than UDP.

4.2.1.  Middleobox Detection Beyond UDP

   As stated in section Section 2.1, it will probably not be sufficient
   for secure SIP-based peer-to-peer communication to just detect NAT
   properties for the UDP protocol, but TCP checks or further checks for
   IPsec will be necessary.  Currently, there are no commonly known
   tools available for performing these checks.


5.  Security considerations

   Obviously, securing access to firewall and NAT configuration is
   extremely important for maintaining network security.  Whatever means
   are applied for enabling SIP-based peer-to-peer communication across
   firewalls and NATs, it should be ensured that the security policy
   that was used for configuring the firewall and/or NAT is not violated
   by this action.

   Particularly tunneling over port numbers that are assigned to other
   services, such as the HTTP or DNS port numbers can often be
   considered a violation of the policy that was set up by the access
   network operator.  Furthermore, such tunnels may be mis-used by
   attackers as entry points into otherwise well protected network.




Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   If explicit methods for firewall and NAT configuration are used, the
   security considerations section of the respective standards document
   should be considered.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Martin Stiemerling is partly funded by Ambient Networks, a research
   project supported by the European Commission under its Sixth
   Framework Program.  The views and conclusions contained herein are
   those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
   representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed
   or implied, of the Ambient Networks project or the European
   Commission.


7.  Informative References

   [RFC1928]  Leech, M., Ganis, M., Lee, Y., Kuris, R., Koblas, D., and
              L. Jones, "SOCKS Protocol Version 5", RFC 1928,
              March 1996.

   [RFC2246]  Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0",
              RFC 2246, January 1999.

   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC3103]  Borella, M., Grabelsky, D., Lo, J., and K. Taniguchi,
              "Realm Specific IP: Protocol Specification", RFC 3103,
              October 2001.

   [RFC3234]  Carpenter, B. and S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and
              Issues", RFC 3234, February 2002.

   [RFC3410]  Case, J., Mundy, R., Partain, D., and B. Stewart,
              "Introduction and Applicability Statements for Internet-
              Standard Management Framework", RFC 3410, December 2002.

   [RFC3489]  Rosenberg, J., Weinberger, J., Huitema, C., and R. Mahy,
              "STUN - Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
              Through Network Address Translators (NATs)", RFC 3489,
              March 2003.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.




Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


   [I-D.rosenberg-midcom-turn]
              Rosenberg, J., "Traversal Using Relay NAT (TURN)",
              draft-rosenberg-midcom-turn-08 (work in progress),
              September 2005.

   [I-D.srisuresh-behave-p2p-state]
              Srisuresh, P., "State of Peer-to-Peer(P2P) communication
              across Network Address  Translators(NATs)",
              draft-srisuresh-behave-p2p-state-01 (work in progress),
              October 2005.

   [I-D.baset-sipping-p2preq]
              Baset, S., "Requirements for SIP-based Peer-to-Peer
              Internet Telephony", draft-baset-sipping-p2preq-00 (work
              in progress), November 2005.

   [I-D.stiemerling-midcom-simco]
              Stiemerling, M., "Simple Middlebox Configuration (SIMCO)
              Protocol Version 3.0", draft-stiemerling-midcom-simco-08
              (work in progress), December 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-midcom-mib]
              Quittek, J., "Definitions of Managed Objects for Middlebox
              Communication", draft-ietf-midcom-mib-06 (work in
              progress), January 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw]
              Stiemerling, M., "NAT/Firewall NSIS Signaling Layer
              Protocol (NSLP)", draft-ietf-nsis-nslp-natfw-09 (work in
              progress), February 2006.

   [UPNP]     UPNP Web Site, "Universal Plug and Play Web Site", Web
              Site http://www.upnp.org/, February 2006.


















Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Juergen Quittek
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 15
   Email: quittek@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Martin Stiemerling
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 13
   Email: stiemerling@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Thomas Dietz
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 28
   Email: dietz@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Saverio Niccolini
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 18
   Email: saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de







Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          SIP P2P Middlebox Problem          February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Quittek, et al.          Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 15]

