                                                        Satomi Okazaki, 
                                                                 editor 
   Internet Draft                                        Yiqun Lisa Yin 
   Document: draft-okazaki-mobileip-abk-00.txt              James Kempf 
   Expires: December 2002                                     June 2002 
                                      
      Securing MIPv6 Binding Updates Using Address Based Keys (ABKs) 
                                      
                  <draft-okazaki-mobileip-abk-00.txt> 
                                      
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document outlines a method for authenticating and authorizing 
   Mobile IPv6 [MIPv6] Binding Updates between a Correspondent Node and 
   a Mobile Node where there exists no pre-established direct or 
   indirect security relationship between those two entities. The 
   method uses a new security technique called Address Based Keys. 
   Address Based Keys are an alternative to other cryptographic address 
   mechanisms for optimizing Binding Update security to avoid the need 
   for Return Routability checks on each binding update. Address Based 
   Keys use some mathematical results in identity based cryptosystems 
   that have been known to cryptographers for some time, but have not 
   been widely discussed in the network security community. 
    
Contents 
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION....................................................2 
2.0  TERMINOLOGY.....................................................3 
    
   Okazaki, S., et. al       Informational                     [Page 1] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
3.0  WHAT ARE IDENTITY BASED CRYPTOSYSTEMS?..........................4 
4.0  DIGITAL SIGNATURE CALCULATIONS..................................5 
5.0  PROTOCOL OVERVIEW...............................................6 
6.0  SECURITY ANALYSIS...............................................8 
7.0  IDENTITY BASED ALGORITHMS.......................................9 
8.0  DISCUSSIONS ON REQUIREMENTS....................................10 
9.0  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS........................................11 
10.0  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS...............................................11 
11.0  REFERENCES....................................................11 
12.0  AUTHORSÆ CONTACT INFORMATION..................................13 
13.0  FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT......................................13 
14.0  IPR NOTICE....................................................14 
 
1.0     Introduction 
    
   The results of the recent Mobile IP design team work and technical 
   discussion has converged to accepting Return Routability (RR) as the 
   basic technique for securing MIPv6 Binding Updates (BUs). Yet, there 
   is recognition within the working group that RR has some potential 
   drawbacks, both in terms of its security properties and also 
   performance.  
    
   Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA) [3] [4] have been 
   proposed as a mechanism for optimizing BU security. CGAs do not 
   eliminate the need for RR, since the Correspondent Node (CN) must 
   perform an RR check initially and possibly also periodically.  
    
   In this draft, a mechanism called Address Based Keys (ABKs) is 
   described for optimizing BU security. ABKs use some long-standing 
   results in identity-based cryptosystems to construct a public key 
   based on the Home Address of the Mobile Node (MN).  
    
   The resulting mechanism contains optimizations if the cryptographic 
   parameters are cached or if the CN is in the same domain as the MN.  
   In addition, ABKs do not impose a particular format on the address, 
   so they can be used with arbitrary addresses.  In particular, ABKs 
   can be used with addresses that require an EUI-64 identifier [22] 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 2] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   (e.g., a telephone number) as the basis of the 64-bit interface 
   identifier.  Finally, the technique described in this draft does not 
   require the use of RR. 
    
1.1 Assumptions 
    
     1) A pre-existing security association is required between the MN 
        and its Home Agent (HA). This assumption is necessary in order 
        that cryptographic parameter information and a private key can 
        be distributed to the MN. 
     2) The MN, HA, and CN all implement an identity based 
        cryptosystem. The HA acts as an Identity based Private Key 
        Generator (IPKG) or has secure access to an IPKG.  
    
2.0     Terminology 
    
      Mobile node (MN) - a node which has a pre-established security 
      association with one or more home agents on its home link and 
      is capable of detecting when it moves between different points 
      of attachment in the network, acquire a temporary care of 
      address in each visited location, and signal its current care 
      of address to the home agent using the security association. 
    
      Correspondent node (CN) - a node with which a mobile node 
      communicates.  The correspondent node may itself be a mobile 
      node. 
    
      Home address (HoA)- the address of the mobile node, which does 
      not change as the mobile node moves. 
    
      Home agent (HA) - a router on the home link that tracks the 
      mobile nodeÆs current location and relays packets to (and in 
      some cases from) the mobile node. 
       
      Home agent address (HAA) û the address of the home agent. 
    
      Care of address (CoA) - an IP address assigned to the mobile 
      node at its current location. 
    
      Cryptographically Generated Address (CGA) Technique - A 
      technique that allows the MN to generate a public/private key 
      pair and uses a hash of the public key as the interface 
      identifier part of the IPv6 HoA and CoA. 
    
      Address Based Keys (ABK) Technique - A technique whereby an 
      identity-based cryptosystem is used to generate the MN's 
      public key and private key from its HoA. 
    
      Identity based cryptosystem - A cryptographic system that 
      allows a publicly known identifier, such as the IPv6 address, 
      to be used as a public key for authentication, key agreement, 
      and encryption. 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 3] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
    
      Identity based Private Key Generator (IPKG) - An agent that is 
      capable of executing an identity based cryptographic algorithm 
      to generate a private key when presented with the public 
      identifier that will act as the public key. 
       
      Public Cryptographic Parameters - A collection of publicly 
      known parameters (specific to the identity based cryptographic 
      algorithm) formed from chosen constants and a secret master 
      key that is known only to the IPKG.  The IPKG uses the secret 
      master key to generate the node's private key.  The parameters 
      are used by two nodes involved in securing or encrypting a 
      message to perform cryptographic operations.  
    
   The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD, 
   SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL, when they appear in this 
   document, are to be interpreted as described in [21]. 
    
3.0     What are Identity Based Cryptosystems? 
    
   Identity based cryptosystems are a collection of cryptographic 
   techniques that allow a publicly known identifier, such as the email 
   address or (particularly important in this application) the IP 
   address of a node, to function as the public key part of a 
   public/private key pair for purposes of digital signature 
   calculation, key agreement, and encryption. Section 7.0 provides a 
   quick overview of work in this area, including an extensive 
   reference list.  
    
   While identity based cryptosystems have been investigated for almost 
   20 years in the cryptographic community, they have not been widely 
   discussed in the network security community. The reason is unclear, 
   but it might have to do with the popularity and algorithmic 
   simplicity of the reigning standard Diffie-Hellman technique, or 
   possibly with the fact that, until recently, there have been no 
   known identity based cryptographic algorithms that can be used to 
   perform encryption. The existing algorithms have been restricted to 
   digital signature calculation, and therefore have been fairly 
   limited in scope.  
    
   Elliptic curve (EC) algorithms are particularly attractive for 
   identity based keys because they work well with small key sizes, are 
   computationally efficient on small hosts, such as small wireless 
   devices, and may generate smaller signatures. In addition, while 
   non-EC algorithms have been proposed for identity based digital 
   signature calculation, at the time of this writing, the most 
   efficient way of performing identity-based encryption is an EC 
   algorithm. 
    
   Identity based cryptosystems work in the following way. A publicly 
   known identifier is submitted to an IPKG. In this application, the 
   publicly known identifier is the HoA of the MN. The MNÆs public key 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 4] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   is a hash of the HoA.  The IPKG uses a particular algorithm to 
   generate the private key and returns it. The public and private key 
   can now be used for authentication and encryption as is typical in 
   cryptosystems. 
    
   Known identity based cryptographic algorithms require that a secret 
   known only to the IPKG be used to generate the public and private 
   key for the clients. As a result, unlike the Diffie-Hellman 
   algorithm, the publicly known parameters of the cryptographic 
   algorithm are not fixed, and therefore cannot be preprogrammed into 
   clients. The secret key could expire or become compromised; in which 
   case, the publicly known parameters would have to be updated. 
    
    
4.0     Digital Signature Calculations 
    
   An identity-based signature scheme consists of two algorithms û a 
   signing algorithm and a verification algorithm. 
    
   Digital signatures MUST be calculated using the following algorithm: 
    
      sig = SIGN(H1(contents),IPrK,Params) 
    
   where: 
    
      sig      - The digital signature. 
      SIGN     - The identity based signing algorithm used to sign 
                 the hash. 
      H1       - The SHA1 one-way hash algorithm. 
      contents - The message contents to be protected. 
      IPrK     - The identity based private key for the MN. 
      Params   - The public cryptographic parameters of the IPKG. 
       
       
   The digital signature MUST be verified using the following 
   algorithm: 
    
      IPuK = H2(ID); 
      valid = VERIFY (sig,H1(contents),IPuK,Params) 
       
   where: 
    
      H2     - A hashing algorithm specific to the identity based 
               algorithm used for generating the public key from the 
               ID. 
      ID     - The publicly known identifier used to generate the 
               key. 
      IPuK   - The identity based public key for the mobile node. 
      VERIFY - The identity based verification algorithm used to 
               verify the validity of the signature. 
      valid  - A binary value indicating whether the signature is 
               valid. 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 5] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
       
   If valid = 1, then the message is verified. If not, the host 
   discards the message. 
    
    
5.0     Protocol Overview 
    
   In this section, the protocol for securing BUs using ABKs is 
   described.  
    
   At a very high level, the protocol works as follows. There is an 
   initial setup in which the MN is configured to have an identity-
   based public/private key pair that is associated with its 128-bit 
   IPv6 HoA, along with the public cryptographic parameters. Once a MN 
   sends a BU initiate message, the CN is required to securely download 
   the public cryptographic parameters from the MN's HA. After that, 
   the MN can send out a secured BU to the CN by signing the BU with 
   its private key. The CN can verify the signature by using the MNÆs 
   public key, which is the hash of the MNÆs HoA. There is no need to 
   send the public key itself or any certificate. 
    
   The protocol for obtaining the cryptographic parameters from the HA 
   using ABK consists of the following six messages. 
    
           1) ABKp1: MN->CN 
           2) ABKp2: CN->HA 
           3) ABKp3: HA->CN 
           4) ABKp4: CN->MN 
           5) ABKp5: MN->CN 
           6) ABKp6: CN->MN 
 
   ABKp2 and ABKp3 are not necessary if CN has cached the HAÆs 
   parameters.   
    
   We discuss these messages in more detail in following subsections. 
         
5.1 System Configuration 
    
   The HA serves as an IPKG for all MNs in its domain. It MUST generate 
   public cryptographic parameters (Params) and a master secret (a 
   private key known only to itself) prior to generating any ABKs.  
    
   The MN configures its own 128-bit HoA û the first 64-bit part is the 
   network address and the following 64-bit part, the interface 
   identifier, is a unique number. There are no restrictions on the 
   interface identifier, except that it must provide a unique address 
   on the MN's home network.  
    
   The MN then generates its public key as IPuK = H2(HoA) and requests 
   the corresponding private key IPrK and public cryptographic 
   parameters from the HA. This can be done at any time prior to the BU 
   being sent, through an exchange of messages between the HA and the 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 6] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   MN using the pre-existing security association. The HA can update 
   the public cryptographic parameters and keys at any time, should 
   they change. 
    
5.2  Description of Protocol Messages 
    
5.2.1   ABKp1 
    
   The MN sends an ABKp1 message to the CN to cause the CN to initiate 
   a request for the public cryptographic parameters. The source 
   address of the packet is the MNÆs current CoA, and the packet MUST 
   contain a MIPv6 Home Address Option with the MNÆs HoA. ABKp1 
   contains the following fields: 
    
          - BUInit 
          - Params_ver: version number of the parameters 
       
   Upon receipt of ABKp1, the CN MUST first determine the Home Agent 
   Address (HAA) using HoA (and Mobile IPv6 Dynamic Home Agent Address 
   Discovery [1]).  The CN MUST look to see if it already has Params 
   (of the correct version number) cached for this HAA. If so, it will 
   take the source address of the MN to be CoA and send an ABKp4 
   message to destination address CoA.  (Note that, in this case, 
   messages ABKp2 and ABKp3 are skipped.)  (See Section 6.0 for 
   recommendations on parameter lifetimes.) 
    
   If the CN does not have Params (of the correct version number) 
   cached, it will take the source address of the ABKp1 message as CoA 
   and send an ABKp2 to HA (using the destination address HAA). 
 
5.2.2   ABKp2 
 
   ABKp2 contains the following fields:  
    
          - HoA 
          - CoA 
          - N1:  nonce 
           
    
5.2.3   ABKp3 
 
   Upon receipt of ABKp2, the HA checks whether HoA is a known home 
   address. The HA returns ABKp3 to CN with the following fields: 
 
          - Params 
          - Params_ver: version number of the parameters 
          - CoA 
          - N1 
    
   If HoA is not a known home address, Params MUST be set to NULL. 
    

    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 7] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   Upon receipt of ABKp3, the CN checks Params and N1.  If Params is 
   set to NULL or if the nonce N1 is not in what it is expecting, then 
   the CN stops.  If Params is not NULL, the CN caches the parameters 
   along with their version number and sends an ABKp4 message to MN 
   using destination address CoA. 
    
5.2.4   ABKp4 
    
   ABKp4 contains the following fields: 
          - N2: nonce 
 
5.2.5   ABKp5 
    
   ABKp5 contains the actual BU.  ABKp5 contains the following fields: 
          - BU: binding update (includes Params_ver) 
          - N2 
          - sig(BU) = SIGN(H1(BU),IPrK,Params) 
 
   CN checks the freshness of the nonce N2.  If itÆs not fresh, then CN 
   sends an ABKp6 message with an error message.  If it is fresh, then 
   the CN checks to see whether Params_ver matches the cached version 
   number.  If they do not match, then CN sends an ABKp6 message with 
   an error message.  If they do match, then CN verifies the signature 
   with: 
    
        valid = VERIFY(sig(BU),IPuK(MN),Params) 
 
5.2.6   ABKp6 
       
     ABKp6 is the Binding Acknowledgement message.  
    
6.0     Security Analysis 
    
   The MN/HoA association can be verified because the CN receives 
   parameters directly from the HA and then verifies the MNÆs signature 
   on ABKp5.  The binding between MN and CoA is established when CN 
   sends to MN (via CoA) in ABKp4 the nonce N2, which is returned in 
   ABKp5. 
    
6.1.1   Flooding attacks 
 
   Suppose there is some mobile node that tries to flood correspondent 
   node CN with ABKp1 messages.  For each message, CN checks its 
   parameters table to see if it has the parameters for the relevant 
   home agent.  If it does not, CN will send an ABKp2 message to the 
   appropriate home agent to request parameters.  CN will not send an 
   ABKp2 message to the same home agent more than once (unless the 
   parameters have expired).  Note that CN does not create state.   
    
   If an HA is flooded with ABKp2 messages, the action that it should 
   take is to throw out all messages that include an HoA that is not in 
   its domain.      
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 8] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
    
   The nonce N1 is used to prevent attackers who might attempt to 
   initiate communications with CN (or flood CN) by using message 
   ABKp3.   
    
   Flooding a mobile node with ABKp4 messages cannot be prevented. 
    
   For a flood of ABKp5 messages, CN can verify the signature before 
   further processing each message. 
    
6.1.2   Man-in-the middle attacks 
 
   If an attacker on one path between any two entities (MN, CN, HA) can 
   alter messages, the worst that can happen is that the BU would fail, 
   and the CN would continue to send MNÆs packets to its old CoA.  In 
   particular, since messages ABKp1-ABKp4 are not signed, it is 
   possible to change them.  Message ABKp5Æs BU is signed, so it is not 
   susceptible to a data alteration attack. 
    
   RR has a weakness that if an attacker can eavesdrop on two links 
   (HA-CN and MN-CN), then he can send a fake BU successfully.  CGA 
   with an initial round of RR is susceptible to this attack.  The ABK 
   protocol does not have this weakness: an attacker who can eavesdrop 
   on two links still cannot send a signed BU.  However, if an attacker 
   can alter messages on both the MN-CN and HA-CN links, then it is 
   possible to establish a fake BU with CN.  As mentioned above, both 
   RR and CGA (with an initial round of RR) are susceptible to a 
   similar attack. 
 
7.0     Identity Based Algorithms 
    
   In this section, a quick overview of existing work on identity-based 
   cryptosystems is provided. The review is intended to acquaint the 
   network security community with identity-based systems, including 
   references for a more detailed examination of the algorithms.  
    
   Shamir [19] introduced the idea of identity-based cryptography in 
   1984. Practical, provably secure identity based signature schemes 
   [10], [9], [11] and key agreement protocols [15] soon followed. 
   Practical, provably secure identity based encryption schemes [6], 
   [8] have only very recently been found.  
    
   In identity based signature protocols, the host signs a message 
   using its private key supplied by its IPKG. The signature is then 
   verified using the host's identity. Identity based key agreement 
   protocols result in two parties sharing a secret. Each party 
   constructs the secret by using its own private key and the other 
   party's public identity. In identity-based encryption, the encryptor 
   uses the recipient's public identity to encrypt a message, and the 
   recipient uses its private key to decrypt the ciphertext.  
    

    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 9] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   As is generally the case with public key cryptography, the security 
   of the systems is based on the difficulty of solving a hard number 
   theory problem, such as factoring or a discrete log (or Diffie-
   Hellman) problem. 
 
   Elliptic curves and associated pairings have solved the problem of 
   how to do identity-based encryption [6] and are used to construct 
   identity-based signature [18][13][7] and key agreement [18][19] 
   protocols.  
    
   There are a number of advantages to using identity-based systems 
   that are based on elliptic curves and their pairings. One is that 
   there are compatible elliptic curve-based signature, key agreement, 
   and encryption schemes. This means firstly that the same public 
   key/private key pair can be used to do signatures, key agreement, 
   and encryption. Secondly, these protocols overlap, so that results 
   of computations and pre-computations done for one system can be used 
   in the others. Further, there are usually efficiency advantages in 
   using elliptic curves over using other public-key methods. 
   Generally, one obtains shorter signatures, shorter ciphertexts, and 
   shorter key lengths for the same security as other systems. 
   Efficiency can be further enhanced by using abelian varieties in 
   place of elliptic curves [17].  
    
   There are identity based signature schemes [7] using elliptic curves 
   and pairings that base their security on the difficulty of solving 
   the elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman problem. This is the same 
   classical hard problem on which standard Elliptic Curve Cryptography 
   (ECC) [16][14] is based. Identity based encryption and key agreement 
   schemes using elliptic curves (or abelian varieties) and pairings 
   rely on the difficulty of solving the bilinear Diffie-Hellman 
   problem. 
    
   Identity based cryptosystems can be constructed with or without key 
   escrow. Protocols with key escrow can be performed in fewer passes 
   than corresponding systems that do not provide for key escrow.  
    
   Techniques from threshold cryptography allow the master key 
   information to be distributed or shared among a number of IPKGs 
   so that all of them would have to collude for a host's private 
   key to be known to them. Such a scenario would allow for key 
   escrow if necessary, by agreement among all the IPKGs, but guards 
   against knowledge of the private keys by the IPKGs without their 
   mutual agreement. 
    
8.0     Discussions on Requirements 
    
8.1 Infrastructure Requirements 
    
   If only digital signatures are of concern, then there are a wide 
   variety of available identity based cryptographic algorithms. 
   These algorithms have widely varying infrastructure requirements.  
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 10] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
    
   Some algorithms have a "key escrow" property whereby the IPKG 
   maintains a copy of the public and private keys for all clients. 
   This property is probably not a big problem in the current 
   application, since the assumption here is that the MN already has 
   a secure relationship with the HA, and the private key is not 
   being used to secure sensitive client data, but just IP 
   signaling.  
    
   The requirement that the IPKGÆs master secret key be used to 
   generate the public cryptographic parameters complicates 
   maintenance, since the public cryptographic parameters may need 
   to be updated periodically if the secret key expires or is 
   compromised.  
    
   Using a hierarchy of IPKGs can make interdomain cooperation 
   simpler [11].  For example, if a "root" IPKG generates identity-
   based private keys for a group of HAs, a CN may authenticate any 
   MN that uses any of these HAs after obtaining the public 
   cryptographic parameters of the root IPKG; 
   the CN need not obtain separate parameters from each HA. 
 
    
8.2 Technology Requirements 
    
   As mentioned, identity based cryptosystems have not received much 
   attention in the network security community. As a consequence, it 
   may require some time before enough understanding of their 
   properties has been built up that wise choices can be made about 
   what algorithms to use and where possible problems could occur. 
   Identity-based schemes require standard cryptography components 
   such as RSA and ECC, so it should be possible to implement them 
   with well-known and widely distributed cryptographic libraries. 
 
9.0     Security Considerations 
    
   This document describes a scheme for securing Mobile IPv6 binding 
   updates. As such, the entire document is about security. 
    
10.0    Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Alice Silverberg, Ohio State 
   University, and Craig Gentry, DoCoMo Labs USA for their help in 
   understanding basic ID cryptography. Carl Williams and Alper Yegin, 
   of DoCoMo Labs USA, and Anand Desai of NTT MCL were instrumental in 
   understanding how to fit ID cryptography together with Mobile IP. 
   This work was completed while Alice was at DoCoMo Labs USA, and 
   Alice would like to thank DoCoMo Labs USA for their support. 
    
11.0    References 
    

    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 11] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
    [1] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and Arkko, J., ôMobility Support in 
        IPv6,ö draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-17.txt, a work in progress. 
    [2] Montenegro, G. and Petrescu, A., "MIPv6 Security:Assessment of 
        Proposals," draft-montenegro-moibleip-mivp6-seceval-00.txt, a 
        work in progress. 
    [3] Montenegro, G. and Castellucia, C., "SUCV Identifiers and 
        Addresses," draft-montenegro-sucv-02.txt, a work in progress. 
    [4] Roe, M., et. al., "Authentication of Mobile IPv6 Binding 
        Updates and Acknowledgements," draft-roe-mobileip-updateauth-
        01.txt, a work in progress. 
    [5] Nordmark, E., ôSecuring MIPv6 BUs Using Return Routability 
        (BU3WAY),ö 
    [6] D. Boneh and M. Franklin, "Identity based encryption from the 
        Weil pairing," Advances in Cryptology --- Crypto 2001, Lecture 
        Notes in Computer Science 2139, (2001), Springer, 213-229, 
        http://www.cs.stanford.edu/~dabo/papers/ibe.pdf 
    [7] J. C. Cha and J. H. Cheon, "An Identity-Based Signature from 
        Gap Diffie-Hellman Problem," Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report 
        2002/018, http://eprint.iacr.org/2002/018/ 
    [8] C. Cocks, "An identity based encryption scheme based on 
        quadratic residues," Cryptography and Coding, Lecture Notes in 
        Computer Science 2260, (2001), Springer, 360-363. 
    [9] U. Feige, A. Fiat, and A. Shamir, Zero-knowledge Proofs of 
        Identity, Journal of Cryptology 1, (1988), 77-94. 
    [10] A. Fiat and A. Shamir, "How to prove yourself: Practical 
        solutions to identification and signature problems," Advances 
        in Cryptology --- Crypto 1986, Lecture Notes in Computer 
        Science 263, 1986), Springer,  186-194. 
    [11] C. Gentry and A. Silverberg, ôHierarchical ID-Based 
        Cryptography,ö Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report 2002/056, 
        http://eprint.iacr.org/2002/056 
    [12] L. C. Guillou and J.-J. Quisquater, "A practical zero-knowledge 
        protocol fitted to security microprocessors minimizing both 
        transmission and memory," Advances in Cryptology --- Eurocrypt 
        1988, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 330, (1988), Springer, 
        123-128.  
    [13] F. Hess, "Exponent Group Signature Schemes and Efficient 
        Identity Based Signature Schemes Based on Pairings," Cryptology 
        ePrint Archive: Report 2002/012, 
        http://eprint.iacr.org/2002/012/ 
    [14] N. Koblitz, "Elliptic curve cryptosystems," Mathematics of 
        Computation 48 (1987), 203-209.  
    [15] U. Maurer and Y. Yacobi, "Non-interactive public-key 
        cryptography," Advances in Cryptology --- Eurocrypt 1992, 
        Lecture Notes in Computer Science 658 (1993), Springer, 458-
        460. 
    [16] V. S. Miller, "Uses of elliptic curves in cryptography," 
        Advances in Cryptology --- Crypto 1985, Lecture Notes in 
        Computer Science 218, (1986), Springer, 417-426.  
    [17] K. Rubin and A. Silverberg, "Supersingular abelian varieties in 
        cryptology,ö to appear in Advances of Cryptology --- Crypto 
        2002, Springer (2002). 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 12] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
    [18] R. Sakai, K. Ohgishi, and M. Kasahara, "Cryptosystems based on 
        pairing," SCIC 2000-C20, Okinawa, Japan, January 2000. 
    [19] A. Shamir, "Identity-Based Cryptosystems and Signature 
        Schemes," Advances in Cryptology --- Crypto 1984, Lecture Notes 
        in Computer Science 196, (1984), Springer, 47-53. 
    [20] N. P. Smart, An identity Based authenticated key agreement 
        protocol based on the Weil pairing, Cryptology ePrint Archive: 
        Report 2001/111, http://eprint.iacr.org/2001/111/ 
    [21] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    [22] IEEE, "Guidelines for 64-bit Global Identifier (EUI-64) 
        Registration Authority", 
        http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/tutorials/EUI64.html, 
        March 1997. 
    
12.0    AuthorsÆ Contact Information 
    
   Satomi Okazaki 
   NTT Multimedia Communications Labs   Phone: +1 650 833 3631   
   250 Cambridge Avenue, Suite 300      Email: satomi@nttmcl.com   
   Palo Alto, CA 94306  
   USA     
    
   Yiqun Lisa Yin 
   NTT Multimedia Communications Labs   Phone: +1 650 833 3612  
   250 Cambridge Avenue, Suite 300      Email: yiqun@nttmcl.com  
   Palo Alto, CA 94306  
   USA     
    
   James Kempf                          Phone: +1 408 451 4711 
   DoCoMo Labs USA                      Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com 
   180 Metro Drive, Suite 300 
   San Jose, CA 95430 
   USA 
       
13.0    Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.  
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
    
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 13] 
    
   Internet Draft          Securing BUs             June, 2002 
    
    
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
14.0    IPR Notice 
    
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed 
   in regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
        
   Okazaki, S.               Informational                    [Page 14] 
    