INTERNET DRAFT                                              Avri Doria 
GSMP Working Group                                     Kenneth Sundell 
Informational Track                                    Nortel Networks  
                                                             July 2000 

                                         

                                           

                 General Switch Management Protocol Applicability  

                     <draft-ietf-gsmp-applicability-01.txt> 


     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
     in progress." 

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 


Abstract 

     This memo provides an overview of the GSMP protocol and includes 
     information relating to its deployment in a MPLS environment. 


                                                                          





Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                   [Page 1] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

1. Overview 
 

     The General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP) has been available 
     to the IETF community for several years now as informational 
     RFC's. Both GSMPv1.1 released in March 1996 as RFC1987 [2], and 
     GSMPv2.0 released in August 1998 as RFC2297 [3] are available. 
     Several vendors have implemented GSMPv1.1. 

     In V1.1 and V2 GSMP was intended only for use with ATM switches. 
     During the course of the last year, the GSMP working group has 
     decided to expand the purview of GSMP to the point where it can be 
     used to control a number of different kinds of switch and can thus 
     live up to what its name indicates; a general switch management 
     protocol. To do this, commands and arguments needed to be 
     generalised, with sections added discussing the manner in which 
     the generalised protocol could be applied to specific kinds of 
     switches and port types. In short the protocol has gone through 
     major changes in the last 24 months. 

     GSMP provides an interface that can be used to separate the data 
     forwarder from the routing and other control plane protocols such 
     as LDP. As such it allows service providers to move away from 
     monolithic systems that bundle control plane and data plane into a 
     single tightly coupled system - usually in a single chassis. 
     Separating the control components from the forwarding components 
     and using GSMP for switch management, enables service providers to 
     create multi-service systems composed of various vendors 
     equipment.  It also allows for a more dynamic means of adding 
     services to their networks. 

     The IETF GSMP working group was established in the routing area 
     because GSMP was being seen as an optional part of the MPLS 
     solution. In a MPLS system, it is possible to run the routing 
     protocols and label distribution protocols on one system while 
     passing data across a generic switch, e.g. an ATM switch.  GSMP 
     provides the switch resource management mechanism needed in such a 
     scenario. 

     GSMP has also been selected by the Multiservice Switching 
     Forum(MSF) as its protocol of choice for the Switch Control 
     Interface identified in their architecture.  The MSF is an 
     industry forum, which among its activities establishes their 
     member's requirements and then works with the appropriate 
     standards bodies to foster their goals.  In the case of GSMP, the 
     MSF presented the IETF GSMP Working Group with a set of 
     requirements for GSMP. The working group has made a determined 
     effort to comply with those requirements in its specifications. 



Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 2] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

   
2. GSMP V3 Document Set 

  The current version of GSMP is documented in 3 documents: 

       - GSMP: General Switch Management protocol V3 [5] 

       - GSMP-ENCAPS: GSMP Packet Encapsulations for ATM, Ethernet 
       and TCP[4] 

       - GSMP-MIB: Definitions of Managed Objects for the General 
       Switch Management Protocol [1] 

        
3. General Description 

   The General Switch Management Protocol V3 (GSMPv3) [5], is a 
       general purpose protocol to control a label switch. GSMP allows 
       a controller to establish and release connections across the 
       switch; add and delete leaves on a multicast connection; 
       reserve resources; manage switch ports; request configuration 
       information; and request statistics. It also allows the switch 
       to inform the controller of asynchronous events such as a link 
       going down. The GSMP protocol is asymmetric, the controller 
       being the master and the switch being the slave.  

   A physical switch can be partitioned in many virtual switches.  
       GSMP does not provide support for defining switch partitions. 
       GSMP treats a virtual switch as if it were a physical switch.  

  GSMP may be transported in three ways: 

       -  GSMP operation across an IP network is specified. 

       -  GSMP operation across an ATM virtual channel is specified. 

       -  GSMP operation across an Ethernet link is specified.  

  Other encapsulations are possible, but have not been defined.  
  Encapsulations are defined in [4]. 

   A label switch is a frame or cell switch that supports connection 
       oriented switching using the exact match forwarding algorithm 
       based on labels attached to incoming cells or frames.  

   A label switch may support multiple label types, however, each 
       switch port can support only one label type. The label type 
       supported by a given port is indicated in a port configuration 
       message. Connections may be established between ports 


Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 3] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

     supporting different label types using the adaptation methods. 
     There are two forms of labels support; short 28 bit labels 
     which are sufficient for many purposes and TLV labels which are 
     defined for labels that do not fit in 28 bits. Examples of the 
     label types that can use the short form include ATM, Frame 
     Relay, and MPLS Generic Labels. Examples of labels which are 
     defined to use the TLV form include DS1, DS3, E1, E3 and MPLS 
     FECs. 

   A connection across a switch is formed by connecting an incoming 
     labelled channel to one or more outgoing labelled channels. 
     Connections are generally referenced by the input port on which 
     they arrive and the label values of their incoming labelled 
     channel. In some messages connections are referenced by the 
     output port. 

   GSMP supports point-to-point and point-to-multipoint connections. 
     A multipoint-to-point connection is specified by establishing 
     multiple point-to-point connections each of which specifies the 
     same output label. A multipoint-to-multipoint connection is 
     specified by establishing multiple point-to-multipoint 
     connections each of which specifies a different input label 
     with the same output labels. 

   In general a connection is established with a certain quality of 
     service (QoS). This version of GSMP includes a default QoS 
     Configuration and additionally allows the negotiation of 
     alternative, optional QoS configurations. The default QoS 
     Configuration includes three QoS Models: a default service 
     model, a simple priority model and a QoS profile model. This 
     version of GSMP also supports the reservation of resources when 
     the labels are not yet known.  This ability can be used in 
     support of MPLS. 

   GSMP contains an adjacency protocol. The adjacency protocol is 
     used to synchronise state across the link, to negotiate which 
     version of the GSMP protocol to use, to discover the identity 
     of the entity at the other end of a link, and to detect when it 
     changes.  

3.1 Switch Partitioning 

  In this version of GSMP switch partitioning is static and occurs 
  prior to running GSMP. The partitions of a physical switch are 
  isolated from each other by the implementation and the controller 
  assumes that the resources allocated to a partition are at all 
  times available to that partition and only to that partition. A 
  partition appears to its controller as a physical label switch. 
  The resources allocated to a partition appear to the controller as 


Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 4] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

     if they were the actual physical resources of a physical switch. 
     For example if the bandwidth of a port is divided among several 
     partitions, each partition would appear to the controller to have 
     its own independent port with its fixed set or resources. 

     GSMP controls a partitioned switch through the use of a partition 
     identifier that is carried in every GSMP message. Each partition 
     has a one-to-one control relationship with its own logical 
     controller entity (which in the remainder of the document is 
     referred to simply as a controller) and GSMP independently 
     maintains adjacency between each controller-partition pair. 

3.2 Switch and controller interactions 

     Multiple switches may be controlled by a single controller using 
     multiple instantiations of the protocol over separate control 
     connections.  

     Alternatively, multiple controllers can control a single switch.  
     Each controller would establish a control connection to the switch 
     using the adjacency protocol.  The adjacency mechanism maintains a 
     state table indicating the control connections that are being 
     maintained by the same partition.  The switch provides information 
     to the controller group about the number and identity of the 
     attached controllers.  It does nothing, however, to co-ordinate 
     the activities of the controllers, and will execute all commands 
     as they are received.  It is the controller group responsibility 
     to co-ordinate its use of the switch.  This mechanism is most 
     commonly used for controller redundancy and load sharing.  
     Definition of the mechanism by which controllers use to co-
     ordinate their control is not within GSMP's scope. 

 

3.3 Service support 

     All GSMP switches must support the default QoS Configuration. A 
     GSMP switch may additionally support one or more alternative QoS 
     Configurations. GSMP includes a negotiation mechanism that allows 
     a controller to select from the QoS configurations that a switch 
     supports. 

     The default QoS Configuration includes three models:  

        The Service Model is based on service definitions found 
           external to GSMP such as in CR-LDP, Integrated Services or 
           ATM Service Categories. Each connection is assigned a 
           specific service that defines the handling of the 
           connection by the switch. Additionally, traffic parameters 


Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 5] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

            and traffic controls may be assigned to the connection 
            depending on the assigned service. 

       In the Simple Abstract Model a connection is assigned a 
            priority when it is established. It may be assumed that for 
            connections that share the same output port, an cell or 
            frame on a connection with a higher priority is much more 
            likely to exit the switch before a cell or frame on a 
            connection with a lower priority if they are both in the 
            switch at the same time.  

       The QoS Profile Model provides a simple mechanism that allows 
            QoS semantics defined externally to GSMP to be assigned to 
            connections.  Each profile is an opaque indicator that has 
            been predefined in the controller and in the switch. 

           

      

 

 

 























Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 6] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 

4. Summary of Message Set 

  The following table gives a summary of the messages defined in 
  this version of the specification. It also makes a recommendation 
  of the minimal set of messages that should be supported in an MPLS 
  environment.  These messages will be labelled as "Required", 
  though the service provided by the other messages are essential 
  for the operation of carrier quality controller/ switch 
  operations.  GSMPv1.1 or GSMPv2 commands that are no longer 
  support are marked as "Obsolete" and should no longer be used. 

4.1 Messages Table 

  Message Name                      Message Number  Status 

  Connection Management Messages 
       Add Branch .......................16          Required 
           ATM Specific - VPC............26 
       Delete Tree.......................18 
       Verify Tree.......................19          Obsoleted 
       Delete All Input..................20 
       Delete All Output.................21 
       Delete Branches...................17          Required 
       Move Output Branch............... 22 
           ATM Specific - VPC............27 
       Move Input Branch.................23 
           ATM Specific  - VPC............28 

  Port Management Messages 
       Port Management...................32          Required 
       Label Range.......................33 

  State and Statistics Messages 
       Connection Activity...............48 
       Port Statistics...................49          Required 
       Connection Statistics.............50 
       QoS Class Statistics..............51          Reserved 
       Report Connection State...........52 

  Configuration Messages 
       Switch Configuration..............64          Required 
       Port Configuration................65          Required 
       All Ports Configuration...........66          Required 
       Service Configuration.............67 







Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 7] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 


     Reservation Messages 
       Reservation Request.............. 70          Required 
       Delete Reservation................71          Required 
       Delete All Reservations...........72 

     Event Messages 
       Port Up...........................80 
       Port Down.........................81 
       Invalid Label.....................82 
       New Port..........................83 
       Dead Port.........................84 
 

     Abstract and Resource Model Extension Messages 
         Reserved.Message Range.............200-249 
 

     Adjacency Protocol....................10         Required 

      
5. Security Considerations 

     The security of GSMP's TCP/IP control channel has been addressed 
     in [4]. Any potential remaining security considerations are not 
     addressed in the current revision of this draft. 






















Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 8] 



Internet Draft          GSMP Applicability            July 2000 



References 

       [1]  [GSMP-MIB] Sjostrand, H., "Definitions of Managed Objects 
                          for the General Switch Management Protocol 
                          (GSMP),"Internet-Draft draft-ietf-gsmp-mib-
                          02", July 2000. work in progress 

       [2]  [GSMPv1.1] Newman, P, Edwards, W., Hinden, R., Hoffman, E. 
                          Ching Liaw, F., Lyon, T. and Minshall, G., 
                          "Ipsilon's General Switch Management Protocol 
                          Specification," Version 1.1, RFC 1987, August 
                          1996. 

       [3]  [GSMPv2]   Newman, P, Edwards, W., Hinden, R., Hoffman, 
                          E., Ching Liaw, F., Lyon, T. and Minshall, G., 
                          "Ipsilon's General Switch Management Protocol 
                          Specification," Version 2.0, RFC 2397, March 
                          1998. 

       [4]  [GSMP-ENCAPS] T. Worster, "GSMP Packet Encapsulations for 
                          ATM, Ethernet and TCP," Internet-Draft draft-
                          ietf-gsmp-encaps-02, July 2000. work in 
                          progress 

       [5]  [GSMP]     Doria, A, Sundell, K, Hellstrand, F, Worster, 
                          T, "General switch Management Protocol V3," 
                          Internet Draft draft-ietf-gsmp-06.txt, July 
                          2000. work in progress 

Authors' Addresses 

     Avri Doria 
     Nortel Networks  
     600 Technology Park Drive 
     Billerica, MA 
     Phone: +1 401 663 5024 
     avri@nortelnetworks.com 

     Kenneth Sundell 
     Nortel Networks AB 
     S:t Eriksgatan 115 A 
     P.O. Box 6701 
     SE-113 85 Stockholm Sweden 
     ksundell@nortelnetworks.com 

 



Doria, Sundell     Expires January 2001                 [Page 9] 



