





Network Working Group                                        S. Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
                                                                 Editor
                                                              July 2005

                            Extracting RFCs

                  <draft-bradner-rfc-extracts-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 7, 2005.

Abstract
   Many people have expressed a desire to extract material from IETF
   RFCs for use in documentation, textbooks, on-line help systems, and
   for similar uses. In addition, some IETF RFCs contain MIBs and other
   types of program code that could be compiled. This document proposes
   an update to RFC RFC3978 to explicitly permit extracting material for
   a wide range of uses.

Copyright Notice
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society. (2005)

1. Introduction
   This Internet Draft proposes an addition to "IETF Rights in



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                     July 2005


   Contributions" [RFC3978] to permit the extraction of material from
   IETF RFCs for a wide range of uses. This proposal assumes that the
   language proposed in draft-bradner-author-contributors-00.txt is also
   adopted.

2. Extractions from RFCs
   This memo proposes that the following paragraph be added to RFC
   RFC3978 as Section 3.3(c):

   c. To the extent that a Contribution or any portion thereof is
      protected by copyright and other rights of authorship, the
      Contributor, and each named co-Contributor, and the organization
      he or she represents or is sponsored by (if any) grant a
      perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
      right and license to extract, copy, publish, display, distribute,
      and incorporate into other works, for any purpose (and not limited
      to use within the IETF Standards Process) any portion of the
      Contribution as long as the extract is not modified (other than
      translated into languages other than English), proper
      acknowledgement is given and as long as the ISOC copyright notice
      is included.  It also being understood that the licenses granted
      under this paragraph (c) shall not be deemed to grant any right
      under any patent, patent application or other similar intellectual
      property right.

3. References

5.1. Normative References

   [RFC 3978] Bradner, S., Ed., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
      RFC 3978, March 2005.

   4. Editor's Address

      Scott Bradner
      Harvard University
      29 Oxford St.
      Cambridge MA, 02138

      Phone: +1 617 495 3864
      EMail: sob@harvard.edu


   5. Full copyright statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is
      subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP
      78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their



Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                RFC Extracts                     July 2005


      rights.

      This document and the information contained herein are provided on
      an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
      THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
      EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
      THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
      ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
      PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   Intellectual Property

      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
      to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
      described in this document or the extent to which any license
      under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
      represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
      such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights
      in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
      of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
      at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  The IETF invites any interested party
      to bring to its attention any copyrights, patents or patent
      applications, or other proprietary rights that may cover
      technology that may be required to implement this standard.
      Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   Acknowledgement

      Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
      Internet Society.














Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

