



Network Working Group                                           L. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: August 18, 2014                                          D. Liu
                                                            China Mobile
                                                                S. Hares
                                                 Hickory Hill Consulting
                                                       February 14, 2014


              Use Cases of I2RS in Mobile Backhaul Network
                    draft-zhang-i2rs-mbb-usecases-01

Abstract

   In a mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms based on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  Thanks to the new
   innovation of Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) programmatic
   interfaces, as defined in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture], an
   alternative way is available to control the configuration and
   diagnose the operational results.  This document discusses the use
   case for I2RS in mobile backhaul network.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2014.




Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Route Policy Enforcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Route Policy Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Service Tunnel Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Service Tunnel Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Protection Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Protection Mechanism Description  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Network Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.1.  Network Monitoring Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.2.  Informative Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   In mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms based on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  The mobile backhaul network
   now needs to serve various radio access modes and applications across
   2G/3G / LTE/5G, build various network architectures based on the



Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   number of network devices or the integration of different Areas or
   Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs), and support various network
   protocols that can be adopted to meet different network requirements.
   These needs make the mobile backhaul network configuration more and
   more arduous.

   Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) Programmatic interfaces, as
   defined in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture], provides an alternative way
   to control the configuration and diagnose the operational results.
   The use cases described in this document cover the critical elements
   of mobile backhaul networks, such as: application configuration,
   route policy enforcement, service tunnel implementation, protection
   mechanisms and network monitoring.  The goal is to increase the
   community's understanding of the mobile backhaul requirements for
   I2RS in a the context of an entire network solution.

2.  Definitions

   I2RS: Interface to the Routing System

   IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol

   BGP: Border Gateway Protocol

   MPLS: Multi-Protocol Label Switching

   LDP: Label Distribution Protocol

   RSVP-TE: Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering

   PWE3: Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge

   VPN: Virtual Private Network

   L2VPN: L2 Virtual Private Network

   L3VPN: L3 Virtual Private Network

   SS-PW: Singe Segment PW

   MS-PW: Multi-Segment PW

   HVPN: Hierarchical VPN

   EPC: Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge

   LTE: Long Term Evolution




Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   FRR: Fast Reroute

   ECMP: Equal Cost Multi-path

3.  Application Configuration

3.1.  Application Configuration

   The mobile backhaul network has evolved into an IP-based network,
   which faces three main challenges in network construction:

   1.  various radio access modes:

          To protect existing investment and end user resource, TDM/ATM-
          based access modes belonging to 2G and 3G will coexist with
          Ethernet-based access mode belonging to 3G, LTE, and 5G for an
          extended time into the future.  The radio architecture
          evolution will bring out new radio interfaces, such as the X2
          interface in LTE which will not work in hub-spoke
          communication mode and needs much more shorter latency.  A
          mobile backhaul network must be built to have the ability to
          adapt to all the mobile access modes, providing PWE3 service
          for TDM /ATM-based access mode and Native IP/Ethernet, PWE3/
          VPLS or L3VPN service for IP-based access mode.

   2.  various radio applications:

          A variety of radio applications (such as OM, signaling, data,
          video, etc. ) which have different quality of services (QoS),
          should be delivered in specific service channels in mobile
          backhaul networks, meaning there will be more than one PW or
          L3VPN instances binding with specific interfaces and service
          tunnels.

   3.  various network architectures:

          The mobile backhaul network maybe consist of hundreds of nodes
          in a small county or thousands of nodes in a populous region.
          It will be an integration of different ASNs rather than a
          single AS, when EPC is deployed in the Core network with LTE.
          The network devices on different points of the network (e.g.
          access\aggregation\core) have different routing and protocol
          processing capabilities, resulting in an integration of
          different IGP routing areas rather than a single large IGP
          routing area.  Within various network architectures, different
          service modes should be provided, such as SS- PW or MS-PW, E2E
          L3VPN or HVPN, Seamless MPLS, and the integration of them.




Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


3.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The challenges in mobile backhaul network construction show the
   flexibility and complexity requirements of network configuration and
   modification, such as:

   o  where the T-LDP should be configured,

   o  where a BGP peer should be established,

   o  where the VPN instance should be deployed, and

   o  where the BGP-based LSP should be set up.

   Faced with flat or reduced budgets, network operators are trying to
   squeeze the most from their network using device-level management
   tools and manual processing.  In contrast to management of entire
   network devices, I2RS' programmatic interface would allow network
   operators to distribute such configurations from a central location
   where global mobile backhaul network solution provisioning
   information could be stored Use of I2RS clients to distribute time-
   critical changes in configuration to I2RS agents associated with each
   node would simplify and automate configuration and monitoring of a
   mobile backhaul network to allow it to readily adapt to changing
   network sizes (and scales) and radio applications.

   I2RS Clients-Agent communication needs to pass information on:

   o  T-LDP configurations and status;

   o  BGP peer configurations, peer topologies and status;

   o  BGP-based LSP topologies and status;

   o  Reset VPN topologies, and per node configurations;

   While a beginning exists in the I2RS RIB Information Model
   [[I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]] which includes in the route
   interfaces with MPLS LSP ro VPN technology, additional features need
   to be added to support mobile backhaul networks.

4.  Route Policy Enforcement

4.1.  Route Policy Description

   The route policy in mobile backhaul networks mainly refers to BGP
   policy when L3VPN is used to serve the radio applications.  The




Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   complexity of today's network architecture and radio interfaces make
   it very difficult to apply a network-wide route policy, for:

   o  avoiding route advertisement across entire network

         When a mobile backhaul network contains more than 500 nodes,
         utilizing a multi-segments service like HVPN is recommended to
         reduce the routing and protocol processing overhead of network
         devices.  BGP policy should be configured with prefix filters
         to advertise only the default or aggregate route to the access
         nodes which have limited capability, while advertising to the
         whole network routes to the core nodes which must have
         capability to store large number of routes.

   o  supporting best route selection for VPN FRR or ECMP

         The mobile backhaul network is recommended to be built with a
         multi-homed network architecture for node failure protection,
         where VPN FRR or ECMP should be configured.  The best route
         selection relies on BGP Policy using Local Preference, MED or
         other path attributes defined in [RFC4760].  When a BGP RR is
         adopted to simplify the BGP peer architecture from full-mesh
         mode, the policy would become more complex, in some cases may
         make be per-peer or per-route worse.

   o  allowing On-demand route advertisement

         The advent of X2 interfaces in LTE, which need specific route
         information between any two access nodes, makes the network
         route advertisement more dynamic and unpredictable.  The BGP
         policy should be adjusted dynamically to meet this route
         advertisement need across the entire network.

4.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   Route policy enforcement in mobile backhaul networks needs to be much
   more dynamic and flexible.  The I2RS interface provides a
   programmatic way to configure (both policy and device) and monitor
   thousands of devices individually whose configuration is based on the
   devices role (such as ASRSs in one AS, ASBRs between ASs and other
   service-touch nodes).  Current methods take hours (or even days) to
   configure route policy across a network.

   In contrast, I2RS clients could contact I2RS agents on nodes to query
   role-based information from the network status.  After collecting the
   status, the I2RS client could develop the BGP policies based on role
   information and push the BGP policies to the I2RS agents that would
   load the alternate policies into the network device.  The I2RS Agents



Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   loading the alternate policies could then send status back to the
   I2RS Client.

5.  Service Tunnel Implementation

5.1.  Service Tunnel Description

   In mobile backhaul network, more than one kind of Service Tunnel can
   be used according to network ability or other consideration in
   different scenarios.  The Tunnel deployment use case in mobile
   backhaul includes:

   o  MPLS LDP LSP

         MPLS LDP LSP is set up through LDP protocol.  Both Label
         Advertisement Mode of Downstream Unsolicited (DU) and
         Downstream on Demand (DOD) defined in [RFC3036] can be used
         individually or integrated across access networks and aggregate
         /core networks.  If needed, the longest length match defined in
         [RFC5283] for LDP LSP should be supported.  MPLS LDP LSP has
         excellent scalability with flexible policy to control the label
         advertisement of route, especially in DU mode, to decrease
         needless LSPs to reduce the LSP capability requirement of
         network devices.

   o  MPLS-TE LSP

         MPLS-TE LSP is set up through RSVP-TE protocol, which has
         multiple path control attributes (such as explicit-path, path
         affinity property , path bandwidth assurance , path hop
         limitation, e.g.) and multiple protection modes (such as hot-
         standby, Fast Re-Route, protection group, e.g.).  MPLS-TE LSP
         should be designed using the attributes and protection modes
         according to the requirements of the service delivery as
         integrated across access network and aggregate/cores network.

   o  MPLS-TP LSP

         MPLS-TP includes unidirectional LSP, bidirectional co-routed
         LSP, and bidirectional associated LSP, which can be calculated
         and set up manually or using dynamic network protocols such as
         GMPLS.  In mobile backhaul networks, the LSP selection depends
         on the service need, and the creation of MPLS-TP LSP is always
         assumed to be decoupled with the protocol control plane running
         on separate network devices.  Ideally, the static MPLS-TP LSP
         should be designed and configured on the centralized control
         plane.




Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


5.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The mobile backhaul network is divided into an access network and an
   aggregation/core network where service tunnel implementation is not
   constant and unique.  Therefore, it may be necessary to deploy
   different kind of LSPs separately (such as LDP LSP or MPLS-TE LSP in
   both access network and aggregate/core networks) or simultaneously
   (such as MPLS-TP static LSP in access network while LDP LSP or MPLS-
   TE LSP in aggregate/core network).  Network operators need to know
   the ability of all of the network devices and the service
   requirements to make the most appropriate tunnel implementation.

   I2RS clients can provide centralized control of many network devices
   via the I2RS Client-Agent communication.  The I2RS programmatic
   interface can automate the collection and analysis of each device's
   capability so that the centralized I2RS client could calculate the
   optimal LSP path and distribute the configuration to individual
   devices.  While the I2RS RIB Information Model
   [[I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]] provides for routes with tunnels or
   MPLS LSP, the features defined in this model are not sufficient to
   configure both types of LSPs needed for the VPN technology in mobile
   backhaul networks.  Additional I2RS Informational models need to be
   created to support these features.

6.  Protection Mechanism

6.1.  Protection Mechanism Description

   The SLA for radio services is strict, which requires interworking
   among multiple protection mechanisms.  Two critical aspects should be
   taken into account for inter-working, hierarchical protection
   architectures and multiple OAM protocol interactions.

   1.  tunnel protection:

          The protection mechanisms of different the tunnel protocols,
          mentioned above, are different from each other.  To enhance
          the reliability, LDP LSP should configure LDP FRR, which is
          calculated depending on the protect route algorithm, and be
          Loop-Free Algorithm (LFA), Remote-LFA, or Maximally Redundant
          Trees (MRT) used together with LDP MT as described in
          [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology].  MPLS-TE LSP should apply
          TE Fast Reroute or TE hot-standby.  When MPLS-TP LSP is used,
          the LSP protection group should be configured with 1:1 or 1+1
          mode for MPLS-TP line protection, as well as wrapping or
          steering modes fault processing for MPLS-TP ring protection.

   2.  service protection:



Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


          Service protection is recommended to be configured for node
          failure handover in mobile backhaul network, where PW
          redundancy defined in [RFC6718] or BGP VPN FRR or ECMP
          realization should be deployed exactly.

6.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The hierarchical protection architecture in mobile backhaul network
   offer high network reliability and more flexibility to meet the
   various needs of the tunnels and services.  The I2RS interface in
   this use case is needed to automate the configuration and monitoring
   so that tunnel protection and service protection interwork in a
   flexible and reliable manner.

7.  Network Monitoring

7.1.  Network Monitoring Description

   The mobile backhaul network operators are asked to give an accurate
   cause when a link or node failure occurs, and get the real reason for
   service quality reduction.  They need to apply different network
   monitor tools for different service mode, like Network Quality
   Analysis (NQA), MPLS-TP OAM, and IP Flow Performance Monitor (IPFPM).
   Determining the exact traffic path is really significant when using
   IPFPM for point-to-point detection.

   Multiple monitor tools require network operators to distinguish
   granular traffic flow to apply the appropriate one.  At the same
   time, getting the traffic path with traditional device-level
   management tools is difficult, which may enhancing the existing
   protocols or designing a new specific protocol to do the job.  Both
   will increase the burden of mobile backhaul network.

7.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The I2RS architecture (client-agent) should solve the two problems
   mentioned above naturally by enabling the use of centralized
   controllers, which control and manage the entire network's devices
   and store the whole routing and service information directly.
   Meanwhile, the outages and traffic congestion or discards can be
   detected real-time with I2RS Client(s) connected to the I2RS agents
   in each node which provide real-time status via notification service.
   An I2RS client with this ability will allow the I2RS clients to keep
   optimal state dynamically all the time.







Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


8.  Security Considerations

   The mobile backhaul network use cases described in this document
   assumes use of I2RS's programmatic interfaces described in the I2RS
   framework mentioned in[I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].  This document
   does not change the underlying security issues inherent in the
   existing [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative Reference

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture]
              Atlas, A., Halpern, J., Hares, S., Ward, D., and T.
              Nadeau, "An Architecture for the Interface to the Routing
              System", draft-ietf-i2rs-architecture-01 (work in
              progress), February 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-problem-statement]
              Atlas, A., Nadeau, T., and D. Ward, "Interface to the
              Routing System Problem Statement", draft-ietf-i2rs-
              problem-statement-00 (work in progress), August 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]
              Bahadur, N., Folkes, R., Kini, S., and J. Medved, "Routing
              Information Base Info Model", draft-ietf-i2rs-rib-info-
              model-01 (work in progress), October 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology]
              Zhao, Q., Fang, L., Zhou, C., Li, L., and K. Raza, "LDP
              Extensions for Multi Topology Routing", draft-ietf-mpls-
              ldp-multi-topology-09 (work in progress), October 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls]
              Leymann, N., Decraene, B., Filsfils, C., Konstantynowicz,
              M., and D. Steinberg, "Seamless MPLS Architecture", draft-
              ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls-05 (work in progress), January
              2014.

   [I-D.li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb]
              Li, Z., Li, L., Morillo, M., and T. Yang, "Seamless MPLS
              for Mobile Backhaul", draft-li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb-00
              (work in progress), July 2013.



Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   [RFC3036]  Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., Fredette, A., and
              B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January
              2007.

   [RFC5283]  Decraene, B., Le Roux, JL., and I. Minei, "LDP Extension
              for Inter-Area Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5283,
              July 2008.

   [RFC6718]  Muley, P., Aissaoui, M., and M. Bocci, "Pseudowire
              Redundancy", RFC 6718, August 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Li Zhang
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: monica.zhangli@huawei.com


   Zhenbin Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: lizhenbin@huawei.com


   Dapeng Liu
   China Mobile
   Unit2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: liudapeng@chinamobile.com










Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB           February 2014


   Susan Hares
   Hickory Hill Consulting
   7453 Hickory Hill
   Saline, MI  48176
   USA

   Email: shares@ndzh.com












































Zhang, et al.            Expires August 18, 2014               [Page 12]
