


Network Working Group                                       V. Narayanan
Internet-Draft                                                L. Dondeti
Intended status: Standards Track                          QUALCOMM, Inc.
Expires: January 10, 2008                                        C. Vogt
                                                                Ericsson
                                                               T. Clancy
                                                                     LTS
                                                            July 9, 2007


                IP Mobility Protocols - Threat Analysis
                   draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Despite the variety of ways to realize mobility support in IP, there
   is a common set of threats that each IP mobility protocol must
   address.  Awareness of these threats is paramount for protocol
   engineers so that they can build appropriate security mechanisms into



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   their protocols.  This document defines a threat model that can serve
   as a guidance for protocol engineers.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  IP Mobility Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Asset Classifications for IP Mobility Protocols  . . . . . . .  6
   5.  The Internet Threat Model - A Recap  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Classes of Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Extensions to the Internet Threat Model for Routing  . . . . .  8
   7.  IP Mobility Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Threat and Vulnerability Analysis of IP Mobility Protocols . . 10
     8.1.  Threats to IP Mobility Providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       8.1.1.  Threats to Mobility Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       8.1.2.  Threats to Mobility Facilitators . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2.  Threats to IP Mobility Recipients  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     8.3.  Threats to non IP Mobility Participants  . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17























Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


1.  Introduction

   The Internet was orignally designed as a network of stationary nodes,
   whose IP addresses remain stable within the lifetime of a typical
   communication session.  Based on the stability assumption, IP
   addresses are reused for node identification in protocols at layers
   above IP.  The unfortunate consequence of this is that a mobile node
   is unable to continue previous communication sessions when obtaining
   a new IP address after a change in IP connectivity.

   As Internet users are becoming increasingly mobile, different packet
   redirection techniques have been proposed to support mobility at the
   IP layer.  Those range from mobile-node-specific routing state in the
   network to tunneling and IP address rewriting inside nodes.  Common
   to all of the mechanisms is that they mask changes in a mobile node's
   IP address from protocols at layers above IP.  This invalidates
   classic assumptions that upper-layer protocols have on IP and thereby
   introduces new security threats.

   One potential attack objective that a mobility protocol without
   appropriate security may facilitate is eavesdropping on or
   manipulation of a pair of victim nodes' communications, from an
   arbitrary position in the Internet.  Another attack objective is to
   void business opportunities of a victim node or victim network, such
   as by hindering the pursuit of legitimate communications.  And
   mobility support as such may be attractive enough for an attacker to
   seek unauthorized access to it and use it at the cost of a victim
   node.  An attacker may finally want to operate illegally under the
   disguise of a false or non-existing identity, which the ability to
   redirect packets may facilitate.

   The new threats must be tackled by a solid security design in
   mobility-related protocols.  A model that has so far played an
   important role in protocol security design is the Internet threat
   model [1].  This primarily targets an Internet of stationary nodes,
   however, and thus does not fully capture the new requirements of a
   mobile Internet.  In this document, we perform an applicability
   analysis of the Internet threat model to IP mobility.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2].

   In addition, this document uses the following terms for sake of
   generality:



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   IP Mobility

      IP mobility refers to changes in the IP point of attachment of a
      node.  As a consequence of this change, a node may obtain a
      different (topologically meaningful) address.  The result is that
      a mobile node or network, as it moves, may obtain different
      topologically meaningful IP addresses that it can use for IP-based
      communications.  Some protocols allow the nodes to maintain the
      same IP address as they move across different IP points of
      attachment.

   IP Mobility Protocol

      An IP mobility protocol provides transparency to layers above IP
      from the changes in the IP addresses resulting from IP mobility.
      In particular, such protocols allow nodes to continue IP
      communications independent of the current IP point of attachment
      and to preserve established communications across any
      corresponding IP address changes.  A key element of an IP mobility
      protocol is to detect movement and do what is needed to allow
      communication continuity.

   Mobility Agent

      A mobility agent is an entity maintaining state about the location
      of the mobile nodes.  Examples of mobility agents include the
      Mobile IP Home Agent (HA), the HMIP MAP, the FMIP PAR, NetLMM LMA,
      MIP6 RO-enabled CN, etc.

   Mobility Facilitator

      This refers to an entity other than a mobility agent that may play
      a role in facilitating the mobility management of the MN.
      Examples of such mobility facilitators include the NetLMM MAG,
      MIP4 FA, HMIP AR, etc.

   Mobility Provider

      Mobility provider collectively refers to the mobility agent and
      facilitators.

   Mobility Recipient

      The mobility recipient is the entity receiving the IP mobility
      service.  The MN is always the mobility recipient and hence these
      terms may be used interchangeably.





Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   Anchor Address

      This is used to refer to the relatively unchanging IP address of
      the MN.  Examples of anchor addresses are the MIP HoA, HMIP RCoA,
      FMIP PCoA, NetLMM RHoA, etc.  This is usually the address
      corresponding to which state is maintained in the mobility agent.
      The permanence and scope of the address may vary depending on the
      protocol.

   Transient Address

      This is used to refer to the relatively frequently changing IP
      address of the MN.  Examples of transient addresses are the MIP
      CoA, HMIP RCoA, FMIP NCoA, NetLMM PLCoA, etc.  This is usually the
      address that points to the present location of the MN.


3.  IP Mobility Model


                        ----------------
                       | Mobility Agent |
                        ----------------
                               |
                               |
                  -----------------------------
                 |                             |
                 |                             |
                 |         IP Cloud            |
                 |                             |
                 |                             |
                  -----------------------------
                    |                      |
                    |                      |
      -----------------------       -----------------------
     | Mobility Facilitator 1| ... | Mobility Facilitator n|
      -----------------------       -----------------------
                   |
                   |
                ------
               |  MN  |
                ------


               Figure 1: IP Mobility Architectural Entities

   There are several classes of IP mobility protocols.  In general, IP
   mobility protocols hide changes in IP address from the layers above



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   IP.  Different classes of IP mobility protocols achieve this in
   different ways.  One set of protocols use a centralized mobility
   management entity that maintains a mapping of the anchor and
   transient addresses and tunnel data to and from the mobile node.  The
   threat analysis in this document applies to this class of protocols.
   Examples of this class of protocols at the time of this writing
   include Mobile IP, Hierarchical Mobile IP, Fast Mobile IP, Proxy
   Mobile IP, MOBIKE and other NetLMM-class of protocols.  Other classes
   of IP mobility protocols such as HIP are out of scope of this
   analysis.

   In the class of protocols under consideration, there is a mobility
   provider that enables and provides the mobility service and a
   mobility recipient that is the end user of the mobility service.  A
   mobility provider typically consists of some mobility facilitators
   that enable the service and mobility agent that maintains the state
   necessary for mobility management.  The mobility recipient is always
   the mobile node.  See Figure 1 for an example architecture.

   IP mobility protocols rely on some signaling exchange to establish
   the necessary state at the mobility agent.  In host-based mobility
   protocols such as Mobile IP, this signaling is performed by the
   mobile node itself.  In network-based mobility protocols such as
   NetLMM, this signaling is performed by an entity in the network on
   behalf of the mobile node.  In either case, the mobility agent is one
   of the entities engaged in the signaling.

   In a system providing IP mobility services, there are several parties
   of interest for security analysis purposes.  Such parties include:

   o  Parties involved in the mobility service, such as the mobility
      provider and recipient.  Within this category, the mobile node and
      the mobility agent must function correctly in order for the
      mobility service to be available.

   o  Parties not involved in the mobility service as such, but, those
      that may be impacted by the presence of mobility services in the
      network.  Such entities include any node that may be receiving any
      kind of IP connectivity or services from networks reachable from
      those providing IP mobility services.


4.  Asset Classifications for IP Mobility Protocols

   For any type of security analysis, it is important to identify the
   assets to determine what must be protected.  Section 3 presents the
   parties of interest within the scope of IP mobility protocols for the
   purpose of a security analysis.  Those parties of interest, along



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   with some other resources, constitute the "assets" for the purpose of
   threat and vulnerability analysis.  This section provides a
   classification of such assets.

   Assets may be classified into the following three categories.

   Critical Assets

      A critical asset is one whose failure or compromise leads to
      failed mobility sessions.  Examples of critical assets include
      mobile node, mobility agent, and security infrastructure entities
      (such as AAA servers or CAs), if any.  A security infrastructure
      entity, when present, may broker the security association between
      the MN and the mobility agent.

   Non-Critical Assets

      A non-critical asset is one whose failure or compromise may cause
      a temporary disruption to mobility sessions.  However, in general,
      the mobility session can continue despite the failure or
      compromise of these assets.  Examples of non-critical assets
      include network infrastructure (such as links) and mobility
      facilitators (such as ARs or even regular routers).

   Other Assets

      These are assets that do not fall under either of the two
      categories above.  Examples of such assets include correspondent
      nodes and other fixed or mobile nodes attaching to the mobility
      domain.  These nodes may or may not use the mobility services,
      but, use the same resources that are part of the network providing
      these services.  In this analysis, we also consider the threats to
      any node that is reachable via the mobility provider network due
      to enabling mobility services in the network.


5.  The Internet Threat Model - A Recap

   Section 3 of [1] describes the Internet threat model.  This section
   provides a brief summary of it as a preface to the application of
   that model to IP mobility.  The Internet threat model is built on two
   important assumptions:

   o  Assumption 1: Critical Assets are not compromised.  More
      specifically, when a critical asset is compromised, the
      correctness of the protocol cannot be guaranteed.  Also, if a
      compromised critical asset shuts down a session, nothing can be
      done about it.  Hence, critical assets for a given protocol must



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


      be protected and we assume they are not compromised for the
      purposes of threat analysis.

   o  Assumption 2: The attacker has full control of the communication
      channel.  The attacker can read, inject, modify or remove any
      packets without detection.  In the absence of any security
      encapsulation of packets, this is generally true; we do not assume
      any security encapsulation in conducting the threat and
      vulnerability analysis.

5.1.  Classes of Attacks

   Attacks can be classified into four broad categories as follows.

   o  Passive Attacks: A passive attacker only reads, but does not
      modify, remove or inject any packets.  Eavesdropping on data is
      possible with a passive attack.  Also, data collected from a
      passive attack may later be used to launch an active attack.
      Passive attackers do not generally need to transmit and thus may
      be able to conduct the attack without being detected.

   o  Active Attacks: Here, the attacker may modify, remove or inject
      packets, thereby actively participating in an attack.  Active
      attackers need to transmit data and thus may be detectable via
      physical observations.

   o  Off-Path Attacks: Here, the attacker is not in the path of the
      data transmission and is capable of launching an attack from
      elsewhere in the network.  An off-path attack is typically an
      active attack.

   o  On-Path Attacks: Here, the attacker is present on the path of the
      data exchanged.  On-path attacks are a superset of off-path
      attacks, since the attacker in this case can do everything that an
      off-path attacker can do as well as do more due to the virtue of
      being on-path.

   The rest of the document analyzes if all of these assumptions and/or
   attacks are valid for the IP mobility protocols.  It also analyzes if
   there are other assumptions and/or attacks that may be applicable to
   this class of protocols.


6.  Extensions to the Internet Threat Model for Routing

   Routing protocols extend the Internet threat model in at least two
   ways, as follows.




Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   o  Routing protocols can typically handle Byzantine failures.
      Byzantine failures constitute entities selectively lying about
      routing or other information, while still appearing to function
      correctly.  Such a failure can be the result of mis-configuration
      or compromise.  In a network using a robust routing protocol, two
      entities can communicate as long as there is at least one non-
      faulty path between them.  Hence, for instance, the compromise of
      a router leading to false routing information should still allow
      convergence to an alternate path, when one such path exists.

   o  Upon receiving a routing update, the recipient must be able to
      verify the authorization of the sender to send the routing update.
      Without such authorization, nodes may be able to advertise the
      wrong prefixes and disrupt the routing service.


7.  IP Mobility Threat Model

   In the rest of this document, we apply the Internet threat model to
   IP mobility.  A closer look at the IP mobility model reveals that the
   threat model is very much analogous to the routing threat model.

   The mobile node may reach the mobility agent via more than one
   network attachment point or mobility facilitator.  When a mobile node
   tries to reach its mobility agent via a compromised access router (or
   some other compromised router along the path), it may fail.  However,
   if it can attach to a different, non-compromised access router that
   has a path to the same mobility agent, it should be able to obtain
   mobility service through that access router.  If the failure of one
   access router disrupts the mobility service via any other access
   router, that is a problem.  This effect is sometimes referred to as
   the domino effect.

   There is another aspect of mobility that is worth mentioning.  Since
   IP mobility state supplants routing state, it has the potential to
   impact entities not involved with the mobility service in any way.
   For instance, the communication between two entities, A and B, may be
   affected due to the malicious use of an IP mobility protocol by a
   different entity, C, with a mobility agent, D. This is a concern for
   all nodes attaching to a network that is reachable from a network
   that provides mobility services, and thus must be prevented.  This
   threat has similarities to the routing update authorization problem
   discussed in Section 6.

   As part of the threat model analysis, it is also important to see
   what classes of attackers can realize a given attack.  Any threat
   that requires state creation or modification can only be achieved by
   an active attacker, since it requires more than just observation of



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   data exchanged.  Typically, on-path attackers are considered to be
   capable of doing more than off-path attackers, but, this needs to be
   analyzed within the context of specific threats.  It generally
   provides an attacker more flexibility when an attack can be launched
   off-path.  Differently put, an off-path attack is more likely to
   happen as it is less of a burden to attacker to launch attacks.
   Section 8 performs an analysis of the various attacks and the types
   of attackers that can launch those attacks.


8.  Threat and Vulnerability Analysis of IP Mobility Protocols

   This section analyzes the threats and vulnerabilities to IP mobility
   participants, as well as non-IP mobility participants due to IP
   mobility protocols.

8.1.  Threats to IP Mobility Providers

   As already mentioned, the Mobility Provider is the entity providing
   the IP mobility service and constitutes the mobility agent (such as
   an HA) and one or more mobility facilitators (such as an AR or FA).
   The mobility provider is generally interested in ensuring that the
   service is only provided to authorized entities.  It is also in the
   interest of the mobility provider to ensure that the service is
   provided as intended.  Providing IP mobility service entails the
   maintenance of state for all mobile nodes served, in order to
   maintain the mapping of the anchor and transient addresses of those
   nodes.  Hence, the mobility provider, to protect its resources, must
   ensure that any state is only created by entities served by the
   provider.

8.1.1.  Threats to Mobility Agents

   Threats to mobility agents fall under two categories:

   o  Creation of state by unauthenticated nodes - this leads to the
      consumption of resources at the mobility agent.  This could
      further lead to the other attacks on mobility recipients described
      in Section 8.2.  Such attacks hinder the correct operation of IP
      mobility in the system.  Such creation of spurious or incorrect
      state may further lead to excessive traffic forwarding to be
      handled by the mobility agent.

   o  Creation of incorrect state by authenticated nodes - as in the
      case above, this also leads to the other attacks on mobility
      recipients described in Section 8.2.  In addition, this may lead
      to loops at the mobility agent by causing packets to shuttle
      infinitely between the routing and mobility stacks of the mobility



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


      agent.

   It should be noted that both categories of threats above involve
   creation of some state at the mobility agent and hence can only be
   from an active attack.  However, these attacks can be launched by an
   off-path attacker, i.e., the attacker that is attempting to create
   state at the mobility agent may not be in the path of any legitimate
   signaling that is going to the mobility agent.

   In summary, an off-path attacker can create illegal state at a
   mobility agent to divert traffic thereby deny service to the entity
   for which the state is created, consume resources at the mobility
   agent.  It is also fairly straightforward for the attacker to repeat
   this attack several fold and cause significant disruption to the
   mobility agent's operation.  The off-path nature of the attack makes
   it highly likely, and the low amount of effort required to launch
   significant damage makes this a high risk event.

8.1.2.  Threats to Mobility Facilitators

   Threats to mobility facilitators also fall into two categories:

   o  Creation of spurious state at the facilitator - Some IP mobility
      protocols (such as MIP4, for example) require some amount of state
      to be maintained at the mobility facilitator (e.g., the Foreign
      Agent).  If an attacker is able to create spurious state at the
      facilitator, it would lead to resource consumption as well as some
      other attacks described in Section 8.2.  Note that it is not
      feasible to cause redirection of packets by creating incorrect
      state at the facilitator, since the facilitator does not directly
      perform the mobility tunneling.  However, DoS attacks may be
      realized from the state created.  For instance, it is feasible to
      cause a facilitator to drop packets meant for a mobile node by
      creating wrong state at it.  Such attacks hinder the correct
      operation of IP mobility in the system.

   o  Use of the facilitator to disrupt mobility - Since a facilitator
      may be advertising information necessary for mobility services, it
      would be feasible to use the facilitator to disrupt the mobility
      services.  For instance, if it is feasible to cause the
      facilitator to advertise wrong information about a mobility agent,
      that would result in inappropriate operation of IP mobility in the
      system.  This would result in the facilitator not being able to
      properly enable the mobility services it intends to.

   Both categories of threats above also require an active attack, since
   these are a result of some misinformation being available at the
   mobility facilitator.  Further, these threats can also be realized by



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   an off-path attacker.

   Facilitators are not really critical to enabling mobility, as long as
   one of them is operational, it is plausible to provide mobility
   service.  In other words, even though the attacker can be off-path,
   the result of attacking a facilitator is at best intermittent service
   disruption; thus, attacks on mobility facilitators may be less
   likely.

8.2.  Threats to IP Mobility Recipients

   The mobile nodes, as recipients of the mobility service, are
   interested in having undisrupted and correct IP mobility service.  In
   other words, the mobile node must be able to obtain the service as
   long as it can reach the mobility agent.  Also, the mobile node must
   not be a victim of attacks from other mobile nodes in the network.

   Threats to mobility recipients can be categorized as follows.

   o  Traffic Redirection: IP mobility protocols create a binding
      between the anchor and transient addresses of mobile nodes, so
      that traffic destined for the former can be tunneled to the latter
      address.  If an attacker can create a binding for the anchor
      address of the MN, the traffic meant for the mobile node ends up
      being redirected to some other node.  This threat to the mobile
      node can be realized as a result of the attacks to mobility agents
      described in Section 8.1.1.  Note that a binding for an anchor
      address can only be created when that address belongs to a prefix
      served by the mobility agent.  Hence, such redirection is limited
      to scope to the prefixes served by the mobility agent.

   o  Distributed Denial of Service: If an attacker can create a binding
      for its address mapped to the mobile node's transient address, the
      mobile node ends up being the recipient of spurious traffic and
      hence a victim to a DDoS attack.  The attacker may create several
      such bindings and can amplify the DDoS attack on the victim.  This
      threat to the mobile node can be realized as a result of the
      attacks to mobility agents described in Section 8.1.1.  It should
      be noted that the impact of this threat is not unlike an attacker
      that might send traffic directly to the transient address of the
      mobile node.  However, the important difference is that by causing
      a DDoS attack due to registering the mobile node's transient
      address at a mobility agent, the attacker can cause a number of
      sources to send data to the mobile node.  In this case, the
      attacker needs to put in less effort than the victim.  The
      attacker may subscribe to several high bandwidth flows and direct
      that traffic to the mobile node.  Unlike the redirection attack,
      the scope of this attack is not limited to the prefixes served by



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


      the mobility agent and can affect any entity that is reachable via
      the mobility provider network.

   o  Denial of Service: The MN's mobility service may be disrupted by
      an attacker.  A redirection attack, for example, may lead to DoS.
      This threat to the mobile node can be realized as a result of the
      attacks to mobility agents described in Section 8.1.1 or as a
      result of attacks to mobility facilitators described in
      Section 8.1.2.  Denial of service can also be achieved by an on-
      path attacker that is capable of dropping or modifying packets
      sent by the mobile node.

   o  Data Reflection: Incorrect state at the mobility agent or mobility
      facilitator may cause responses to a request to be sent to a
      different entity.  The effect of this is similar to the DDoS
      attack described above.  Such incorrect state may also cause
      packets meant for the wrong address to be sent to an entity.  This
      results in a forced redirection, in addition to a DDoS attack on
      the entity receiving the packets.

   All of the above attacks can only be realized by causing
   inappropriate state in the mobility provider.  Hence, these can only
   be caused by active attacks.  However, just like all the other
   threats discussed, these attacks can also be caused by an off-path
   attacker.  None of these require an attacker to capture any data that
   was actually sent from or to the mobile node.  While there are
   additional DoS attacks feasible by an on-path attacker that drops or
   modifies packets, the same effect can be realized by an off-path
   attacker that can create incorrect state at the mobility agent.

8.3.  Threats to non IP Mobility Participants

   As in the case of routing protocols, mobility protocols are also
   capable of introducing threats to entities that are not parties to
   the protocol.  In particular, all the threats that apply to mobile
   nodes also apply to any entity that is reachable through the network
   providing the mobility service.  All the threats discussed in
   Section 8.2 are a result of some inappropriate mobility state in some
   element of the mobility provider.  These are attacks that can affect
   any entity that uses an IP address for communication that is
   reachable via the network of the provider.

   If the mobility agent only serves virtual prefixes for the purposes
   of IP mobility anchor addresses, then a redirection attack would only
   be feasible on mobile nodes and not on any fixed nodes or routers.
   While this may be feasible in some networks and protocols, it is not
   always feasible.  For instance, for scenarios served by FMIP, the
   prefixes served by an access router are typically physically



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   available prefixes that can be reached via a last hop wired or
   wireless access device.

   In summary, mobility protocols facilitate DDoS attacks on any entity
   in the Internet; the potential attacker can be off-path and can
   launch the attack with a minimal cost.


9.  Security Considerations

   This entire document deals with the threat analysis of IP mobility
   protocols.  There are several security requirements to consider in
   order to address the threats documented here.  Those requirements are
   presented in a separate draft.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.


11.  Acknowledgments


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on
         Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552, July 2003.

   [2]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

12.2.  Informative References

   [3]   Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
         August 2002.

   [4]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [5]   Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068,
         July 2005.

   [6]   Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El Malki, K., and L. Bellier,
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)",
         RFC 4140, August 2005.



Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   [7]   Eronen, P., "IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol (MOBIKE)",
         RFC 4555, June 2006.

   [8]   Koodli, R. and C. Perkins, "Mobile IPv4 Fast Handovers",
         draft-ietf-mip4-fmipv4-07 (work in progress), May 2007.

   [9]   Gundavelli, S., "Proxy Mobile IPv6",
         draft-sgundave-mip6-proxymip6-02 (work in progress),
         March 2007.

   [10]  Fogelstroem, E., "Mobile IPv4 Regional Registration",
         draft-ietf-mip4-reg-tunnel-04 (work in progress), October 2006.

   [11]  Bedekar, A., "A Protocol for Network-based Localized Mobility
         Management", draft-singh-netlmm-protocol-02 (work in progress),
         March 2007.

   [12]  Giaretta, G., "The NetLMM Protocol",
         draft-giaretta-netlmm-dt-protocol-02 (work in progress),
         October 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Vidya Narayanan
   QUALCOMM, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-2483
   Email: vidyan@qualcomm.com


   Lakshminath Dondeti
   QUALCOMM, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-1267
   Email: ldondeti@qualcomm.com









Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


   Christian Vogt
   Ericsson Research, NomadicLab
   Hirsalantie 11
   02420 Jorvas
   Finland

   Email: christian.vogt@ericsson.com


   T. Charles Clancy
   DoD Laboratory for Telecommunications Sciences
   8080 Greenmead Drive
   College Park, MD  20740
   USA

   Email: clancy@LTSnet.net



































Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       draft-vidya-ip-mobility-threats           July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Narayanan, et al.       Expires January 10, 2008               [Page 17]

