                                                           JinHyeock Choi 
Internet Draft                                                Samsung AIT 
Expires: August 2004                                           Greg Daley 
                                                   Monash University CTIE 
                                                            February 2004 
                   
                   
                 Detecting Network Attachment in IPv6 Goals 
                       draft-jinchoi-dna-goals-00.txt 
                   
                   
Status of this Memo 
      
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [RFC 2026].  
                   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
                   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                   
   Definitions of requirements keywords are in accordance with the IETF 
   Best Current Practice - [RFC 2119] 
                   
                   
Abstract 
                   
   Upon establishing a new link-layer connection, a host may or may not 
   have valid IP configuration for Internet Connectivity. A host may 
   determine whether its IP configuration is valid by checking Network 
   Layer link change. With the information gathered, a host may decide 
   if their own configuration needs to be updated and initiate a new 
   configuration in case of link change. This procedure is described as 
   Detecting Network Attachment. 
                
   Rapid attachment detection is required for devices, which connect to 
   or disconnect from IP networks while they have existing upper-layer 
   protocol sessions. Current schemes for detecting link change are 
   inadequate to support real-time applications. The existing procedures 
   for transmission routing and prefix configuration information lead to 
                
                
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
                
                
   ambiguous link determination and reception delays. For efficient 
   detection of network attachment, a way to correctly represent link 
   change, complete and consistent routing information advertisement and 
   rapid advertisement delivery to hosts will be necessary. 
                   
                   
Table of Contents 
                   
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. The Tasks of Network Attachment Detection......................3 
   3. Application of Network Attachment Detection....................4 
   4. Network Attachment Detection in Existing IPv6 Systems..........5 
   5. Problems for Network Attachment Detection......................7 
      5.1 Wireless link properties...................................7 
      5.2 The Inadequacy of RA information...........................7 
      5.3 Time delay.................................................8 
   6. The Goals of Network Attachment Detection.....................10 
      6.1 Potential Solution space..................................10 
      6.2 Goals list................................................11 
   7. IANA Consideration............................................12 
   8. Security Consideration........................................12 
   References.......................................................13 
   Acknowledgments..................................................13 
   Author's Addresses...............................................14 
                   
                   
1. Introduction 
                   
   Link change may occur when a new link-layer connection is established. 
   At this stage, a node should be able to send and receive some IP 
   packets within a link, particularly those used for configuration 
   purposes. Subsequently Internet Connectivity occurs when a node is 
   able to send packets to arbitrary Internet destinations. 
                   
   Though link-layer connection is made, a node may or may not have 
   valid IP configuration for Internet Connectivity. Hence, the node has 
   to check the validity of its IP configuration.  
                
   For this, the node may check 'L3 link change'. When the node remains 
   at the same link, it can assume its IP configuration is still valid. 
   Otherwise, its configuration is no longer valid and the node needs to 
   gather the necessary information to allow Internet usage from this 
   new IP subnet. 
                   
   The process by which a device determines that it has joined a new 
   link, and checks its IP configuration is called Detecting Network 
   Attachment (DNA). DNA checks the validity of current IP configuration
               
                
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
                
                
   by gathering information and, if necessary, initiate configuration 
   based on gathered information. 
                
   It is important to note that DNA does not incorporate actual IP 
   configuration. For example, with respect to DHCP, it's the detection 
   system's task to get the confirmation that a node needs to perform 
   DHCP. It's not DNA's job to actually retrieve the information from a 
   DHCP server. 
                
   Rapid attachment detection is required when a host has existing upper 
   layer protocols sessions. This may be the case if a host is 
   connected intermittently, is a mobile host or has urgent data to 
   transmit upon attachment to a link. 
                   
                   
2. The Tasks of Network Attachment Detection 
                   
   Detecting Network Attachment aims to determine whether a host's 
   existing IP configuration is valid by checking L3 link change, upon 
   establishing a new link-layer connection. Valid IP configuration 
   consists of several components, which impact on packet delivery to 
   and from the Internet. While checking link change, a host may be able 
   to get the necessary information for new IP configuration 
   simultaneously. 
                
   Initially, when a host has just made a link-layer connection, it may 
   or may not belong to a new subnet. A host is unaware which of its 
   addresses are topologically correct for this network, and whether 
   duplicates of these addresses are already in use on this link or 
   subnet. 
                   
   Additionally, a host doesn't know whether its currently configured 
   default router is on this link, or whether its neighbor cache entries 
   for the router and peers on the link are valid. 
                
   Correct configuration of each of these components is necessary in 
   order to send packets off the current link. 
                   
   While other information required for IP connections (such as DNS 
   server configuration) are important, most of these requirements 
   depend on the determination of correct global addressing, and valid 
   default router configuration. 
                
   Therefore, in order to determine if a host requires further 
   configuration, it needs to check at least that: 
                   
   1) It has an (at least partially) a reachable default router. 
                
                
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
                
                
   2) It has valid IP addressing. 
                
   Partial reachability indicates that the router is at least visible to 
   the host, although full bi-directional reachability is required for 
   packet transfer. 
                   
   A host can check link change to determine the validity of it IP 
   configuration. Today, L3 link change implies IP subnet change. If a 
   host has moved to a new subnet, its IP configuration is no longer 
   valid. Otherwise, a host still has valid IP configuration. 
                
   Usually a host detects subnet change with Router Advertisement 
   messages. After Network Attachment, a host receives a new Router 
   Advertisement and compares it with the previously received ones. It 
   checks whether the information in a new RA, the advertised prefixes 
   and router addresses, matches the currently stored information, 
   current IP address and default router address. 
                   
   The validity of other IP subnet related configuration is implied by 
   Router Advertisements, if RA reception implies subnet change. 
   Particularly, Dynamic Host Configuration protocols [DHCPv6] are 
   explicitly indicated in RA messages, and multicast group membership 
   is needed if the host is no linger in reach of a querier 
   router[MLDv1][MLDv2]. 

   For rapid attachment detection, it is necessary to receive an RA 
   quickly enough after a new link-layer connection is established, 
   although by default this is not sufficient for link change detection 
   (see Chapter 5). 
                   
   From a received RA, a host can get the necessary information for new 
   IP configuration, the prefixes and router addresses. With the 
   information, a host can immediately initiate new IP configuration, 
   forming a new IP address and selecting a new default router, if it 
   turns out that it has moved to a new link. 
                   
                   
3. Application of Network Attachment Detection 
                   
   For efficiency, before initiating a new IP configuration, a host 
   should check whether its current IP configuration is still valid. 
                
   In case a host has moved to a new IP subnet, its IP configuration is 
   no longer valid.  Hence a modification to IP configuration will be 
   necessary and a host has to gather necessary information for new 
   configuration. 
                   
   Automatic configuration mechanisms in IPv6 allow the host to: 
                
                
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
                
                
   1) Choose a suitable default router 
   2) Configure per-link information such as address reachability times, 
      maximum transfer units &etc. 
   3) Configure link-local and global unicast addresses.  
   4) Join multicast groups 
   5) Determine authentication state for off-link communications. 
                   
   While Detecting Network Attachment does not prescribe any particular 
   mechanisms for configuration, it aims to support each requirement by 
   determining if this configuration is required and providing necessary 
   information, for example on-link prefixes. 
                
   This may help to minimize signaling to those occasions where IP 
   subnet or link change has occurred. Also, DNA may provide timely 
   indications which may be used by IP subsystems to initiate 
   configuration signaling. 
                   
                   
4. Network Attachment Detection in Existing IPv6 Systems 
                   
   IPv6 has a rich set of features provided by Neighbor Discovery, which 
   are supported in all hosts and most networks [RFC-2461]. In order to 
   maintain mappings between IP layer and hardware (link-layer) 
   addresses, IPv6 Neighbor Discovery maintains a cache of reachable 
   devices. 
                
   When a node changes its point of attachment, it may or may not have 
   moved to a location where these devices are no longer reachable. To 
   check its IP layer connectivity and gather the necessary information, 
   a node may use any of the following features: 
                   
   1) Neighbor Solicitation/Neighbor Advertisement (NS/NA) exchange 
   2) Router Solicitation/Router Advertisement (RS/RA) exchange 
   3) Link-layer (L2) Information 
                   
   If a host can exchange neighbor information with any one of the nodes 
   in its neighbor cache, for the interface which changed attachment, 
   this is an indication that this host is reachable. A definition of 
   this procedure in [RFC 2461] is called Neighbor Unreachability 
   Detection (NUD). It prescribes transmission behaviors for hosts 
   determining unreachability. 
                   
   Additionally, in many IPv6 networks, routers advertise their 
   availability through Router Advertisement messages. While a host may 
   not receive an unsolicited router advertisement message when Network 
   Attachment occurs, it can check reachability to routers by performing 
   router discovery [RFC-2461]. Router discovery which fails to update
                
                
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
                
                
   the currently configured router's information indicates that the 
   router is unreachable, and should not be used. 
                   
   In some environments, link-layer topology information is signaled to 
   wireless hosts.  For some subsets of these technologies, link-layer 
   information regarding IP connectivity may be considered as a strong 
   hint that change of Link-layer attachment implies change of IP subnet. 
                   
   While this is sometimes the case, not all IP stacks will be aware of 
   this signaling at the network-layer, nor will indications from link-
   layers necessarily always be accurate. Because of this, attachment 
   change detection at the network layer may be required in any case. 
                
   If information from the link layer is available, but it is not 
   considered authoritative, the information may still be used as a 
   'Link-layer hint'.  Link-layer hints are indications from lower 
   layers that IP connectivity may have changed.  With suitable 
   hysteresis, these hints may be used to initiate IP based reachability 
   checks. 
                   
   Currently there is no way to represent a link such that subnet change 
   can be detected instantly. No information in the above messages can 
   identify a link. Neither Router address nor Prefix nor Link-layer 
   information will do.  
                
   Though the set of all the assigned prefixes can represent a link, 
   it's difficult for a host to attain and retain all the prefixes with 
   certainty. Moreover there may be a link without a prefix. 
    
   Hence, to detect link change, a host has to resort to guessing 
   based on the router address and advertised prefixes in the router 
   advertisements and Neighbor Unreachability Detection.  
 
   Upon Network Attachment, a host has to check at least the (partial) 
   reachability of the current default router and the validity of 
   current IP address. 
    
   A host probes the current default router with Neighbor Solicitation. 
   If it receives a no reply, it means its current default router is no 
   longer reachable. If a host receives a message from a router where it 
   has previously been able to exchange packets, then existing neighbor 
   discovery (ND) procedures may be used to ensure full bi-directional 
   reachability. 
 
   The Internet routing system is expected to deliver packets sent to a 
   valid address to their intended recipients. Because packet is 
   forwarded with prefix based routing, a host should have an IP address 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   whose prefix is advertised on the link to which it is currently 
   attached. To determine if its IP address is valid, a host has to 
   check whether the prefix of its IP address is in the Prefix 
   Information Option of received Router Advertisements[RFC-2461]. 
    
   Address validity though may only be assured if Duplicate Address 
   Detection (DAD) is undertaken for them [RFC-2462]. This is the case, 
   even if a host has only momentarily been disconnected from a network. 
   It is possible that in the short interval where the host has been 
   disconnected, another node has performed DAD, and configured an 
   address. Thus undertaking DAD may be required even if host has an IP 
   address whose prefix is supported on the current link. 
    
    
5. Problems for Network Attachment Detection 
    
   The following make DNA complicated. Firstly, wireless connectivity is 
   not as clear-cut as in the wired case. Secondly, the information 
   contained in RA messages is not adequate for efficient DNA.  Today, 
   RA messages can't represent a link and have inherent ambiguities. 
   Thirdly, Router Discovery or NUD may take too much time and result in 
   service disruption. 
    
    
5.1 Wireless link properties  
    
   1) Unclear boundary 
    
   Unlike wired environments, what constitutes wireless link is variable 
   in both time and space.  It doesn't have clear boundaries. This may 
   be illustrated by the fact that a host may be able to attach to 
   multiple wireless links at the same time.  Moreover reachability on a 
   wireless link is very volatile which can make link detection hard. 
    
    
   2) Asymmetric reachability 
    
   In some wireless environments, it may be possible to receive 
   periodically multicasted advertisement information without being able 
   to send or receive IP packets to the network.  In these cases, it is 
   insufficient to rely upon reception of unsolicited advertisement 
   information as confirmation of router reachability. 
    
    
5.2 The Inadequacy of RA information  
    
   Usually a node gets the information necessary for IP configuration 
   from Router Advertisement messages.  Based on current definition 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   [RFC2461], the information contained in RA is inadequate for 
   efficient DNA. 
    
   1) Link local scope of Router Address  
    
   The router address contained in a Router Advertisement message is 
   link-local scope.  Hence its uniqueness can't be guaranteed out side 
   of a link. 
 
   So if it happens that two different router interfaces have the same 
   link-local address, a host can't detect that it has moved from one 
   interface to another by checking the router address in Router 
   Advertisement messages. 
    
   On the other hand, a host can't be sure that its current default 
   router is reachable, even if it can communicate with the router which 
   has the same address as its current router address. That router may 
   be a different one, which, though highly unlikely, happens to have 
   the same link-local address as its current default router. 
    
    
   2) Omission of Prefix Information Option 
    
   To check the validity of its IP address, a host should see whether 
   the prefix of its IP address is advertised on the link to which it is 
   currently attached. 
    
   For this, a host checks whether the prefix of its IP address is in 
   the Prefix Information Option of Router Advertisement messages. But 
   an unsolicited Router Advertisement message can omit some prefixes 
   for convenience, for example to save bandwidth. 
 
   Hence, a host can't be sure that the prefix of its current IP address 
   is not supported on the current link, even though the prefix is not 
   contained in a Router Advertisement message. 
    
    
5.3 Time delay  
    
   For DNA, the following issues cause a delay, which may result in 
   communication disruption. 
    
    
   1) Delay for receiving a hint  
    
   In order to speed up network attachment detection, hints can be  
   used tell a host that they may have attached to a new subnet. This  
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   hint itself doesn't confirm new attachment, but can be used to  
   initiate appropriate procedures. 
 
   Hints come in various forms, and vary in how they can indicate a new 
   network attachment.  The hints can be link-layer indications, the 
   receipt of a new RA or the lack of RA from current default router. 
   Additionally, the time taken to receive a hint varies. With Link-
   layer support, it can be done instantly. 
    
   Alternatively a host can monitor periodic RA beacons. [MIPv6] defines 
   use of RA Interval Timer expiry as a hint. A host may implement its 
   own policy to determining the number of missing RAs, which it will 
   interpret as a hint for possible movement.  Hence the detection delay 
   depends on the Router Advertisement interval. 
    
   Without schemes such as above, a host must receive a new RA from a 
   new router to detect possible movement. The detection time also 
   depends on the frequency of Router Advertisements. 
 
   Periodic RA beaconing transmits packets within an interval varying 
   randomly between MinRtrAdvInterval to MaxRtrAdvInterval seconds. In 
   [RFC 2461] minimums for these values are 3 and 4 seconds, 
   respectively.  Since MN movement is unrelated to the advertisement 
   time on the new network, the MN is expected to arrive on average half 
   way through the interval. This is about 1.75 seconds with [RFC 2461] 
   advertisement rates. 
    
    
   2) Delay for checking current default router Unreachability 
    
   When a host checks the reachability of the current default router, a 
   certain delay occurs if the current default router is not reachable. 
 
   Usually it's easier to check a node's presence than its absence. A 
   host sends a solicitation message and, upon the receipt of a reply, 
   it can assume that it's there. 
    
   To be sure that a system is absent, time needs to be taken to ensure 
   that lack of reply is not due to another reason (For example: Packet 
   Loss, MAC latency, or processing delay) So it takes time to determine 
   the unreachability of the current default router. 
 
   If a host uses NUD to check the reachability of current default 
   router, it will take more than 3 seconds to detect its unreachability 
   in the case where a host has moved to another IP subnet. 
    
    
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   3) Random delay execution for RS/ RA exchange 
    
   Router Solicitation and Router Advertisement messages are used for 
   Router Discovery.  According to Neighbor Discovery [RFC 2461], it is 
   sometimes necessary for a host to delay a transmission for a random 
   amount of time for Router Solicitation and for routers to delay 
   before Router Advertisement. 
 
   Before a host sends an initial solicitation, it SHOULD delay the 
   transmission for a random amount of time between 0 and 
   MAX_RTR_SOLICITATION_DELAY (1 second).  Moreover Router 
   Advertisements sent in response to a Router Solicitation MUST be 
   delayed by a random time between 0 and MAX_RA_DELAY_TIME (0.5 
   seconds). 
    
    
6. The Goals of Network Attachment Detection 
    
6.1 Potential Solution space  
    
   DNA solutions should be 1) Precise, 2) Sufficiently fast and 3) Of 
   limited signaling.  The solutions should correctly determine whether 
   a host has valid IP configuration by checking link change. They also 
   should be sufficiently fast lest there should be service disruption. 
   Finally they should not flood the link with related signaling. 
 
   After a host establishes a new link-layer connection, if it receives 
   a RA message which correctly indicates link change, a host can check 
   the validity of its IP configuration with no further action. 
    
   Subsequently, in case of link change, if the RA message contains all 
   the necessary information for new IP configuration, a host can 
   initiate new configuration immediately. 
 
   For efficient DNA schemes, it's desirable to have a RA message 
   optimized for DNA, which can indicate link change and contains the 
   necessary information for new IP configuration. 
    
   Moreover, after network attachment, a host has to get a DNA optimized 
   RA quickly to reduce handoff latency. Current Router Discovery may 
   take too much time and result in the disconnection of on-going 
   session.  
    
   To design adequate DNA schemes, we'd better investigate how to 1) 
   design a RA optimized for DNA and 2) deliver a DNA optimized RA to a 
   host sufficiently fast.  
 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   For this, it will be necessary to investigate the usage of available 
   tools, NS/NA messages, RS/RA messages, Link-layer hints and other 
   features.  This will allow precise description of procedures for 
   efficient DNA Schemes. 
    
6.2 Goals list  
    
   G1. DNA schemes should ascertain the validity of current IP 
   configuration by detecting currently attached link. It should 
   recognize and determine whether IP configuration change is needed and 
   initiate a new configuration if necessary. 
    
   G2. When upper-layer protocol sessions are being supported, DNA 
   schemes should detect link change rapidly, with minimal latency 
    
   G3. In the case where a host has not changed link or subnet, IP 
   configuration change should not occur. 
 
   G4. Detection of network attachment should not cause undue signaling 
   on a wireless link. 
    
   G5. Solutions for detecting network attachment should make use of 
   existing signaling mechanisms where available. 
    
   G6. Detection of Network Attachment should make use of signaling 
   within the link (particuarly link-local scope messages) since 
   communication off-link may not be achievable in the case of link 
   change. 
 
   G7. DNA schemes should be safe with respect to Duplicate Address 
   Detection[RFC2462]. That is, hosts which undertake DNA should not 
   infringe upon existing hosts' address configuration when arriving on 
   a new link. 
    
   G8. DNA Solutions should be compatible with IP security subsystems 
   such as Secure Neighbour Discovery[SEND] and IPsec[RFC2411] 
    
   G9. A host configured for DNA should not expose the host to 
   additional man in the middle or identity revealing attacks. 
 
   G10. A host or router configured for DNA should not expose itself or 
   other devices on the link to additional denial of service attacks. 
    
   G11. Routers Supporting DNA should work appropriately with hosts 
   using unmodified configuration schemes, such as router 
   discovery[RFC2461] and [DHCPv6]. 
 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004               [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   G12. Hosts supporting DNA should be able to work with unmodified 
   routers and hosts which do not support DNA solutions. 
    
    
7. IANA Consideration 
    
   No new message formats or services are defined in this document. 
    
    
8. Security Consideration 
    
   Nodes connected over wireless interfaces may be particularly 
   susceptible to jamming, monitoring and packet insertion attacks.  Use 
   of [SEND] to protect link-layer to network-layer mappings and routing 
   information exchange are important in achieving reliable detection of 
   network attachment. 
 
   Since DNA schemes are based on Neighbor Discovery, its trust models 
   and threats are similar to the ones presented in [SEND-psreq]. DNA 
   schemes SHOULD incorporate the solutions developed in IETF SEND 
   Working Group if available, where assessment indicates such 
   procedures are required. 
    
   Even in the case where authoritative routing and prefix state is 
   advertised, wireless network attackers may still prevent packet 
   reception at soliciting nodes. This may trigger routing configuration 
   change in some devices, when otherwise it is unnecessary.  Such 
   attacks may be used to make a host preferentially select a particular 
   comfiguration or network access. 
 
   Devices receiving confirmations of reachability (for example from 
   upper-layer protocols) should be aware that unless these indications 
   are sufficiently authenticated, reachability may falsely be asserted 
   by an attacker.  Similarly, such reachability tests, even if known to 
   originate from a trusted source should be ignored for reachability 
   confirmation if duplicates or stale. This may reduce the effective 
   window for attackers replaying otherwise authentic data. 
    
   Reception of link-change indications from L2 and L3 are dangerous if 
   they are received from devices which are insufficiently authenticated.  
   In particular, indications that authentication has completed at the 
   link-layer may not imply that a security relationship is available at 
   the network-layer. This is due to the potentially inconsistent 
   semantic interpretation of such authentication at link-layer. 
 
   Additional authentication or proof of identity may be required at the 
   network layer to justify modification of IP configuration. In some 
   cases, there is a significant performance cost in verifying 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004               [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   configuration authority, which may impact on application performance.  
   Implementors are cautioned that in the case such checks are deferred, 
   they may be subject to short term man-in-the-middle and denial-of-
   service attacks, or implicated in denial-of-service attacks against 
   innocent third parties. Particular care should be taken so that this 
   doesn't occur. 
    
    
References 
    
   [RFC 2026] S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process ?Revision 3", 
      BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [RFC 2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC 2461] T. Narten, E.Nordmark, W. Simpson, "Neighbour Discovery 
      for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998. 
    
   [RFC 2462] S. Thomson, T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address 
      Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998. 
    
   [MIPv6] D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
      Internet Draft (work in progress), June 2003. 
    
   [MDO] G. Daley, J. Choi, "Movement Detection Optimization in Mobile 
      IPv6", Internet Draft (work in progress), May 2003. 
    
   [cRA] J. Choi, G. Daley, " Router Advertisement Issues for 
      Movement Detection/ Detection of Network Attachment ", Internet 
      Draft (work in progress), October 2003. 
    
   [LinkID] B. Pentland, G. Daley, J. Choi, "Router Advertisement Link 
      Identification for Mobile IPv6 Movement Detection", Internet Draft 
      (work in progress), May 2003. 
    
   [SEND-01] J. Arkko et al.," SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", 
      Internet Draft (work in progress), January 2004. 
    
   [Hindsight] E. Nordmark, "MIPv6: from hindsight to foresight?", 
      Internet Draft, November 2001. 
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   Erik Nordmark has contributed significantly to work predating this 
   draft on the ambiguity in On-link prefix. Also Ed Remmell's comments 
   on the inconsistency of RA information were most illuminating. Thanks 
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004               [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft               DNAv6 Goals                     Feb 2004 
 
 
   for Brett Pentland, Nick Moore and Youn-Hee Han for their 
   contribution for this draft. 
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   JinHyeock Choi 
   i-Networking Lab Samsung AIT 
   P.O. Box 111 Suwon  
   440-600 Korea 
   Email: athene@sait.samsung.co.kr 
    
    
   Greg Daley 
   Centre for Telecommunications and Information Engineering 
   Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering 
   Monash University 
   Clayton 3800 Victoria 
   Australia 
   Email: greg.daley@eng.monash.edu.au 
   
 
 
Choi, Daley             Expires - August 2004               [Page 14] 

