
Internet Engineering Task Force                                T. Hansen
Internet-Draft                                         AT&T Laboratories
Updates: RFC 3458 (if approved)                             May 26, 2004
Expires: November 24, 2004


                     Video Message Message Context
             draft-hansen-lemonade-msgctxt-videomsg-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 24, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Message-Context header defined in RFC 3458 [1] describes the
   context of a message (for example: fax-message or voice-message).
   This specification extends the Message-Context header with one
   additional context value: "video-message".

   A receiving user agent (UA) may use this information as a hint to
   optimally present the message.

Note



Hansen                 Expires November 24, 2004                [Page 1]
=0C
Internet-Draft       Video Message Message Context              May 2004


   This document is being discussed in the LEMONADE working group,
   lemonade@ietf.org.

1.  Introduction

   Email messages can be used to convey many different forms of
   messages, and the user will interact with different types in
   different ways.  As explained in RFC 3458 [1], the "message context"
   of the message conveys information about the way the user expects to
   interact with the message.  For example, a message may be e-mail,
   voice mail, fax mail, etc.  The message context can give clues to the
   receiving UA for the presentation of the message.  This allows the
   receiving UA to present the message to the recipient, in a meaningful
   and helpful way.

   Typical uses for this mechanism include:

   o  Selecting a special viewer for a given message.

   o  Selecting an icon indicating the kind of message in a displayed
      list of messages.

   o  Arranging messages in an inbox display.

   o  Filtering messages the UA presents when the user has limited
      access.

   RFC 3458 then goes on to register the message contexts for a
   "voice-message", "fax-message", "pager-message",
   "multimedia-message", "text-message" and "none".

2.  Video Message

   One form of email is a message that consists mostly of a video
   stream.  Examples of services that send video email are those
   connected to cell phones that capture video streams, and video email
   services that use webcams attached to a PC.  These email messages
   currently consist of two flavors, both of which can be properly
   considered to be a video message:

   1.  those that embed the video stream internally within the message
       as a body part, and

   2.  those whose video stream is stored on a 3rd party's video server.

   However, none of the existing message contexts properly identify such
   video messages.  This specification extends the Message-Context
   header with one additional context value: video-message.



Hansen                 Expires November 24, 2004                [Page 2]
=0C
Internet-Draft       Video Message Message Context              May 2004


3.  IANA Considerations

3.1  Message-Context

   As specified in RFC 3458 [1], this document registers "video-message"
   in the "Internet Message Context Types" repository.

   Message-Context class name:
      video-message

   Sumary of the message class:
      Indicates a message whose primary content is a video mail message.
      The primary content is video data.  The context is usually a
      message recorded using a video camera, or a message whose primary
      purpose is to contain an external reference to a message recorded
      using a video camera.

   Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Tony Hansen, tony+msgctxt@maillennium.att.com.


4.  Security Considerations

   The intention for this header is to be an indicator of message
   context only.  As such, it is only a hint and requires no behavior on
   the part of a message user agent.

5  Normative References

   [1]  Burger, E., Candell, E., Eliot, C. and G. Klyne, "Message
        Context for Internet Mail", RFC 3458, January 2003.


Author's Address

   Tony Hansen
   AT&T Laboratories
   200 Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ  07748
   USA

   EMail: tony+msgctxt@maillennium.att.com









Hansen                 Expires November 24, 2004                [Page 3]
=0C
Internet-Draft       Video Message Message Context              May 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Hansen                 Expires November 24, 2004                [Page 4]

