
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Davide Musella
draft-musella-html-metatag-00.txt             National Research Council
Expires in six months                             13 November 1995


                       The META Tag of HTML



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Cost) or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this document is unlimited. Please send comments to 
   Davide Musella, davidmsl@anti.tesi.dsi.unimi.it or to 
   musella@dsi.unimi.it , (voice) +39.(0)2.55006287


Abstract

   This document define a strict synopsis for the META Tag of HTML.
   The grammar is extended to the contents of the HTTP-EQUIV field,
   defining a set of words to use to allow document cataloging.

1. Introduction

   The synopsis of the META HTTP-EQUIV Tag is not severe, allowing so 
   the use of different key words to define the same things.
   The functions like this:
   	<META HTTP-EQUIV = "Keywords" CONTENT = "Italy, Tourism">
   or
   	<META HTTP-EQUIV = "Keys" CONTENT = "Italy, Tourism">
   could represent the same concepts with two difference syntax.
   The aim of this Draft is to define which are the words to use to 
   define the contents of an HTML document.
   There are, also, some easy rules to implement a binary logic (AND or
   OR) for the CONTENT field.

 2. The META Tag (HTML 2.0 definition)

   The META element is used within the HEAD element to embed documents
   meta-information not defined by other HTML elements. Such information
   can be extracted by servers/clients for use in identifying, indexing
   and cataloging specialized document meta-information.

   Although it is generally preferable to used named elements that have
   well defined semantics for each type of meta-information, such as 
   title, this element is provided for situations where strict SGML 
   parsing is necessary and the local DTD is not extensible. 




                       -Page 1-
   In addition, HTTP servers can read the contents of the document head
   to generate response headers corresponding to any elements defining 
   a value for the attribute HTTP-EQUIV.  This provides document authors
   with a mechanism (not necessarily the preferred one) for identifying
   information that should be included in the response headers of an 
   HTTP request. 

   The META element has three attributes: 

   NAME 
   HTTP-EQUIV 
   CONTENT

 3. NAME.

   This attributes could be used to define some properties such as 
   author, publication date etc. If absent the name can be assumed to be
   the same as the value of HTTP-EQUIV.
   An example:

   	<META NAME= "Editor" CONTENT = "McDraw Bill">

   Do not use the META element to define information that should be 
   associated with an existing HTML element.
   This tag is not processed by the HTTP server.

 4. HTTP-EQUIV.

   This attribute binds the element to an HTTP response header. If the 
   semantics of the HTTP response header named by this attribute is 
   known, then the contents can be processed based on a well defined 
   syntactic mapping, whether or not the DTD includes anything about it.
   HTTP header names are not case sensitive. If absent, the NAME 
   attribute should be used to identify this meta-information and it 
   should not be used within an HTTP response header.
   It is possible to use any text string, but if you want to define 
   these properties you have to use the following words:

	keywords: to indicate the keywords of the document
	author:   to indicate the author of the document
	expire:   to indicate the expire date of the document
	language: to indicate the language of the document
	abstract: to indicate the abstract of the document
	organization: to indicate the organization of the author
	public (yes, no): to indicate if the document is available to
	                 everybody or not


   An HTTP server can process these tags for an HEAD HTTP request, but
   each server can choose which one handle.
   Do not name an HTTP-EQUIV attribute the same as a response header 
   that should typically only be generated by the HTTP server. Some 
   inappropriate names are "Server", "Date", and "Last-Modified".
   Whether a name is inappropriate depends on the particular server 
   implementation. It is recommended that servers ignore any META 
   elements that specify HTTP equivalents (case insensitively) to their 
   own reserved response headers.   
                        -Page 2-
   4. CONTENT

   Used to supply a value for a named property.
   If it's used with the HTTP-EQUIV it can contain more than one single 
   information; it is possible to use the Boolean operator (AND, OR) to 
   insert a Boolean definition of the field.
   The AND operator will be represent by the SPACE (ASCII[32]) and the 
   OR operator with the COMMA (ASCII[44]).
   The AND operator is processed before the OR operator. So a string 
   like this: "Red ball, White ball" means :"ball AND (red OR white)".
   Examples:

   <META HTTP-EQUIV= "Keywords" CONTENT= "Italy Product, Italy Tourism">

   The spaces between a comma and a word or viceversa are ignored.
   
