MMUSIC Working Group                                T. Guenkova-Luy,    
Internet-Draft                                      A. Kassler 
Document:draft-guenkova-mmusic-e2enp-sdpng-00.txt   University of Ulm
Expires: September 25, 2002                          
                                                    J. Eisl
                                                    Siemens AG
                                                    
                                                    D. Mandato
                                                    Sony International
                                                    (Europe) GmbH
                                                    
                                                    March 25, 2002


       Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features


Status of this Memo 
                     
	This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all 
	provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

	Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
	Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
	other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
	Drafts.

	Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
	months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
	documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
	as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
	progress."

	The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
	http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

	The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
	http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
 
Abstract

	This document analyzes issues for providing both sedentary and 
	mobile users of multiparty, multimedia communication services with 
	efficient mechanisms for coping with unstable network conditions 
	and limited resource availability, conforming to the users' QoS 
	requirements and expectations. To this extent, the concept of an 
	efficient end-to-end QoS signaling mechanism is needed, dealing 
	not only with capabilities/QoS negotiation, but also with 
	efficient re-negotiations and coordinated resource management. 
	Requirements of a protocol (thereinafter, the "End-to-End 
	Negotiation Protocol" - E2ENP) [1], as well as a possible 




Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 1]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

	implementation thereof, based on extensions of SDPng [2] and on 
	the use of SIP [3], are then discussed. Finally, differences 
	and/or synergies with existing solutions and proposals (especially 
	with [4] and [5]), as well as security considerations, are 
	provided.


Table of Contents

	1.    Introduction                                         2
	1.1   Motivations                                          2
	1.2   Problem Statement                                    2
	1.3   Scope of this document                               3
	2.    Definition of Terms                                  4
	3.    The concept                                          5
	3.1   Coping with unstable environment conditions          6
	3.2   Hierarchical QoS Specification                       7
	3.3   Inter-stream QoS constraints                         7
	3.4   Planning counteractions ahead                        8
	3.5   Independence from network aspects                    8
	3.6   Mapping of the quality settings on codec definition  9
	3.7   Third-Party-Assisted Negotiation                     9
	4.    The features                                        10
	5.    Security Considerations                             11
	6.    Related Work                                        11
	7.    Conclusions                                         13
	8.    References                                          13
	9.    Author's addresses for comments and discussions     15
	10.   Acknowledgements                                    15

1.	Introduction

1.1	Motivations

	The Internet has proven to be a successful architecture for 
	delivering a broad set of electronic services (including - among 
	many others - telephony, electronic messaging, and audio/video 
	(A/V) services), not only to sedentary but also to nomadic users. 
	Micro/macro IP mobility and wireless IP technologies in fact pave 
	the way to the full integration of the Internet with the second 
	and third generation of mobile phone systems. In order to achieve 
	this goal, next generation IP networks and applications will have 
	to address the increasingly important challenges of wireless 
	access, mobility management, the provision of Quality of Service 
	(QoS), and multimedia services. 

1.2	Problem Statement

	A paramount problem that mobile users will face within this 
	context is how to cope with limited amounts of resources at the 





Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 2]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

	end-systems and within the network, under unstable environmental 
	conditions. It is expected that mobile users will no longer be 
	able to rely on their QoS contracts being supported over the whole 
	duration of a session by the network infrastructure, due to 
	various reasons like: wireless link quality degradations, 
	handovers, limited amount of resources. By assuming proper 
	resource overprovision in the backbone, one can expect that these 
	problems will most likely be concentrated in the access network, 
	especially in the radio part thereof, and even on the end-systems. 
	Since users typically have business relationships with specific 
	network providers (e.g. a subscription with an ISP or a prepaid 
	phone card), two possible types of handover may occur:
	 - horizontal handovers: occur within a given administrative 
	domain of a network provider, and within the same type of access 
	network;
	 - vertical handovers: occur across two different types of access 
	networks and/or across the administrative boundary between two 
	network providers.
	When dealing with handovers, users must be prepared to face 
	changes in network resource availability, depending not only on 
	the type of access network, but also on the type of business 
	relationships the users may have with the various network 
	providers. In some extreme cases, the users might try to access 
	the network owned by a network provider, with which the user has 
	no business relationship at all, or which offers limited amount of 
	resources. Pricing aspects also play a key role. 
	Within this context, multiparty multimedia applications will need 
	an effective and efficient way of handling QoS fluctuations at the 
	network layer.
	In particular, the sheer negotiation of capabilities (like codecs) 
	is hereby regarded as necessary but not sufficient for meeting the 
	users' QoS expectations. Intelligent, adaptive applications can in 
	fact provide predictive QoS on an end-to-end basis only if end-
	peers are able to negotiate also QoS aspects directly affecting 
	the application performance, according to the users' QoS 
	expectations. This combined information enables applications 
	effectively choosing the best adaptation strategy in reaction to a 
	given QoS fluctuation [1].

1.3	Scope of this document

	Coping with the aforementioned issues, this document presents a 
	concept for negotiation of capabilities and QoS at the application 
	level, triggered by QoS requirements of the end-user (the E2ENP 
	concept), which can be realized by either deriving a new specific 
	protocol, or enhancing existing ones. As an example of the latter 
	option, a possible E2ENP implementation based on extensions of 
	SDPng [2] and on the use of SIP [3] is also discussed.




Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 3]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

2.	Definition of Terms

	Adaptation Path (AP)
	An ordered set of QoS contracts that end-systems use for employing 
	adaptation strategies in a preplanned way. The nominal QoS 
	contract indicates the one the end-system should preferably try to 
	enforce. Should this not (or no longer) be possible, the AP offers 
	alternative QoS contracts (and, optionally, specific rules for 
	choosing them) for degrading the QoS level in a controlled way.

	Application Level QoS
	An end-system internal representation of QoS specification (e.g. 
	XML description), derived from User Level QoS specification.

	Capability
	The ability to perform certain tasks and/or to handle certain 
	information types. A single capability is associated with a 
	certain amount of hardware and/or software resources (each 
	handling a given information type) and can be configured to 
	produce different QoS levels. On the other hand a given QoS level 
	can be associated with different capability sets (e.g. different 
	codecs can offer the same QoS level). 

	Intermediate Components (IM)
	Any network element situated on the signaling and/or the data path 
	between two end-systems and which can understand the protocol the 
	end-systems use (at least on the network level). Examples are: 
	routers, proxies, independent services, etc. 

	Mediator
	The role an end-peer can take for redirecting incoming calls to 
	another end-peer(s) according to some settings in the user 
	profile. A part of this role is to provide QoS satisfaction for 
	the user(s) in a way the Mediator itself (considering the end-
	peer's multimedia capabilities) cannot handle.

	Peer
	A service or an end-device (associated with an end-user). This 
	term has equivalent meaning with the terms end-peer and party, 
	which are interchangeably used throughout this document.

	QoS change
	The change of the QoS contract initiated by the service user or by 
	an application within the context of a predefined AP. 

	QoS contract
	An agreement between a service user and a service provider , 
	specifying QoS requirements and constraints, as well as the 
	policies required to keep track of a single QoS level during the 
	given service execution.


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 4]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

	QoS level
	A discrete region of the multidimensional QoS space characterizing 
	a service. Users perceive distinct QoS levels as the result of 
	applying certain QoS contracts to the given services.

	QoS parameter
	A functional representation of a single characteristic of a given 
	QoS aware service (e.g. network bitrate, network overall end-to-
	end delay, but also parameters like video frame rate, video frame 
	size, audio sampling rate, number of audio channels, etc.), which 
	identifies a measurable QoS related quantity.

	QoS profile
	A collection of data specifying the end-peer preferences in terms 
	of QoS, concerning the usage of a given service. The QoS profile 
	is the end-system internal representation of the user's QoS 
	preferences within a QoS aware system. The QoS profile can contain 
	one or several Application Level QoS specifications.

	QoS violation
	The violation of one or several QoS contracts within an AP, caused 
	by the network and/or Service Provider and/or local system.

	User Level QoS specification
	The QoS as users expect to perceive, eventually expressed in non-
	crisp terms by non-expert users. This QoS specification is an 
	application-specific issue, depending on user interface aspects.

3.	The concept 

	This section defines requirements for an efficient end-to-end QoS 
	signaling mechanism for dealing with multiparty, multimedia 
	services. This concept also embraces the case of multi-streams 
	applications like online-games combined with A/V sessions. 
	The "handling of QoS" shall be achieved through the negotiation of 
	hardware/software configuration information and the negotiation 
	and enforcement of QoS contracts, which are derived from the user 
	preferences : 
	 - a QoS contract shall capture user's QoS expectations, as well 
	as network provider policies for enabling a comprehensive QoS 
	adaptation process (this means for instance to control that the 
	QoS levels fit into the predefined policies, or to control the 
	amount of resources by up-/downgrading QoS upon detection of QoS 
	changes / QoS violations);
	 - a QoS contract shall also capture configuration information 
	concerning network resources, as well as the resources and 
	capabilities of the involved QoS aware end-systems (for instance, 
	some codecs like variable bitrate video-codecs can be differently 
	preset to produce different QoS directly perceivable by the user: 
	the sheer definition of codecs is thus not sufficient for 



Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 5]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

	determining the amount of local and network resources to reserve 
	when QoS should be supported).

	Before starting a negotiation, each end-peer shall derive the 
	negotiable QoS contracts from existing information concerning both 
	users' QoS expectations and type/amount of available resources, by 
	possibly applying the following refinement/validation process:
	1. users specify the User Level QoS; 
	2. applications derive Application Level QoS by mapping User Level 
	QoS into QoS contracts detailing specific aspects (e.g. video 
	frame rate, video frame size, image quality, etc); 
	3. the mapping of Application Level QoS on the end-system 
	capabilities (i.e. the end-system hardware and software 
	configuration - e.g. supported codecs), originates QoS contract 
	Sketches, which represent the Application Level QoS that the end-
	system can theoretically support;
	4. the validation of QoS contract Sketches against network 
	provider policies for supporting QoS, originates Validated 
	Application Level QoS contracts. These valid contracts constitute 
	a common vocabulary, which the local and the remote end-systems 
	can use for negotiating the establishment of QoS aware 
	communications, and for efficiently dealing with QoS re-
	negotiations thereof. Those Application Level QoS which have 
	failed the validation, could still be used in special cases like 
	vertical handovers, dynamic end-system changes (e.g. due to end-
	system up-/downgrading), etc.

	For the sake of simplicity, this document refers thereinafter to 
	"Validated Application Level QoS contracts" as "Application Level 
	QoS". These are the negotiable QoS contracts end-peers are 
	expected to deal with during QoS negotiations and QoS re-
	negotiations.
	In order to allow end-peers reserving network resource in a 
	coordinated manner, during the negotiation process the sender side 
	can derive network-level QoS contracts (e.g. the TI(Traffic 
	Information) and SI(Sensitivity Information) information presented 
	in [4]) from the negotiable Application Level QoS.

3.1	Coping with unstable environment conditions

	In order to allow users achieving QoS with limited amounts of 
	resources at the end-system and in the network, under unstable 
	environment conditions, the application developers and the users 
	shall be prepared to increase renegotiation speed, for instance by 
	proactively planning proper actions at negotiation time.
	As aforementioned, QoS Contract information is complementary to 
	capability information. As such, the E2ENP may advantageously 
	negotiate QoS Contracts and capabilities independently. For 
	instance some codecs might be dynamically downloadable: having 
	negotiated QoS contracts independently of such codes, allows end-
	


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 6]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

      peers saving time (critical aspect of re-negotiations), by simply 
	referencing the pre-negotiated QoS contracts and binding the newly 
	available codecs with those contracts.

3.2	Hierarchical QoS Specification

	Grouping streams is mainly useful for allowing QoS aware 
	applications to handle groups as a whole when balancing quality to 
	resource availability under certain environmental conditions.
	For instance, in online gaming applications it can make sense to 
	augment the gaming experience by allowing each player to keep in 
	audio/visual contact with the other players. To this extent, it is 
	possible to distinguish (and therefore treat differently) various 
	groups of streams, each grouping all the streams between the given 
	player and another player. The description of these groups of 
	streams is subject to negotiation.
	Furthermore, the developers and the users of multiparty multimedia 
	applications dealing with multiple streams may advantageously 
	arrange streams by recursively applying the grouping process, 
	based on high-level criteria aiming to improve resources 
	orchestration among multiple streams. For instance, a player can 
	arrange the A/V streams by identifying multiple concurrent 
	instances of audio- or videoconferences, one with the own team 
	members and one with each other team. This optional form of 
	streams grouping is managed locally by the end-peers (and thus is 
	not subject to negotiation).
	The resulting hierarchical structure is topologically equivalent 
	to a tree, where each leaf represents a stream, and each internal 
	node represents a group of streams (or, recursively, of groups). 

3.3	Inter-stream QoS constraints

	Multi-media applications may deal with multiple streams of 
	different types (i.e. audio, video, and data). To this extent, 
	users of such applications may wish to specify their QoS 
	preferences for each single stream, but also any parameter that 
	might determine inter-stream behavior. Typically, videoconference 
	applications deal with voice and video streams, which must be 
	synchronized (time synchronization). If the media codec and stream 
	format itself does not provide means for synchronizing, it is a 
	requirement that inter-stream correlation information is available 
	and negotiated. This correlation can be generalized by introducing 
	the specification of QoS constraints applicable to a given bundle 
	of streams (QoS correlation). The decision of what level of 
	correlation should be enforced at the QoS level among a set of 
	streams, depends on the scenario and the requirements of the 
	application. The introduction of the time synchronization and QoS 
	correlation aspects augment the overall possibilities to specify 
	and manage QoS within a QoS aware system.




Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 7]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

3.4	Planning counteractions ahead

	A possible way to cope with otherwise unpredictable events 
	resulting from QoS changes / QoS violations, is to enable the 
	mobile users' applications to efficiently and timely react to 
	those events, by planning proper counteractions ahead, in a 
	coordinated manner with the remote end-peers.
	In this manner, whenever QoS changes / QoS violations occur, 
	agreements on how to most effectively adapt to the mutated 
	conditions can be timely reached among the peers. 
	These counteractions include:
	 - negotiating multiple alternative QoS levels for a stream;
	 - negotiating multiple alternative QoS levels for a group of 
	streams, to capture time synchronization, QoS correlation, and 
	other inter-stream QoS constraints;
	 - coordinating local-, remote-, and network-resource management.

3.5	Independence from network aspects

	The end-peers are in general connected over one or a multiplicity 
	of interconnected networks, including also Intermediate Components 
	(IM). In terms of SIP the SIP-proxies are considered as  IM. 
	Taking in account the functionality of the SIP-proxies [3], [6] 
	and their ability to interfere with the communication between two 
	end-peers, it is desirable that the E2ENP operates based on an 
	abstraction of the underlying network, in order to provide real 
	end-to-end negotiation and conformance of the so delivered QoS 
	information.
	Since the IMs offer services that not only may influence the 
	information that end-peers eventually negotiate via E2ENP, but 
	also may enforce the results of the E2ENP process, IMs should be 
	informed about the decision made by the end-peers. 
	IMs may be informed by providing them with some standard-profile 
	information before the start of E2ENP, and/or by publishing the 
	agreed QoS contracts, e.g. via a directory service.
	In order to best satisfy the user QoS expectations and the network 
	provider QoS policies, the following is suggested:
	 - the E2ENP should be able to be used in combination with (but 
	independently from) IM, which may result effective in preparing 
	and/or guaranteeing the QoS contracts agreed by the end-peers;
	 - the exchange of information (e.g. profiles, security, 
	authentication, provider policies, etc.) not directly affecting 
	the E2ENP-process, rather influencing the information that is 
	going to be negotiated, should be carried out before the E2ENP 
	starts.
	In general the flows carrying E2ENP messaging (the signaling-path) 
	and the flows carrying the actual streams (the data-path) could be 
	routed differently, depending not only on network-related issues, 
	but also on application/service specific reasons. Thus the E2ENP 
	signaling-paths and the corresponding data-paths between any two 
	


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 8]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

      given end-peers should be in general considered different. 
	Every time a signaling-path and/or data-path is built, there may 
	be some IMs (proxies, directory services, etc.) located along the 
	path, whose usage is application-specific, and which might 
	"understand" some of the protocols used by the end-peers. Some of 
	these entities might thus be able to "interfere" with the E2ENP, 
	thus disrupting the very "End-to-End" nature of the E2ENP. In 
	order to avoid this threat, it is suggested that:
	 - with respect to the E2ENP, Intermediate Components should 
	operate based only on information provided - directly or 
	indirectly - by the peers, in order to carry out application 
	specific tasks;
	 - exception cases when the involvement of the IMs is inevitable, 
	should also be considered. Thus the IMs should be allowed to 
	interfere with the E2ENP only by explicitly notifying the end-
	peers about the occurred problems, and only when end-peers 
	misbehave, e.g. by disregarding system policies and/or in case of 
	system failure conditions.

3.6	Mapping of the quality settings on codec definition

	When user-defined audio quality settings are associated with 
	codecs according to the standard static payload-type definitions 
	of the codecs [7], each QoS level can be mapped to one audio 
	payload type expressing such QoS level. On the other hand a single 
	variable bitrate video-codec can produce multiple QoS levels with 
	respect to the quality of the single video frame and - in some 
	cases - the quality of the color of a single frame. A user-defined 
	QoS level can be applied to a video by defining a compression 
	percentage for the performance of the video codec. However, some 
	video codecs have different number of compression levels. When an 
	application based on the users requirements selects a constant 
	video quality and accepts a variable bitrate coder, the 
	application would derive from the QoS level "visually perceivable 
	quality = X", an unique number expressing the compression level 
	for the video codec. Thus, in order to better apply QoS settings 
	to a codec, it is suggested that:
	 - applications should share a numbering range for the user 
	perceivable quality specification (overall visual quality and 
	color quality, if the user wants to specify a certain color 
	quality), in order to be able to uniquely map video quality to a 
	given codec;  
	 - the numbering range for the user perceivable quality 
	specification should have enough resolution to uniquely map to the 
	compression levels of a given codec.

3.7	Third-Party-Assisted Negotiation

	End-peers may leverage services like directory, allocation, 
	presence, etc. for redirecting connections over alternative end-
	


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 9]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

      systems, which can more appropriately meet users' QoS expectations 
	because of more appropriate capabilities. 
	In these cases, end-peers should be able to negotiate on behalf of 
	other end-peers, according to specific user profile information. 
	This type of negotiation is called third-party-assisted 
	negotiation. By third-party-assisted negotiation a pure Mediator 
	should only facilitate the delegation of a connection without 
	actively taking part in it.

4.	The features

	A possible E2ENP implementation can be realized by combining 
	special extensions of SDPng [2] with a particular use of SIP. 
	The following list indicates the proposed SDPng extensions.
	 - An important part of the implementation is the use of 
	modularity for the elements by applying SDPng and extensions of 
	it. This would enable to use SDPng with and without the new 
	extensions.
	 - The modularity of the SDPng extensions should enable the end-
	to-end negotiating parties to quickly reach agreements on common 
	codecs, payload types and codec parametrizations thus possibly 
	optimizing the decisions on commonly supported QoS contracts. 
	 - For describing the QoS contracts it is necessary to have SDPng 
	elements for mapping the Application Level QoS descriptions onto 
	the codecs and the payload types. A single QoS contract would be 
	in these terms the QoS settings of a single media stream.
	 - It is suggested to enrich at the sender side the negotiated 
	Application Level QoS contracts with the TI and SI information 
	presented in [4], for allowing the end-peers to perform resource 
	reservation in a coordinate manner.
	 - It is necessary to distinguish between the different streams 
	(audio, video) and data types (data, control) in the definition of 
	the QoS contracts for a communication session. 
	 - Considering the video codecs, the parametrization indicated in 
	[7] is not sufficient to fully characterize the given codec from a 
	QoS perspective. That is why it is necessary to introduce codec 
	parametrization attributes like frame-rate, frame-size, color-
	quality-range, overall-quality-range, etc. which should be 
	uniquely interpreted by the end-systems.
	 - It is necessary to introduce descriptions and parametrizations 
	for non-streaming data.
	 - It is necessary to provide means for managing user, system, and 
	provider policy information at least by defining which of the 
	proposed QoS contracts the QoS aware system may support during a 
	negotiation.
	 - For defining APs new SDPng elements are needed for formally 
	configuring the adaptation process correspondingly, in accordance 
	with the envisioned QoS changes and/or violations.
	 - For defining stream grouping it is necessary to introduce new 




Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 10]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

	SDPng elements with respect to (eventually hierarchical) group 
	definition, and QoS correlation / time synchronization aspects.

	The following SIP features for implementing the E2ENP processes 
	are identified:
	 - Signaling for carrying out the negotiation and re-negotiation
	 - Means for coordinating resource management among multiple 
	parties (common example given in [8])
	 - Transporting and recognizing the E2ENP content expressed as 
	SDPng content

5.	Security Considerations

	This chapter discusses some aspects considering security with 
	respect to SDPng and SIP performance.
	If the contents of the SIP message body (SDPng) are private and 
	should be treated according to security policies they might be 
	encrypted.
	The use of Digital Certificates with and within SDPng message 
	bodies can serve the unique identification of the sent information 
	for both end-peers and IM. This would enable the end-peers and IM 
	verify and best satisfy the user, system and provider policies. 
	Additional techniques for confidentiality and integrity support, 
	with respect to the negotiated information, should also be 
	considered.
	On the issue of firewalls, further thorough investigations 
	concerning IMs are required. 

6.	Related Work

	This section discusses existing solutions and/or proposals in the 
	field of QoS aware end-to-end negotiations, and highlights the 
	shortcomings of the respective existing signaling mechanisms (in-
	band, SIP) and description methods (SDPng) for QoS.

	The authors of [7] and [9] describe possibilities of quick re-
	negotiations via in-band signaling. However this kind of signaling 
	concerns only change of codecs and the redundant support of 
	differently coded media without considering the respective effects 
	when QoS should be supported.

	The authors of [8] and [10] present a multi-phase call-setup 
	mechanism that makes network QoS and security establishment a 
	precondition to sessions initiated by the SIP and described by the 
	SDP. Thus the resource management is done only for the network 
	resources. However [8], [10] do not consider pre-negotiation of 
	QoS and the integration of local and peer resource management. 

	The authors of [11] describe a complete model for one-to-one 
	capabilities negotiation with SDP. However this model has problems 
	


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 11]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

      by the definition of mutually referred information and information 
	on grouping streams because of the flat structure of the SDP. 
	Additionally this model concerns only capability negotiation but 
	no QoS support and QoS adaptation. 

	Ongoing work in [12] identifies the requirements of a framework 
	dealing with session description and endpoint capability 
	negotiation in multiparty multimedia conferencing scenarios. 
	Depending on user preferences, system capabilities, or other 
	constraints, different configurations can be chosen for the 
	conference. The need of a negotiation process among the end-peers 
	for determining a common set of potential system configurations 
	and for selection of one or many common configurations to be used 
	is identified, but not described. The authors of [12] also 
	identify the need for network resource reservation coupled with 
	session setup. 
	The proposal in [12] deals only with capability negotiations and 
	does neither consider a negotiation protocol for determining a 
	common set of QoS configuration nor integrate local, peer and 
	network resource reservation. 

	The most recent versions of SDPng proposal [2], [13] provide 
	detailed XML Schema specification and a prototype of the Audio 
	Codec and RTP Profiles. Additionally [13] describes a capability 
	negotiation process for establishing of a common capability 
	vocabulary between end-peers. However the proposals in [2], [13] 
	still do not consider the QoS specific issues.

	In [5] an End-to-End User Perceived Quality of Service Negotiation 
	is described, with the assumption that some IMs and services may 
	strongly be involved in the end-decision about the negotiated QoS 
	information of the end-peers. The decision about QoS 
	configurations in [5] may be taken over some standard "contract 
	types". Although [5] mentions that signaling and data packets may 
	flow along different paths throughout the network, the authors of 
	[5] suggest that some IMs along the negotiation path may influence 
	the negotiation, though in general having nothing to do with the 
	data. According to such a protocol model the network is not 
	transparent. 
	The negotiation process presented in [5] does not allow 
	incremental negotiations, and furthermore [5] leverages static APs 
	with fixed transitions among capability configurations/network-
	level QoS contracts only. 
	The model of [5] suggests negotiations of QoS only at stream level 
	without considering some stream dependencies like groups and 
	stream hierarchies.  

	The most recent work on the problem of User Perceived QoS [4] 
	introduces SDPng schema for defining traffic throughput and 
	sensitivity information. This information considers only the 
	


Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 12]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002

      network reservation process without taking in account the 
	necessity for local (peer) QoS specific configurations and 
	reservations. The model in [4] is not taking in account the 
	Application Level QoS definitions, with respect to codec 
	configuration and a flexible adaptation process. However the E2ENP 
	can incorporate this proposal, by allowing senders to derive TI/SI 
	from Application Level QoS contracts, and to forward this 
	information as part of a proposal/counter-proposal to the 
	receiver(s). The model of [4] is static in terms of adaptation, 
	insofar as it reuses the fixed prioritization of alternative 
	options derived from SDP, thus losing the powerful flexibility 
	featured by XML. The description of the payload types in [4] is 
	not in accordance with the payload types as described in [7], 
	since the codec parametrization of the audio codecs is already 
	pre-defined for the static payload types. One interesting aspect 
	in [4] is the introduction of QoS Class format as a form of 
	predefined interoperable application level QoS definition. However 
	such a definition would also need high level QoS specification 
	considering the usage of different possible QoS configurations of 
	a single codec/payload type. 
 
7.	Conclusions

	This document has introduced the concept and requirements of the 
	End-to-End QoS Negotiation Protocol (E2ENP). The E2ENP is a 
	signaling mechanism for effectively and efficiently performing 
	end-to-end QoS negotiations/re-negotiations and resource 
	management coordination, when dealing with multiparty multimedia 
	services under unstable network conditions. Special features are 
	the negotiation of common vocabulary and adaptation paths, that 
	describe alternative QoS contracts to be applied, when QoS 
	violations occur.
	Furthermore, the E2ENP allows developers and/or users to capture 
	and enforce time synchronization and QoS correlation (and even 
	more complex) constraints among multiple streams, thus allowing 
	adaptation at different levels. This is envisioned to be a key 
	benefit in terms of QoS for current and future applications.
	By modularly extending SDPng, and by properly defining SIP usages, 
	the authors expect that the induction of the E2ENP concept will 
	smoothly blend with legacy solutions, along the path towards the 
	next generation of QoS aware multiparty, multimedia services.

8.	References

	[1] IST-1999-10050 BRAIN Deliverable 1.2, Concepts for Service 
	adaptation, scalability and QoS handling on mobility enabled 
	networks, 31.03.2001 (http://www.ist-brain.org/) 






Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 13]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002


	[2] D. Kutscher et al.: Session Description and Capability 
	Negotiation, IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-progress, <draft-ietf-
	mmusic-sdpng-03.txt>.

	[3] IETF RFC 2543, SIP: Session Initiation Protocol, M. Handley et 
	al, ACIRI, March 1999.

	[4] L. Bos, et al: SDPng extensions for Quality of service 
	negotiation, IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-progress,<draft-bos-
	mmusic-sdpng-qos-00.txt>.

	[5] L. Bos, et al: A Framework for End-to-End User Perceived 
	Quality of Service Negotiation, IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-
	progress,<draft-bos-mmusic-sdpqos-framework-00.txt>.

	[6] Rosenberg et al.: SIP: Session Initiation Protocol, IETF SIP 
	working group, Work-in-progress, <draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-
	07.txt>.

	[7] H. Schulzrinne  et al.: RTP Profile for Audio and Video 
	Conferences with Minimal Control, Columbia U., Work-in-progress, 
	<draft-ietf-avt-profile-new-12.txt>. 

	[8] W. Marshall et al.: Integration of Resource Management and SIP 
	- SIP Extensions for Resource Management, IETF SIP working group, 
	Work-in-progress, <draft-ietf-sip-manyfolks-resource-01.txt>.

	[9] IETF RFC 2198, RTP Payload for Redundant Audio Data, C. 
	Perkins et al., Network Working Group, September 1997.

	[10] W.Marshall et al., SIP Extensions for Resource Management, 
	IETF draft <draft-ietf-sip-manyfolks-resource-00>, November 2000.

	[11] J.Rosenberg, H.Schulzrinne.: An Offer/Answer Model with SDP, 
	IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-progress, <draft-rosenberg-mmusic-
	sdp-offer-answer-00.txt>. 

	[12] D. Kutscher et al.: Requirements for Session Description and 
	Capability Negotiation, IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-progress, 
	<draft-kutscher-mmusic-sdpng-req-01.txt>.

	[13] D. Kutscher et al.: Session Description and Capability 
	Negotiation, IETF Internet-Draft, Work-in-progress, <draft-ietf-
	mmusic-sdpng-04.txt>. 








Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 14]


Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling - concepts and features     Mar 2002


9.	Author's addresses for comments and discussions

	Teodora Guenkova-Luy
	Dept. Distributed Systems, University of Ulm, 
	Oberer Eselsberg, 89069 Ulm, Germany
	Tel: +49 (0)731 502-4148 
	Fax: +49 (0)731 502-4142 
	e-Mail: guenkova@vs.informatik.uni-ulm.de

	Andreas Kassler
	Dept. Distributed Systems, University of Ulm, 
	Oberer Eselsberg, 89069 Ulm, Germany
	Tel: +49 (0)731 502-4146
	Fax: +49 (0)731 502-4142
	e-Mail: kassler@informatik.uni-ulm.de

	Jochen Eisl              

	Siemens Mobile Networks
	Research & Concepts Dep.
	Tel: +49 (0)89 722 62710
	Fax: +49 (0)89 722 21882
	e-Mail:  jochen.eisl@icn.siemens.de

	Davide Mandato
	Broadband Wireless Technology Research (BWTR)  
	Sony International (Europe) GmbH 
	Advanced Technology Center Stuttgart      
	Heinrich-Hertz-Str. 1
	70327 Stuttgart, Germany
	Tel: +49 (0)711 5858-797
	Fax: +49 (0)711 5858-468
	e-mail: mandato@sony.de

10.	Acknowledgements

	This work has been performed in the framework of the IST project
	IST-2000-28584 MIND, which is partly funded by the European Union. 
	The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of their 
	colleagues, especially Markku Kojo.
	The authors would also like to thank their colleagues from TZI, 
	University of Bremen, from Sony International (Europe), Stuttgart 
	and University of Ulm for their support.










Guenkova, et al.          Expires September 25, 2002           [Page 15]


