

   SIPPING Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                          J. Mulahusic 
                                                             H. Persson 
   Expires: August 2003                                           Telia 
                                                          February 2003 
    
    
                   SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments 
            draft-persson-sipping-sip-issues-dual-stack-00.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   The advent of IPv6 in addition to IPv4 makes hosts and servers dual-
   stack. SIP communications can be used in both environments but there 
   is little understanding what will happen if some nodes are dual-stack 
   while others, presently the majority, is IPv4 only enabled. This 
   document describes some scenarios and associated issues when dual-
   stack users and servers try to communicate with IPv4 only hosts using 
   SIP. It is not evident that interoperability is achieved, and if that 
   is not the case, this would severely limit the usability of both SIP 
   and IPv6. 
    
1.   Introduction 
    

 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 1] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
   Currently, the vast majority of the Internet hosts are IPv4-only. As 
   the IPv6 adoption on the Internet is growing, more and more hosts are 
   going to be dual-stack enabled, i.e. they will support both IPv4 and 
   IPv6. A relatively easy step to make services available to all 
   clients regardless of which network protocol they are utilizing 
   (IPv4-only or dual-stack clients) is to have servers understand both 
   IP versions, i.e. have servers be dual-stack. Note that making 
   servers available over both network protocols will still not solve 
   the NAT-related end-to-end issues, as some clients may still be 
   located behind NAT boxes. 
    
   The SIP communication between IPv4-only hosts and dual-stack enabled 
   hosts, but which is bypassing dual-stack enabled servers, can in some 
   perfectly regular cases according to SIP operation, introduce failure 
   modes not described in the SIP standard [RFC3261]. This may lead to 
   inability to initiate and set-up sessions between pairs of hosts, 
   which in practice should be possible since the hosts support same IP 
   versions. 
    
   One of the basic presumptions made here is that IPv6 is being 
   gradually deployed in an IPv4 environment by upgrading existing IPv4 
   nodes to dual-stack or deploying new dual-stack nodes. Accordingly, 
   IPv4 servers have been made available to dual-stack clients by being 
   upgraded to dual-stack servers. However, there may exist a number of 
   clients that cannot be upgraded to dual-stack and will thus not be 
   able to support the new IP protocol. Deploying IPv6-only clients and 
   SIP communication between IPv4-only and IPv6-only clients has not 
   been considered as interesting and has not been analyzed in this 
   document. 
    
   Perhaps a more interesting case for the nearer future would be to 
   consider dual-stack SIP servers and single-stack (IPv4-only) SIP 
   servers and scenarios derived from this case. However, the scenarios 
   described here are felt to be more general and the case with single-
   stack SIP servers is considered to be a sub-set of the more general 
   scenario cases described in this document. 
    
   The inability to initiate communication between the hosts supporting 
   several IP versions can have two causes. Either the host initiating 
   the session can not in advance find out what IP version a peer on the 
   other end is supporting or the inability of the other side to 
   unambiguously signal that the IP version chosen by the host 
   initiating the session is not supported by the target host. 
    
   The inability to in advance find out what IP version(s) the target 
   host is supporting cannot be done as this information is only known 
   to, possibly, the SIP server with which the target host has 
   registered or, usually the case, the client itself. The SIP does not 
   have any mechanism defined to acquire such information in advance. 
 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 2] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
    
   There exist a number of final responses that might be used to signal 
   that the target client do not support the IP version chosen by the 
   initiating host, but none of the available responses are felt to 
   unambiguously describe the failure reason. 
    
   The purpose of this document is to highlight the issue when dual-
   stack hosts initiate SIP sessions towards IPv4-only hosts. Specifying 
   mechanisms to cope with these events would greatly increase the 
   interoperability between hosts/networks of dual-stack type and IPv4-
   only hosts/networks. 
    
2.   Scenario I, First try IPv6 and if error try IPv4 
    
   This is scenario when both users that wish to communicate are located 
   behind dual-stack SIP servers. The host initiating the session is 
   registered with its SIP server with both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. The 
   target user is on the other hand IPv4-only and is therefore 
   registered only with its IPv4 address, even though the SIP server it 
   is registered with is dual-stack. 
    
   When the originating host initiates a session it will, perhaps due to 
   local policy or some other valid reason, choose IPv6 as the default 
   network protocol to send initial INVITE to the first hop SIP server 
   which is in this case dual-stack. Choosing IPv6 as the default 
   network protocol can mean that the contact address in the SIP header 
   will be an IPv6 address. 
    
   The SIP server will, after elsewhere defined SIP mechanisms 
   [RFC3261], forward the request to the next hop SIP server, which is 
   again dual-stack in this case. When finally, the request reaches SIP 
   server of the destination host, the contact address in the request 
   may be the IPv6 address of the host originating the request. 
    
   The target hostÆs SIP server will be able to process and understand 
   the request, according to the SIP procedures described elsewhere 
   [RFC3261], since this server is also a dual-stack server. However, 
   the target SIP server may or may not be able to discover that the 
   request contains IPv6 addresses, which the target host may not 
   understand. If the server is able to find out that the request cannot 
   be understood by the target host, e.g. the target host has only 
   registered with an IPv4 address; the server may choose to reply with 
   some type of response to the originating host. Likewise, the server 
   may choose to forward the message and let the target host deal with 
   the request. 
    
   If the target SIP server has chosen to respond with a final response, 
   it will respond to the originating host to try again with another 

 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 3] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
   version of the network protocol as this one is not supported by the 
   target host. 
                                      
                      example1.com  . . . example2.com 
                    .      proxy              proxy     . 
                   .      dual-stack         dual-stack  . 
             Alice's  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Bob's 
           softphone                                        SIP Phone 
           dual-stack                                        IPv4-only 
              |                |                |                | 
              | INVITE (IPv6)  |                |                | 
              |--------------->| INVITE (IPv6)  |                | 
              |   100 Trying   |--------------->|                | 
              |<---------------|Error Try (IPv4)|                | 
              | Error Try(IPv4)|<-------------- |                | 
              |<---------------|                |                | 
              | INVITE (IPv4)  |                |                | 
              |--------------->| INVITE (IPv4)  |                | 
              |   100 Trying   |--------------->| INVITE (IPv4)  | 
              |<---------------|   100 Trying   |--------------->| 
              |                |<---------------|  180 Ringing   | 
              |                |  180 Ringing   |<---------------| 
              |                |<---------------|                | 
                                     . 
                                     . 
                                     . 
                    Figure 1: Scenario I setup example 
    
   Figure 1 illustrates the example when a dual-stack host is initiating 
   a SIP session towards an IPv4-only host. Since proxy servers involved 
   in the communication are dual-stack, the SIP signaling will reach the 
   last proxy server as it is the only server, except the target host 
   itself, that can tell which IP version the target host is using. 
    
   Similarly would happen if the last hop proxy server forwarded request 
   to the target host and had the target host itself handle the request 
   and found an error. 
    
2.1     Analysis of final responses 
    
   This is a short analysis of available final responses and which of 
   these could be used to inform originating client that the target host 
   cannot be contacted using the IP version in the request. The server 
   should however signal in the response that the client could be 
   reached using alternative IP version. 
    
   Redirection 3XX 
    
   Redirection 3XX type responses seem to have what is needed to inform 
   the originating host that the target host is not reachable at that 
 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 4] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
   address and what address should alternatively be probed. However, 
   there might exist some issues with 3XX responses as different IP 
   versions are being mixed. 
    
   ô301 Moved Permanentlyö is probably too strong to signal back to the 
   originating host as the client may register with IPv6 address at some 
   later point in time. 
    
   ô302 Moved Temporarilyö is quite close to what is being looked for in 
   this case. The alternative IPv4 address of the client where it can be 
   reached is signaled back to the originating host informing the 
   originating host to use alternative address and protocol. Again, the 
   issue is that the server may not be able to find out that the IP 
   version used in the request is not supported by the target host. 
    
   ô380 Alternative Serviceö could be used if ôserviceö also includes 
   network protocols. Even this response has the same issue as previous 
   one, i.e. how does the server knows that there might be a problem 
   with the IP version? 
    
   Request Failure 4XX 
    
   The nearest one when analyzing 4XX final responses is probably the 
   ô480 Temporarily unavailableö, but 480 means that the calleeÆs end 
   system has been successfully contacted which is not true in this 
   case. 480 also means that the proxy recognizes the user, but does not 
   have a valid forwarding location, which also is not completely true. 
    
   Server Failure 5XX 
    
   Can this type of responses be used as this is not exactly a server 
   error? ô505 Version Not Supportedö is really close, but this is only 
   about SIP version, but not IP version? 
    
2.2    Analysis of Warnings 
    
   The Warning header field described in [RFC3261] have the right 
   semantics to signal this types of errors. However, as defined today, 
   available warnings are closely tied to signaling SDP related errors 
   and not general SIP errors caused by mismatch in network protocols 
   between peers. 
    
3.   Scenario II, Try IPv4 and IPv6 simultaneously 
    
   Scenario II has the same presumptions as the first one. A dual-stack 
   host tries to set up a session with an IPv4-only host. The SIP 
   signaling is traversing dual-stack SIP servers. 
    

 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 5] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
   In Scenario II, instead of first sending IPv6 request and waiting for 
   response before eventually sending out an IPv4 response, the host 
   sends both requests simultaneously. When the first response is 
   received, it is the one used to set-up the session. 
    
   One issue with Scenario II is the handling of simultaneous requests 
   if the target host also is a dual-stack host. The target host will 
   somehow have to recognize that the requests are actually for the same 
   session except that they have been sent utilizing different IP 
   transports. Is it sufficient if call-idÆs are the same for both 
   requests? What will happen with the request that is not accepted? 
    
4.   Conclusions 
    
   As shown in the two examples above, there may exist issues with 
   operation of SIP in dual-stack environments. As dual-stack hosts have 
   been deployed on the Internet for some time now, and as more are to 
   be deployed in the future, it might be useful to clarify how SIP is 
   meant to operate in such environments in order to avoid unexpected 
   interoperability problems. 
    
   The scenarios illustrated above are should not be seen as a complete 
   list of all cases with interoperability issues. There may exist other 
   and more complex issues not described here. The scenarios above are 
   only two basic cases described with purpose to show that there exist 
   cases where interoperability may be an issue. 
    
   If found necessary, this document can provide a basis for further 
   investigation of SIP issues in dual-stack environments and in making 
   a more thoroughly list of scenario of interest to consider when 
   finding a solution. Such a work would eventually lead to providing 
   clarifications for implementers and networks administrators about 
   what to consider when implementing and deploying SIP and SIP 
   applications to be used in dual-stack environments. 
    
Security Considerations 
    
   Since the purpose of this document is to only highlight some of the 
   existing issues with previously defined standards, the document does 
   not introduce any new security threats. 
    
References 
    
                     
   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., et.al., öSIP: Session Initiation 
              Protocolö,  RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    
    

 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 6] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Jasminko Mulahusic 
   Telia 
   Vitsandsgatan 9 
   123 86 Farsta 
   Sweden 
   Phone: +46 8 713 82 94 
   Email: Jasminko.W.Mulahusic@telia.se 
    
   H…kan Persson 
   Telia 
   Vitsandsgatan 9 
   123 86 Farsta 
   Sweden 
   Phone: +46 8 713 82 33 
   Email: Hakan.N.Persson@telia.se 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 7] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 

 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 8] 
                SIP Issues in Dual-stack Environments   February 2003 
 
 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
    
    





























 
 
Mulahusic & Persson     Expires - August 2003                [Page 9] 
