

SIPPING								Ravi Raviraj
Internet-Draft							Psytechnics
Expires: December 29, 2007					June 29, 2007


 Session Initiation Protocol Package for Voice Quality Reporting Event
                  draft-raviraj-sipping-endpoint-mos-00

Status of this Memo

  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
  applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
  have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
  aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

  This Internet-Draft will expire on December 29, 2007.

Copyright Notice

  Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

















Raviraj                   Expires December 29, 2007           [Page 1]


Internet-Draft                   endpoint-mos            February 2007





Abstract

This document introduces the concept of Mean Opinion Score (MOS) and 
briefly describes the types and variations of MOS within an end point, 
thus justifying the need for a perceptual-objective-MOS SIP event 
package.
 







Table of Contents

1.	Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
2. 	Mean Opinion Score (MOS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
3.	MOS variations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
4.	MOS reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
5.	References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4



























Raviraj                   Expires December 29, 2007           [Page 2]


Internet-Draft                   endpoint-mos            February 2007


1.  Overview 

Over the last few years, a number of perceptual media quality measures 
have been standardized by ITU-T. For example, MOS-LQO, MOS-CQO, etc. 
Many of these quality measures could have a number of variations like 
narrow-band/wide-band, electrical/acoustical, full reference/no-
reference, algorithm types etc. When applied within a network end-
point, each media direction (ingress/egress) could have one or more of 
these values associated with it. We need a way to report these values 
efficiently without any ambiguity. These MOS values could be 
sent/distributed as perceptual objective quality SIP events. In this 
way, all the advantages of SIP like mobility, etc. will be pulled in.
   
2.  Mean Opinion Score (MOS)

The abbreviation MOS (Mean Opinion Score) is defined in ITU-T Rec. 
P.10/G.100[1] in the following way:
The mean opinion scores, i.e., of the values on a predefined scale that 
subjects assign to their opinion of the performance of the telephone 
transmission system used either for conversation or for listening to 
spoken material.

The ITU-T Rec. P.800.1[2] extends this further by saying the following.
Apart from subjective opinion, the abbreviation MOS is also used for 
scores that originates from objective models or network planning 
models.
In effect, it categorizes MOS into three broad groups: subjective MOS; 
scores given by human subjects, objective MOS; objective prediction of 
subjective MOS and estimation MOS; estimation by a network planning 
model. Additionally, it also defines another three orthogonal 
categories: listening MOS, Talking MOS and conversational MOS. 
Combining these two categories results in nine different types of MOS.

3. MOS variations

The MOS type described above could have many variations:
- Up to four variations based on the audio bandwidth: narrow-band, 
  wide-band, uper-wide-band and full-band.
- Variations in the algorithm used. For example, ITU-T Rec. P.564[3] 
  defines two different compliance classes.
- Variations based on stream direction. Within a simple endpoint where 
  there are two directional streams (ingress and egress direction), 
  there may be MOS for each direction. This particular variation does 
  not apply to conversational MOS types. However, conversational MOS 
  could have two other types of variations; local end conversational 
  quality and remote end conversational quality. 
- Variations based on the measurement point; electrical, acoustical or 
  packet-level.
- Variations based on reference usage/availability; full reference or 
  no reference.

Raviraj                   Expires December 29, 2007           [Page 3]


Internet-Draft                   endpoint-mos            February 2007


The above list is not exhaustive and it is important to realize that, 
all these variations are within a simple end point. End points with 
multiple streams like conference stations may have additional 
variations.

Although there are many possible combinations, not all are practical. 
Some combinations are already well defined, some are being defined and 
others are expected to be defined in the near future.

A given end point will not support all well defined combinations. 
Instead, they can be expected to support a small subset of them. This 
subset will vary depending on the network and operating scenario.



4. MOS reporting

Real-time reporting of various objective MOS types is an immediate 
requirement. An obvious method to send these MOS values is to use a SIP 
event. A perceptual objective MOS SIP event could report these values 
efficiently and without any ambiguity.


5.  References

[1]  ITU-T recommendation P.10/G.100, "Vocabulary for performance and 
     quality of service", July 2006.

[2]  ITU-T recommendation P.800.1, "Mean Opinion Score (MOS) 
terminology",  
     July 2006.

[3]  ITU-T recommendation P.564, "Conformance testing for narrowband 
     voice over IP transmission quality assessment models", July 2006.



Author's Address

   Ravi Raviraj
   Psytechnics Ltd.
   Fraser House
   23 Museum Street
   Ipswich, Suffolk IP1 1HN
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 261866
   Email: ravi.raviraj@psytechnics.com
   URI:   http://www.psytechnics.com

   
Raviraj                   Expires December 29, 2007           [Page 4]


Internet-Draft                   endpoint-mos            February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
retain all their rights.

This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
Administrative Support Activity (IASA).




Raviraj                   Expires December 29, 2007           [Page 5]
