
Network Working Group                                       Igor Bryskin
Category: Informational                           Independent Consultant

Expires: October 2005                                      Adrian Farrel
                                                      Old Dog Consulting

                                                              April 2005

   A Lexicography for the Interpretation of Generalized Multiprotocol
     Label Switching (GMPLS) Terminology within The Context of the
   ITU-T's Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) Architecture

           draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt

Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
   accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) has been developed
   by the IETF to facilitate the establishment of Label Switched Paths
   (LSPs) in a variety of physical technologies and across several
   architectural models. The ITU-T has specified an architecture for
   the management of Automatically Switched Optical Networks (ASON).

   This document provides a lexicography for the interpretation of GMPLS
   terminology within the context of the ASON architecture.

   It is important to note that GMPLS is applicable in a far wider set
   of contexts than just ASON. Thus the definitions presented in this
   document do not provide exclusive or complete interpretations of the
   GMPLS concepts. The intention of this document is simply to allow the
   GMPLS terms to be applied within the ASON context.


Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 1

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

1. Introduction

   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) has been developed
   by the IETF to facilitate the establishment of Label Switched Paths
   (LSPs) in a variety of physical technologies such as Packet Switching
   Capable (PSC), Layer Two Switching Capable (L2SC), Time Division
   Multiplexing (TDM), Lambda Switching Capable (LSC). and Fiber
   Switching Capable (FSC).

   GMPLS is deliberately specified to allow it to be applicable in
   several key architectures including the Integrated Model, the Overlay
   Model, and the Augmented Model. More information on these
   architectural models and on GMPLS can be found in [RFC3945].

   The ITU-T has specified an architecture for the management of
   Automatically Switched Optical Networks (ASON). This architecture
   forms the basis of many recommendations within the ITU-T.

   Because the GMPLS and ASON architectures were developed by different
   people in different standards bodies, and because the architectures
   have very different historic backgrounds (the Internet, and telephone
   and transport networks respectively), the terminology used is
   different. In order to demonstrate that GMPLS is a suitable
   technology to satisfy the requirements of the ASON architecture it is
   necessary to examine the terminology and provide a mapping between
   GMPLS and ASON terms.

   This document provides a lexicography for the interpretation of GMPLS
   terminology within the context of the ASON architecture. It does not
   provide wider definitions of the GMPLS terms which can already be
   found in existing RFCs. Thus the definitions presented in this
   document do not provide exclusive or complete interpretations of the
   GMPLS concepts. The intention of this document is simply to allow the
   GMPLS terms to be applied within the ASON context.

   Note that the limitation of GMPLS to the ASON architecture in this
   document is in no sense intended to imply that GMPLS applicability is
   limited to the ASON architecture, nor that the ASON model is
   preferable to any other model that can be supported by GMPLS.













Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 2

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

2. Terminology Sources

2.1. GMPLS Terminology Sources

   GMPLS Terminology is principally defined in [RFC3945]. Other
   documents provide further key definitions including [GMPLS-RTG],
   [BUNDLE], [LSP-HIER] and [LMP].

   The reader should be familiar with these other documents before
   attempting to use this document to provide a mapping to between GMPLS
   and ASON.

   For details of GMPLS signaling please refer to [RFC3471] and
   [RFC3473]. For details of GMPLS routing, please refer to [GMPLS-OSPF]
   and [GMPLS-ISIS].

2.2. ASON Terminology Sources

   The ASON architecture is specified in ITU-T Recommendation G.8080
   [G-8080]. This is developed from generic functional architectures and
   requirements specified in [G-805], [G-807] and [G-872].

   The reader must be familiar with these documents before attempting to
   apply the lexicography set out here.

2.3. Common Terminology Sources

   The work in this document builds on the shared view of ASON
   requirements and requirements expressed in [ASON-SIG], [ASON-RTG] and
   [TRANSPORT-LMP].

3. Lexicography

3.1. Network Presences

   Transport node [Data Plane] is a logical network device that is
     capable of originating and/or terminating of a data flow and/or
     switching it on the route to its destination.

   Controller [Control Plane] is a logical entity that models all
     control plane intelligence (routing, TE and signaling protocols,
     path computation, etc). A single controller can manage one or
     several transport nodes.

   Node [Control & Data Planes] is an association of a transport node
     and a controller that manages the transport node.






Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 3

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

   Control plane network [Control Plane] is an IP network used for
     delivery of control plane (protocol) messages exchanged by
     controllers.

     The ITU term for the control plane network is Data Connection
     Network (DCN).

3.2. Resources

   Non-packet based resource [Data Plane] is a channel of certain
     bandwidth that could be allocated in a network data plane of a
     particular technology for the purpose of user traffic delivery.
     Examples of non-packet based resources are timeslots, lambda
     channels, etc.

   Packet based resource [Data Plane] is an abstraction hiding means
     related to delivery of traffic with particular parameters (most
     importantly, bandwidth) with particular QoS over PSC media.
     Examples of packet based resources are forwarding queues,
     schedulers, etc.

   Layer Resource (Resource) [Data Plane]. A non-packet based data plane
     technology may yield resources in different network layers. For
     example, some TDM devices can operate with VC-12 timeslots, some
     with VC-4 timeslots and some with VC4-4c timeslots. There are also
     multiple layers of packet based resources (i.e. one per label in
     the label stack). Therefore, we define layer resource (or simply
     resource) irrespective of underlying data plane technology as a
     basic data plane construct. It is defined by a combination of a
     particular data encoding type and switching/terminating bandwidth
     granularity.

   All other definitions provided in this memo are tightly bound to the
   resource. Examples of layer resources are: PSC1, PSC4, ATM VP, ATM
   VC, Ethernet, VC-12, VC-4, Lambda 10G, Lambda 40G.

   ITU-T terms for resource:
   - Connection point (cp) in the context of link discovery and resource
     management (allocation, binding into cross-connects, etc.);
   - Link connection or trail termination in the context of routing,
     path computation and signaling.

3.3. Labels

   Label [Control Plane] is an abstraction that represents a resource in
     the control plane.

     In ITU terms a label is the portion of an SNP name that follows the
     SNPP name.  A label represents a subnetwork point (SNP) in the
     context of a subnetwork point pool (SNPP). Generally, a label
     identifies a client layer SNP within an SNPP supported by a single

Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 4

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

     server layer access point. In some cases, for example SONET/SDH
     labels, there may be multiple layers between the SNPP and the
     single access point.

3.4. Data Links

   Unidirectional data link end [Data Plane] is a set of resources of a
     particular layer that belong to the same transport node and could
     be allocated for transfer of traffic in this layer to the same
     neighbor in the same direction.

     In ITU-T terminology a unidirectional data link end is a collection
     of the same client layer connection points supported by a single
     trail termination (access point).

   Bidirectional data link end [Data Plane] is an association of two
     unidirectional data link ends of a particular layer that belong to
     the same transport node and could be used for transfer of traffic
     in this layer to/from the same neighbor in both directions.

   Unidirectional data link [Data Plane] is an association of two
     unidirectional data link ends of a particular layer belonging to
     two transport nodes adjacent in this layer that could be used for
     transfer of traffic between the two transport nodes in one
     direction.

     The ITU term for a unidirectional data link is unidirectional link.

   Bidirectional data link [Data Plane] is an association of two
     bidirectional data link ends of a particular layer belonging to two
     transport nodes adjacent in this layer that could be used for
     transfer of traffic between the two transport nodes in both
     directions.

     The ITU term for a bidirectional data link is bidirectional link.

   In the ITU ASON architecture a unidirectional/bidirectional data link
   is supported by a single unidirectional/bidirectional trail

3.5. Link interfaces

   Unidirectional link interface [Data Plane] is an abstraction that
     connects a transport node to a unidirectional data link end and
     represents (hides) the data plane intelligence like switching,
     termination and adaptation in one direction. In GMPLS, link
     interfaces are often referred to as "GMPLS interfaces" and it
     should be understood that these are data plane interfaces and the
     term does not refer to the ability of a control plane interface to
     handle GMPLS protocols.

     A single unidirectional data link end could be connected to a

Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 5

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

     transport node by multiple link interfaces with one of them, for
     example, realizing switching function, while others realize the
     function of termination/adaptation.

     In ITU terminology, a unidirectional link interface is a switching
     function provided by matrix, and/or a trail termination function
     bound to an adaptation function for which adapted client layer
     connection points are bound to a matrix. The link interface type
     may be identified by the cross-connected client layer, or by the
     adapted client layer, or by the terminated server layer, or by a
     combination of these depending on the context. In some cases, a
     unidirectional link interface comprises a set of trail termination
     and adaptation pairs, for which some connection points are bound to
     trail terminations and others to matrices.

   Bidirectional link interface [Data Plane] is an association of two or
     more unidirectional link interfaces that connects a transport node
     to a bi-directional data link end and represents the data plane
     intelligence like switching, termination and adaptation in both
     directions.

3.6. Connections

   In GMPLS a connection is known as a Label Switched Path (LSP).

   Unidirectional connection (LSP) [Data Plane] is a single resource or
     a set of cross-connected resources of a particular layer that could
     deliver traffic in this layer between a pair of transport nodes in
     one direction.

   Bidirectional connection (LSP) [Data Plane] is an association of two
     unidirectional connections that could simultaneously deliver
     traffic in a particular layer between a pair of transport nodes in
     opposite directions.

      In the context of GMPLS both unidirectional constituents of a
      bidirectional connection (LSP) take identical paths in terms of
      data links and could be provisioned concurrently.

   The ITU term for a connection is connection.

   The ITU term for a connection end is connection point (cp).

   LSP (connection) segment [Data Plane] is a single resource or a set
     of cross-connected resources that constitutes a segment of a
     connection.

     The ITU term for an LSP segment is connection.

   The ITU does not distinguish between connection and connection
   segment.

Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 6

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

3.7. Layers

   Layer [Data Plane] is a set of resources of the same type that could
     be used for establishing a connection or used for connectionless
     data delivery.

     Using ITU terminology, a layer is a set of (related) networking
     technologies, each of which is defined by its distinct
     characteristic information.

   Note. In GMPLS, the existence of non-blocking switching function in a
   transport node in a particular layer is modeled explicitly as one of
   the functions of link interfaces connecting the transport node to its
   data links, while in ITU-T the switching function is modeled
   explicitly as subnetwork.

3.8. Switching, Termination and Adaptation Capabilities

   Switching capability [Data Plane] is a property of a link interface
     that connects a particular data link to a transport node. This
     property characterizes the interface's ability to cooperate with
     other link interfaces connecting data links within the same layer
     to the same transport node for the purpose of binding resources in
     cross-connects. Switching capability is advertised as an attribute
     of the TE link local end associated with the link interface.

   Termination capability [Data Plane] is a property of a link interface
     that connects a particular data link to a transport node. This
     property characterizes the interface's ability to terminate
     connections within the layer the data link belongs to.

   Adaptation capability [Data Plane] is a property of a link interface
     that connects a particular data link to a transport node. This
     property characterizes the interface's ability to perform a nesting
     function - to use a locally terminated connection that belongs to
     one layer as a data link for some other layer(s).

   The need for advertisement of adaptation and termination capabilities
   within GMPLS has been recognized and work is in progress to determine
   how these will be advertised. It is likely that they will be
   advertised as a single combined or separate attributes of the TE link
   local end associated with the link interface.

   In the ITU ASON architecture switching capability is modeled as a
   matrix, and termination and adaptation capabilities are modeled as
   the termination and adaptation functions respectively accessible from
   a particular link.





Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 7

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

3.9. TE Links and FAs

   TE link end [Control Plane] is a grouping for the purpose of
     advertising and routing of labels representing resources of a
     particular layer.

     The ITU term for a TE link end is SNP pool (SNPP).

     Such a grouping allows for decoupling of path selection from
     resource assignment. Specifically, a path could be selected in a
     centralized way in terms of TE link ends, while the resource
     assignment (resource reservation and label allocation) could be
     performed in a distributed way during the connection setup. A TE
     link end may reflect zero, one or several data link ends in the
     data plane. A TE link end is associated with exactly one switching
     capability or, in other words, with exactly one layer.

   TE link [Control Plane] is a grouping of two TE link ends associated
     with two neighboring transport nodes in a particular layer.

     In contrast to data link, which provides network flexibility in a
     particular layer and, therefore, is a "real" topological element,
     TE link is a logical routing element. For example, an LSP path is
     computed in terms of TE links (or more precisely, in terms of TE
     link ends), while the LSP is provisioned over (that is, resources
     are allocated from) data links.

     The ITU term for a TE link is SNPP link.

   Virtual TE link is a TE link associated with zero data links.

   TE link end advertising [Control Plane]. A controller managing a
     particular transport node advertises local TE link ends. Any
     controller in the TE domain makes a TE link available for its local
     path computation if it receives consistent advertisements of both
     TE link ends. Strictly speaking, there is no such a thing as TE
     link advertising - only TE link end advertising. TE link end
     advertising may contain information about multiple switching
     capabilities. This, however, should not be interpreted as
     advertising of a multi-layer TE link end, rather, as joint
     advertisement of ends of multiple parallel TE links, each
     representing resources in separate layers. The advertisement may
     contain attributes shared by all TE links in the group (examples:
     protection capabilities, SRLGs, etc), separate information related
     to each TE link (examples: switching capability, data encoding,
     unreserved bandwidth, etc) as well as information related to
     inter-layer relationships of the advertised resources (example:
     termination and adaptation capabilities) should the control plane
     decide to use them as termination of higher layer data links. These
     higher layer data links, however, are not real yet - they are
     abstract until the underlying connections are established in lower

Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 8

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

     abstract until the underlying connections are established in lower
     layers. LSPs created in lower layers for the purpose of providing
     data links (extra network flexibility) in higher layers are called
     hierarchical connections/LSPs (H-LSPs) or simply hierarchies. LSPs
     created for the purpose of providing data links in the same layer
     are called stitching segments. H-LSPs and stitching segments could,
     but do not have to be advertised as TE links. Naturally, if they
     are advertised as TE links (LSPs advertised as TE links are often
     referred as TE-LSPs), they are made available for path computations
     performed on any controller within the TE domain into which they
     are advertised. H-LSPs and stitching segments could be advertised
     either individually or in TE bundles. An  H-LSP or a stitching
     segment could be advertised as a TE link either into the same or a
     separate TE domain compared to the one within which it was
     provisioned.

     A set of H-LSPs that are and/or could be created in a particular
     layer to provide network flexibility (data links) in other layer(s)
     is called Virtual network topology (VNT). A single H-LSP could
     provide several (more than one) data links (each in a different
     layer).

     The ITU term for a H-LSP is trail.

   Forwarding Adjacency (FA) [Control Plane] is a TE link that does not
     require a direct routing adjacency (peering) between controllers
     managing either of its ends in order to guarantee control plane
     connectivity (control channel) between the controllers. An example
     of an FA is an H-LSP or stitching segment advertised as a TE
     link into the same TE domain within which it was dynamically
     provisioned. In such cases, the control plane connectivity between
     the controllers at the ends of H-LSP/stitching segment is
     guaranteed by the concatenation of control channels interconnecting
     the ends of each of its constituents. In contrast, a H-LSP or
     stitching segment advertised as a TE link into a different TE
     domain compared to one where it was provisioned, generally requires
     a direct routing adjacency to be established within the TE domain
     where the TE link is advertised in order to guarantee control plane
     connectivity between the TE link ends, and, therefore, is not an
     FA.

3.10. TE Domain

   TE link attribute is a parameter of the set of resources associated
     with a TE link end that is significant in the context of path
     computation.

   Full TE visibility is a situation when a controller receives all
     unmodified TE advertisements from any other controller from a
     particular set of controllers.


Bryskin and Farrel                                                Page 9

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

   Limited TE visibility is a situation when a controller receives
     summarized TE information or does not receive one at all from some
     of controllers on the network.

   TE domain is a set of controllers each of which has full TE
     visibility within the set.

   TE database (TED) is a memory structure within a controller that
     contains all TE advertisements generated by all controllers within
     a particular TE domain.

   Virtual network integration is a set of collaborative mechanisms
     within a single node driving multiple (at least two) layers and the
     adaptation between the layers.

   Horizontal network integration is a set of collaborative mechanisms
     within a single instance of the control plane driving multiple (at
     least two) TE domains or between different instances of the control
     plane.

3.11. Component Links and Bundles

   Component link end [Control Plane] is a grouping of labels
     representing resources of a particular layer that is not advertised
     as an individual TE link end. A component link end could represent
     one or more data link ends or any subset of resources that belong
     to one or more data link ends.

   Component link [Control Plane] is a grouping of two or more component
     link ends associated with neighboring transport nodes (that is,
     directly interconnected by one or more data links) in a particular
     layer. Component links are equivalent to TE links except that the
     component link ends are not advertised separately.

   TE bundle [Control Plane] is an association of several parallel (that
     is, connecting the same pair of transport nodes) component links
     whose attributes are identical or whose differences sufficiently
     negligible that the TE domain can view the entire association as a
     single TE link. A TE bundle is advertised in the same way as a TE
     link, that is, by representing the associated component link ends
     as a single TE link end (TE bundle end) which is advertised.

3.12. Regions

   TE region [Control Plane] is a set of one or more layers that are
     associated with the same type of data plane technology. A TE region
     is sometimes called an LSP region or just a region. Examples of
     regions are: IP, ATM, TDM, photonic, fiber switching, etc. Regions
     and region boundaries are significant for the signaling sub-system
     of the control plane because LSPs are signaled substantially
     differently (i.e. use different signaling object formats and

Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 10

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

     semantics) in different regions. Furthermore, advertising, routing
     and path computation could be performed differently in different
     regions. For example, computation of paths across photonic regions
     requires a wider set of constraints (e.g. optical impairments,
     wavelength continuity, etc) and needs to be performed in different
     terms (e.g. in terms of individual resources - lambda channels,
     rather than in terms of TE links) compared to path computation in
     other regions like IP or TDM.

4. Guidance on the Application of this Lexicography

   As discussed in the introduction to this document, this lexicography
   is intended to bring the concepts and terms associated with GMPLS
   into the context of the ITU's ASON architecture. Thus, it should help
   those familiar with ASON to see how they may use the features and
   functions of GMPLS in order to meet the requirements of an ASON
   system. For example, a service provider wishing to establish a
   protected end-to-end service, might read [SEG-PROT] and [E2E-PROT]
   and wish to understand how the GMPLS terms used relate to the ASON
   architecture so that he can confirm that he will satisfy his
   requirements.

   This document is not a substitute for obtaining a clear understanding
   of GMPLS. It should not be assumed that a deep knowledge of the ASON
   architecture combined with this document will allow the reader to
   comprehend GMPLS. Rather, this lexicography will enable a reader who
   is familiar with the ASON architecture to make a rapid transition to
   GMPLS within the ASON context.

   This lexicography should not be used in order to obtain or derive
   definitive definitions of GMPLS terms because GMPLS is applicable in
   a wider context than just the ASON architecture. To obtain
   definitions of GMPLS terms that are applicable across all GMPLS
   architectural models, the reader should refer to the RFCs listed in
   the references sections of this document. [RFC3945] provides an
   overview of the GMPLS architecture and should be read first.

5. IANA Considerations

   This informational document defines no new code points and requires
   no action by IANA.

6. Management Considerations

   Both GMPLS and ASON networks require management. Both GMPLS and ASON
   specifications include considerable efforts to provide operator
   control and monitoring, as well as OAM functionality.

   These concepts are, however, out of scope of this document.



Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 11

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

7. Security Considerations

   Security is also a significant requirement of both GMPLS and ASON
   architectures.

   Again, however, this informational document is intended only to
   provide a lexicography, and the security concerns are, therefore, out
   of scope.

8. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank participants in the IETF's CCAMP
   working group and the ITU-T's Study Group 15 for their help in
   producing this document. In particular, all those who attended the
   Study Group 15 Question 14 Interim Meeting in Holmdel, New Jersey
   during January 2005.

   Many thanks to Ichiro Inoue of NTT for his useful review and input,
   and to Scott Brim and Dimitri Papadimitriou for lengthy and
   constructive discussions. Ben Mack-Crane and Jonathan Sadler
   provided very help reviews and discussions of ASON terms.

9. Intellectual Property Consideration

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.

10. Normative References

   [RFC3945]        E. Mannie (Ed.). "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                    Switching (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October
                    2004.

Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 12

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

   [BUNDLE]         Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., and Berger, L., "Link
                    Bundling in MPLS Traffic Engineering",
                    <draft-ietf-mpls-bundle>, work in progress.

   [GMPLS-RTG]      Kompella, K. and Rekhter, Y., "Routing Extensions in
                    Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                    Switching", <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing>, work
                    in progress.

   [LSP-HIER]       Kompella, K. and Rekhter, Y., "LSP Hierarchy with
                    Generalized MPLS TE",
                    <draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy>, work in progress.

   [LMP]            J. Lang (Ed.), "Link Management Protocol (LMP)",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp>, work in progress.

11. Informational References

   [RFC3471]        L. Berger (Ed.), "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                    Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description",
                    RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [RFC3473]        L. Berger (Ed.), "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                    Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation
                    Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions",
                    RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [ASON-RTG]       D. Brungard (Ed.), "Requirements for Generalized
                    MPLS (GMPLS) Routing for Automatically Switched
                    Optical Network (ASON)",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts>, work in
                    progress.

   [ASON-SIG]       Papadimitriou, D., Drake, J., Ash, J., Farrel, A.,
                    and Ong, L., "Requirements for Generalized MPLS
                    (GMPLS) Signaling Usage and Extensions for
                    Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-reqts>, work in
                    progress.

   [E2E-PROT]       Lang, J., Rekhter, Y., and Papadimitriou, D. (Eds.),
                    "RSVP-TE Extensions in support of End-to-End
                    Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
                    (GMPLS)-based Recovery",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-e2e-signaling>,
                    work in progress.

   [GMPLS-ISIS]     Kompella, K., and Rekhter, Y. (Ed.), "IS-IS
                    Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS",
                    <draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions>, work in
                    progress.

Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 13

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

   [GMPLS-OSPF]     Kompella, K., and Rekhter, Y. (Ed.), "OSPF
                    Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-ospf-gmpls-extensions>, work in
                    progress.

   [SEG-PROT]       Berger, L., Bryskin, I., Papadimitriou, D., and
                    Farrel, A., "GMPLS Based Segment Recovery",
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-segment-recovery>, work in
                    progress.

   [TRANSPORT-LMP]  Fedyk, D., Aboul-Magd, O., Brungard, D., Lang, J.,
                    Papadimitriou, D., "A Transport Network View of LMP"
                    <draft-ietf-ccamp-transport-lmp>, work in progress.

   For information on the availability of the following documents,
   please see http://www.itu.int.

   [G-8080]         ITU-T Recommendation G.8080/Y.1304, Architecture for
                    the automatically switched optical network (ASON).

   [G-805]          ITU-T Recommendation G.805 (2000), Generic
                    functional architecture of transport networks.

   [G-807]          ITU-T Recommendation G.807/Y.1302 (2001),
                    Requirements for the automatic switched transport
                    network (ASTN).

   [G-872]          ITU-T Recommendation G.872 (2001), Architecture of
                    optical transport networks.

12. Authors' Addresses

   Igor Bryskin
   Independent Consultant
   EMail:  i_bryskin@yahoo.com

   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting
   Phone:  +44 (0) 1978 860944
   EMail:  adrian@olddog.co.uk

13. Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 14

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-lexicography-02.txt               April 2005

14. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.















































Bryskin and Farrel                                               Page 15

