



Human Rights Protocol Considerations Research Group         N. ten Oever
Internet-Draft                                                ARTICLE 19
Intended status: Informational                          G. Perez de Acha
Expires: April 19, 2018                               Derechos Digitales
                                                                 C. Cath
                                               Oxford Internet Institute
                                                        October 16, 2017


                       Unrequested Communications
                   draft-tenoever-hrpc-unrequested-00

Abstract

   This document addresses the topic of unrequested traffic in the form
   of spam or DDoS attacks.  Instead of solely discussing these topics
   from a mere technical angle, it also addresses human rights
   implications of unrequested traffic.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Research Questions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   4.  Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     4.1.  DDOS Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     4.2.  Spam, filter bubbles, and unrequested messaging . . . . .   6
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Research Group Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     9.1.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     9.2.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   While researching the human rights impact of the Internet
   infrastructure we came across several cases which called upon the
   need to balance rights.  The balancing of human rights [UDHR] [ICCPR]
   is a process in which two conflicting rights, or two uses of the same
   right, need to be reconciled.

   We will specifically look at Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
   attacks as well as unwanted messaging such as spam.

2.  Glossary

3.  Research Questions

   Overal question:

   -  Should the IETF develop or change its position on unrequested
      messaging

   Specific questions

   -  Are Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks a legitimate form
      of online protest protected by the right to freedom of speech and
      association?

   -  Is spam a legitimate way of making use of the right to freedom of
      expression?



ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


4.  Analysis

4.1.  DDOS Attacks

   Are Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks a legitimate form of
   online protest protected by the right to freedom of speech and
   association?  Can they be seen as the equivalent to 'million-(wo)men
   marches', or sit-ins?  Or are they a threat to freedom of expression
   and access to information, by limiting access to websites and in
   certain cases the freedom of speech of others?  These questions are
   crucial in our day and age, where political debates, civil
   disobedience and other forms of activism are increasingly moving
   online.

   Many individuals, not excluding IETF engineers, have argued that DDoS
   attacks are fundamentally against freedom of speech.  Technically
   DDoS attacks are when one or multiple host overload the bandwidth or
   resources of another host by flooding it with traffic, causing it to
   temporarily stop being available to users.  One can roughly
   differentiate three types of DDoS attacks: Volume Based Attacked
   (This attack aims to make the host unreachable by using up all it's
   bandwith, often used techniques are: UDP floods and ICMP floods),
   Protocol Attacks (This attacks aims to use up actual server
   resources, often used techniques are SYN floods, fragmented packet
   attacks, and Ping of Death [RFC4949]) and Application Layer Attacks
   (this attack aims to bring down a server, such as the webserver).

   In their 2010 report Zuckerman et al argue that DDoS attacks are a
   bad thing because they are increasingly used by governments to attack
   and silence critics.  Their research demonstrates that in many
   countries independent media outlets and human rights organizations
   are the victim of DDoS attacks, which are directly or indirectly
   linked to their governments.  These types of attacks are particularly
   complicated because attribution is difficult, creating a situation in
   which governments can effectively censor content, while being able to
   deny involvement in the attacks [Zuckerman].  DDoS attacks can thus
   stifle freedom of expression, complicate the ability of independent
   media and human rights organizations to exercise their right to
   (online) freedom of association, while facilitating the ability of
   governments to censor dissent.  When it comes to comparing DDoS
   attacks to protests in offline life, it is important to remember that
   only a limited number of DDoS attacks involved solely willing
   participants.  In most cases, the clients are hacked computers of
   unrelated parties that have not consented to being part of a DDoS
   (for exceptions see Operation Abibil [Abibil] or the Iranian Green
   Movement DDoS [GreenMovement]).





ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   In addition, DDoS attacks are increasingly used as an extortion
   tactic, with criminals flooding a website - rendering it inaccessible
   - until the owner pays them a certain amount of money to stop the
   attack.  The costs of mitigating such attacks, either by improving
   security to prevent them or paying off the attackers, ends up being
   paid by the consumer.

   All of these issues seem to suggest that the IETF should try to
   ensure that their protocols cannot be used for DDoS attacks.
   Decreasing the number of vulnerabilities in the network stacks of
   routers or computers, reducing flaws in HTTPS implementations, and
   depreciating non-secure HTTP protocols could address this issue.  The
   IETF can clearly play a role in bringing about some of these changes,
   and has indicated in [RFC7258] its commitment to mitigating
   'pervasive monitoring (...) in the design of IETF protocols, where
   possible.'  This means the use of encryption should become standard.
   Effectively, for the web this means standardized use of HTTPS.  The
   IETF could redirect its work such that HTPPS becomes part-and-parcel
   of its standards.  However, next to the various technical trade-offs
   that this might lead to it is important to consider that DDoS attacks
   are sometimes seen as a method for exercising freedom of speech.

   DDoS although disruptive, and silencing at times, can also enable as
   protest and speech.  Or as Sauter [Sauter] argues: 'though DDoS as a
   tactic is still relatively novel, it fits within a centuries-long
   tradition of breaking laws and disrupting business as usual to make a
   political point.  These actions aren't simply disruption for
   disruption's sake.  Rather they serve to help the activist or
   dissenter to direct the attention of the public through the
   interpolation of difference into routine.' (30-31).  An often heard
   argument against DDoS attacks is that you cannot construe it as a
   means to exercise your right to freedom of speech, when the means
   used effectively impede the right of the party on the receiving end
   of the attack to exercise that same right.  The problem with this
   line of argumentation is that it conveniently ignores the fact that
   online DDoS attacks are often one of the few effective ways for
   activists to gain the attention of the media, the government or other
   parties of interest.  Simply putting up a website for a cause won't
   garner the same amount of attention as directly confronting the issue
   via the website of the individual or organization at the heart of the
   issue.  The ability of activists to do so should be protected,
   especially considering the fact that as Sauter (2014:4) explains:
   'Collectively, we have allowed the construction of an entire public
   sphere, the Internet, which by accidents of evolution and design, has
   none of the inherent free speech guarantees we have come to expect.
   Dissenting voices are pushed out of the paths of potential audiences,
   effectively removing them from the public discourse.  There is
   nowhere online for an activist to stand with her friends and her



ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   sign.  She might set up a dedicated blog--which may or may not ever
   be read--but it is much harder for her to stand collectively with
   others against a corporate giant in the online space.'  Although the
   Internet is often compared to public space, it is not.  Rather the
   opposite.  The Internet is almost entirely owned by private entities.
   And the IETF plays a crucial role in developing this privatized
   commercialized Internet.

   From a legal and political perspective, the IETF does not have the
   legitimacy to determine when a DDoS is legitimate (in legal or
   political terms).  It does not have the capability to make this
   judgment as a matter of public policy and subsequently translate it
   to code.  Nor should the IETF try to do so.  From a technical
   perspective, the difference between a 'legitimate' and 'illegitimate'
   DDoS attack is meaningless because it would be extremely difficult
   for the IETF to engineer a way to detect that difference.  In
   addition, there is a need for the IETF to be consistent in the face
   of attacks (an attack is an attack is an attack) to maintain the
   viability of the network.  Arguing that some DDoS attacks should be
   allowed, based on the motivation of the attackers complicates the
   work of the IETF.  Because it approaches PM regardless of the
   motivation of the attackers (see [RFC7258]) for reasoning), taking
   the motivation of the attackers into account for DDoS would
   indirectly undermine the ability of the IETF to protect the right to
   privacy because it introduces an element of inconsistency into how
   the IETF deals with attacks.

   David Clark recently published a paper warning that the future of the
   Internet is in danger.  He argues that the private sector control
   over the Internet is too strong, limiting the myriad of ways in which
   it can be used [Daedalus], including for freedom of speech.  But just
   because freedom of speech, dissent, and protest are human rights, and
   DDoS is a potential expression of those rights, doesn't mean that
   DDoS in and of itself is a right.  To widen the analogy, just because
   the Internet is a medium through which the right to freedom of
   expression can be exercised does not make access to the Internet or
   specific ICTs or NCTs a human right.  Uses of DDoS might or might not
   be legitimate for political reasons, but the IETF has no means or
   methods to assess this, and in general enabling DDoS would mean a
   deterioration of the network and thus freedom of expression.

   In summation, the IETF cannot be expected to take a moral stance on
   DDoS attacks, or create protocols to enable some attacks and inhibit
   others.  But what it can do is critically reflect on its role in
   creating a commercialized Internet without a defacto public space or
   inherent protections for freedom of speech.





ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


4.2.  Spam, filter bubbles, and unrequested messaging

   In the 1990s as the internet became more and more commercial, spam
   came to be defined as irrelevant or unsolicited messages that were
   porsted many times to multiple news groups or mailing lists [Marcus].
   Here the question of consent is crucial.  In the 2000s a large part
   of the discussion revolved around the fact that certain corporations
   -protected by the right to freedom of association- considered spam to
   be a form of "comercial speech", thus encompassed by free expression
   rights [Marcus].  Nonetheless, if we consider that the rights to
   assembly and association also mean that "no one may be compelled to
   belong to an association" [UDHR], spam infringes both rights if an
   op-out mechanism is not provided and people are obliged to receive
   unwanted information, or be reached by people they do not know.

   This leaves us with an interesting case: spam is currently handled
   mostly by mailproviders on behalf of the user, next to that countries
   are increasingly adopting opt-in regimes for mailinglists and
   commercial e-mail, with a possibility of serious fines in case of
   violation.

   While this protects the user from being confronted with unwanted
   messages, it also makes it legally and technically very difficult to
   communicate a message to someone who did not explicitly ask for this.
   In public offline spaces we regularly get exposed to flyers,
   invitations or demonstrations where our opinions get challenged, or
   we are invited to consider different viewpoints.  There is no
   equivalent on the Internet with the technical and legal regime that
   currently operates in it.  In other words, it is nearly impossible to
   provide information, in a proportionate manner, that someone is not
   explicility expecting or asking for.  This reinforces a concept that
   is regularly discussed on the application level, called 'filter
   bubble': "The proponents of personalization offer a vision of a
   custom-tailored world, every facet of which fits us perfectly.  It's
   a cozy place, populated by our favorite people and things and ideas."
   [Pariser].  "The filter bubble's costs are both personal and
   cultural.  There are direct consequences for those of us who use
   personalized filters.  And then there are societal consequences,
   which emerge when masses of people begin to live a filter bubbled-
   life (...).  Left to their own devices, personalization filters serve
   up a kind of invisible autopropaganda, indoctrinating us with our own
   ideas, amplifying our desire for things that are familiar and leaving
   us oblivious to the dangers lurking in the dark territory of the
   uknown."  [Pariser].

   It seems that the 'filter bubble'-effect can also be observed at the
   infrastructure level, which actually strenghtens the impact and thus
   hampers the effect of collective expression.  This could be



ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   interpretated as an argument for the injection of unrequested
   messages, spam or other unrequested notifications.  But the big
   difference between the proliferation of such messages offline and
   online is the investment that is needed.  It is not hard for a single
   person to message a lot of people, whereas if that person needed to
   go house by house the scale and impact of their actions would be much
   smaller.  Inversely if it were a common practice to expose people to
   unwanted messages online, users would be drowned in such messages,
   and no expression would be possible anymore.  Allowing illimited
   sending of unsolicited messages would be a blow against freedom of
   speech: when everyone talks, nobody listens.

   Here the argument is very similar to DDoS attacks: whereas one could
   argue for legitimate uses in limited specific cases, these would be
   drowned out by a malicious use which constitutes an attack on the
   internet infrastructure and thus the assembly or association itself.

5.  Conclusion

   While there might be narrow individual cases in which DDoS attacks or
   spam could be used to rightfully excercise freedom of expression,
   overal DDoS and spam are a self-defeating practice which harms both
   the Internet infrastructure and freedom of expression.

   The growing use of spam and DDoS attacks also leads to an increased
   dependency of website owners to rely on third party services for DDoS
   protection which leads to centralization and thus hampers the
   resilience of the Internet.  Furthermore the increase in spam attacks
   makes it harder for individuals to run a mailserver because of risks
   for hijacking and blacklisting of the mailserver, as well as the
   difficulties in filtering spam from messages that are actually
   wanted.

6.  Security Considerations

   As this draft concerns a research document, there are no security
   considerations.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

8.  Research Group Information

   The discussion list for the IRTF Human Rights Protocol Considerations
   Research Group is located at the e-mail address hrpc@ietf.org [1].
   Information on the group and information on how to subscribe to the
   list is at https://www.irtf.org/mailman/listinfo/hrpc



ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   Archives of the list can be found at: https://www.irtf.org/mail-
   archive/web/hrpc/current/index.html

9.  References

9.1.  Informative References

   [Abibil]   Danchev, D., "Dissecting 'Operation Ababil' - an OSINT
              Analysis", 2012, <http://ddanchev.blogspot.be/2012/09/
              dissecting-operation-ababil-osint.html>.

   [Daedalus]
              Clark, D., "The Contingent Internet", Daedalus Winter
              2016, Vol. 145, No. 1. p. 9-17 , 2016,
              <http://www.mitpressjournals.org/toc/daed/current>.

   [GreenMovement]
              Villeneuve, N., "Iran DDoS", 2009,
              <https://www.nartv.org/2009/06/16/iran-ddos/>.

   [ICCPR]    United Nations General Assembly, "International Covenant
              on Civil and Political Rights", 1976,
              <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/
              CCPR.aspx>.

   [Marcus]   Marcus, J., "Commercial Speech on the Internet: Spam and
              the first amendment", 1998, <http://www.cardozoaelj.com/
              wp-content/uploads/2013/02/Marcus.pdf>.

   [Pariser]  Pariser, E., "The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized
              Web Is Changing What We Read and How We Think", Peguin
              Books, London. , 2012.

   [RFC4949]  Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary, Version 2",
              FYI 36, RFC 4949, DOI 10.17487/RFC4949, August 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4949>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

   [Sauter]   Sauter, M., "The Coming Swarm", Bloomsbury, London , 2014.

   [UDHR]     United Nations General Assembly, "The Universal
              Declaration of Human Rights", 1948,
              <http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/>.





ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   hrpcurq                    October 2017


   [Zuckerman]
              Zuckerman, E., Roberts, H., McGrady, R., York, J., and J.
              Palfrey, "Report on Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
              Attacks", The Berkman Center for Internet and Society at
              Harvard University , 2010,
              <https://cyber.law.harvard.edu/sites/
              cyber.law.harvard.edu/
              files/2010_DDoS_Attacks_Human_Rights_and_Media.pdf>.

9.2.  URIs

   [1] mailto:hrpc@ietf.org

Authors' Addresses

   Niels ten Oever
   ARTICLE 19

   EMail: niels@article19.org


   Gisela Perez de Acha
   Derechos Digitales

   EMail: gisela@derechosdigitales.org


   Corinne Cath
   Oxford Internet Institute

   EMail: corinnecath@gmail.com




















ten Oever, et al.        Expires April 19, 2018                 [Page 9]
