


Network Working Group                                       V. Narayanan
Internet-Draft                                            Qualcomm, Inc.
Intended status: Best Current                                 L. Dondeti
Practice                                                  QUALCOMM, Inc.
Expires: August 29, 2007                               February 25, 2007


            Security Requirements for IP Mobility Protocols
                  draft-vidya-ip-mobility-sec-reqs-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 29, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes security requirements to take into account in
   designing IP mobility protocols and deploying IP mobility services.
   We consider threat models applicable to different service models and
   deployment scenarios and provide guidance on prioritizing the
   security requirements.





Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Functional Goals of IP Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Brief Summary of the Threat and Vulnerability Analysis . . . .  5
   5.  Security Requirements and Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11






































Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


1.  Introduction

   IP mobility service is vulnerable to various attacks generally
   applicable to IP routing protocols.  The threats include disruption
   to IP mobility signaling and disruption of other network services
   including routing, where the attacks may be facilitated by IP
   mobility signaling.

   The "IP Mobility - Threat Analysis" draft provides an analysis of the
   threats and vulnerabilities in an IP mobility system.  The analysis
   points out that off-path attackers may be able to create incorrect
   address binding(s) to launch denial of service (DoS) attacks on
   mobility agents and DDoS attacks on mobile nodes or even nodes that
   are reachable from the mobility domain.

   Based on the threat and vulnerability analysis, we generate a set of
   requirements in designing IP mobility systems and protocols.  In the
   rest of this document, we discuss the security requirements and their
   applicability to various scenarios and use cases.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

   In addition, this document uses the following terms (these terms are
   specified in the threats document also and perhaps elsewhere; the
   definitions will eventually be removed from all but one of the
   documents to avoid duplication):

   IP Mobility

      IP mobility refers to changes in the IP point of attachment of a
      node.  As a consequence of this change, a node may obtain a
      different (topologically meaningful) address.  The result is that
      a mobile node or network, as it moves, may obtain different
      topologically meaningful IP addresses that it can use for IP-based
      communications.  Some protocols allow the nodes to maintain the
      same IP address as they move across different IP points of
      attachment.

   IP Mobility Protocol

      An IP mobility protocol provides transparency to layers above IP
      from the changes in the IP addresses resulting from IP mobility.
      In particular, such protocols allow nodes to continue IP



Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


      communications independent of the current IP point of attachment
      and to preserve established communications across any
      corresponding IP address changes.  A key element of an IP mobility
      protocol is to detect movement and do what is needed to allow
      communication continuity.

   Mobility Agent

      A mobility agent is an entity maintaining state about the location
      of the mobile nodes.  Examples of mobility agents include the
      Mobile IP Home Agent (HA), the HMIP MAP, the FMIP PAR, NetLMM LMA,
      MIP6 RO-enabled CN, etc.

   Mobility Facilitator

      This refers to an entity other than a mobility agent that may play
      a role in facilitating the mobility management of the MN.
      Examples of such mobility facilitators include the NetLMM MAG,
      MIP4 FA, HMIP AR, etc.

   Mobility Provider

      Mobility provider collectively refers to the mobility agent and
      facilitators.

   Mobility Recipient

      The mobility recipient is the entity receiving the IP mobility
      service.  The MN is always the mobility recipient and hence these
      terms may be used interchangeably.

   Anchor Address

      This is used to refer to the relatively unchanging IP address of
      the MN.  Examples of anchor addresses are the MIP HoA, HMIP RCoA,
      FMIP PCoA, NetLMM RHoA, etc.  This is usually the address
      corresponding to which state is maintained in the mobility agent.
      The permanence and scope of the address may vary depending on the
      protocol.

   Transient Address

      This is used to refer to the relatively frequently changing IP
      address of the MN.  Examples of transient addresses are the MIP
      CoA, HMIP RCoA, FMIP NCoA, NetLMM PLCoA, etc.  This is usually the
      address that points to the present location of the MN.





Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


3.  Functional Goals of IP Mobility

   The mobility provider is generally interested in ensuring that the
   service is only provided to authorized entities.  It is also in the
   interest of the mobility provider to ensure that the service is
   provided as intended.  Providing IP mobility service entails the
   maintenance of state for all mobile nodes served, in order to
   maintain the mapping of the anchor and transient addresses of those
   nodes.  The mobile nodes, as recipients of the mobility service, are
   interested in having undisrupted and correct IP mobility service.  In
   other words, the mobile node must be able to obtain the service as
   long as it can reach the mobility agent.

   Reachability between the mobile node and the mobility agent is
   generally available as long as all the critical resources and a
   subset of non-critical resources are available.  Critical and non-
   critical assets are described in the threats document and briefly
   documented below.  Hence, the one of the most important functional
   goals of IP mobility is to ensure that as long as the mobile node and
   mobility agent may communicate, mobility service is available.


4.  Brief Summary of the Threat and Vulnerability Analysis

   The mobility threat and vulnerability analysis of "IP Mobility -
   Threat Analysis" can be summarized as follows:

   Asset Classification

      Mobility agents, mobile nodes, security infrastructure entities
      are classified as critical assets; mobility facilitators, network
      infrastructure entities such as routers and links are classified
      as non-critical assets.  The idea is that as long as a subset of
      uncompromised non-critical assets is available to facilitate
      communication between a mobile node and a mobility agent, the
      mobile node can signal its new transient address to the mobility
      agent.

   Equivalence of Off-path Attacks to On-path Attacks

      While there are some types of DoS attacks feasible by an on-path
      attacker such as dropping, modification or replay of packets, the
      same effect can be realized by an off-path attacker that can
      create incorrect state at the mobility agent.







Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


   Attacks on Mobility Agents

      Creation of state by unauthenticated nodes or creation of
      incorrect state by authenticated nodes at a mobility agent
      consumes address binding state and more importantly, possibly
      creates large amounts of spurious traffic through the mobility
      agent.

   Attacks on Mobile Nodes

      An assortment of attacks are possible on mobile nodes including
      redirection of traffic, DDoS attacks, or a combination of those
      attacks.

   Attacks on Other Nodes

      The threats to mobile nodes are also applicable to other nodes
      which are reachable through the mobility domain.


5.  Security Requirements and Recommendations

   Domino Effect Mitigation

      Following the functional goals of IP mobility, the mobility
      service must be available as long as the critical resources are
      available and there is reachability between the mobile node and
      mobility agent.  As such, non-critical resources are expected to
      be independent of each other.  Compromise of one or more non-
      critical entities MUST NOT compromise the other non-critical
      entities or the mobility session via other non-critical entities.

      In particular, it must not be possible for a compromised non-
      critical entity to impersonate the mobile node or cause
      redirection or DDoS attacks on it.

   Protection of Signaling Messages

      Signaling messages between a mobile node and a mobility agent MUST
      be integrity and replay protected; the mobility agent MUST also be
      able to verify the origin of the signaling message unambiguously.

      Channel protection as specified above is necessary to mitigate any
      on-path attackers modifying the signaling between the mobile node
      and the mobility agent.  The data origin authentication protection
      property of the secure channel may be used to ensure that the
      entity that created a binding entry is the entity that may modify
      that entry.



Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


   Authorization to Signal Mobility

      A mobility agent MUST only accept mobility signaling for a mobile
      node from authorized nodes.  For node-based mobility, this
      authorization translates to allowing only the mobile node to be
      capable of creating or modifying mobility bindings.  For network-
      based mobility, this is applicable to nodes that act as proxies to
      mobile nodes in maintaining address binding at mobility agents.

      There are two components to such entity authorization - one part
      is to ensure that a given entity is allowed to signal mobility and
      the other part is to ensure that the mobile node is actually
      present at the location.  For node-based mobility, these two
      aspects are tied to authorizing the mobile node.  For network-
      based mobility, these are different aspects.  The mobility agent
      MUST be able to verify whether the node signaling mobility is
      authorized to signal mobility.  Authorizing the mobility signaling
      using the appropriate security association ensures that the entity
      performing the signaling is allowed to do so for a node in the
      mobility domain.  However, the mobility agent SHOULD also be able
      to verify whether the mobile node is in fact present in the
      corresponding mobility domain.  In some cases, the mobility agent
      may be able to determine if the mobile node is actually associated
      with the actual entity that performed the mobility signaling.  In
      some other cases, only a domain-level check can be performed.

      Without entity authorization, compromise of the entity leads to
      compromise of any mobility session in the domain.

   IP Address Authorization

      IP Mobility deals with two addresses, the anchor address that
      remains the same within the mobility domain and the transient
      address that corresponds to the current location of the mobile
      node.



      Anchor IP Address Authorization

         Without anchor IP address authorization, an entity will be able
         to redirect traffic belonging to some other node.  Due to such
         redirection, a legitimate node (mobile or fixed) will be denied
         IP (and IP mobility) service.







Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


         Authorization for "anchor" address, e.g., MIP HoA, FMIP pCoA,
         HMIP RCoA, NETLMM RHoA, etc., ensures IP mobility service is
         only available for authorized nodes and protects against
         redirection, MiTM, and DoS attacks.

         A mobility agent receiving a address binding request MUST be
         able to verify whether the anchor address in the request
         belongs to the mobile node for which the request was sent.



      Transient IP Address Authorization

         By registering an invalid transient address, an attacker will
         be able to direct its traffic on to other nodes.  Authorization
         for "transient" address, e.g., MIP CoA, FMIP nCoA, HMIP LCoA,
         NETLMM PLCoA, etc., prevents such DDoS attacks.

         A mobility agent receiving a address binding request SHOULD be
         able to verify whether the transient address in the request
         corresponds to the current location of the mobile node for
         which the request was sent.

   Requirements on Key Management and Key Managers

      Key management protocols may be used to setup the security
      associations (SA) required to protect signaling messages.  These
      protocols MUST authenticate the parties to the authentication and
      tie the SA to the identities of the parties.

      Key managers or distributors and trust anchors are critical
      assets; they must be protected as such since the failure or
      compromise of a key distributor or trust anchor may result in
      disrupting the mobility service irreparably.

      Keys MUST be scoped for a given purpose; the same key MUST NOT be
      used for different purposes.

      Keys MUST be scoped to the signaling endpoints; in other words,
      the keys MUST NOT be known to non-critical assets or other
      entities that do not need it to perform their role.

   Privacy Requirements

      Privacy of nodes can be provided at several levels.  The goal of
      an IP mobility protocol should be tied to being able to provide
      privacy at the IP level for a mobile node.  A mobile node SHOULD
      be able to move across IP points of attachment without entities in



Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


      the home, visited or other networks being able to track it.  This
      includes being able to hide the actual transient address changes
      from correspondent or other nodes and being able to hide the
      anchor to transient address changes from entities in the home or
      visited domains.  Note that the mobility agent is an entity that
      always needs to be trusted to know the mapping of the anchor and
      transient addresses .


6.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies the security requirements for IP mobility
   service and protocol design.  The requirements are based on a threat
   and vulnerability analysis.  The eventual goal is to identify various
   operational scenarios and provide guidance on the order of the
   requirements listed in this document.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


8.  Acknowledgments


9.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Vidya Narayanan
   Qualcomm, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-2483
   Email: vidyan@qualcomm.com









Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


   Lakshminath Dondeti
   QUALCOMM, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-1267
   Email: ldondeti@qualcomm.com











































Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Requirements for Secure Mobility       February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Narayanan & Dondeti      Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 11]


