

   ENUM Working Group                                                   
   Internet Draft                                               S. Lind 
   Document: draft-lind-infrastructure-enum-reqs-                  AT&T 
   00.txt 
   Expires: January 2006                                      July 2005 
    
    
                     Infrastructure ENUM Requirements 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79." 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   There has been much discussion in various industries about the 
   concept of infrastructure (or carrier) ENUM. Some of this discussion 
   has been has been reflected within the ENUM WG mailing list and some 
   within other organizations, including ETSI, the US ENUM Forum and the 
   Country Code 1 ENUM LLC. While there has been consensus within some 
   pockets of individual efforts, there has been little consensus 
   industry-wide on even what infrastructure ENUM is, why it seems to be 
   important, or what the requirements for implementing it are.  
    
   At the request of the WG co-chairs, this document attempts to gather 
   together the bits and pieces from those discussions (i.e., I stole 
 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 1] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
   the words shamelessly from the various sources) and, with an absolute 
   minimum of editing, present them in some sort of cohesive manner that 
   will enable enlightened discussion and hopefully achieve consensus. 
   Some items listed below may be duplicative and suggest alternative 
   wordings for similar and other contradictory issues. As such, this 
   list is very raw and should not be viewed as complete, cohesive or 
   correct. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ii]. 
    
    
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Infrastructure ENUM............................................3 
      1.1 Definition.................................................3 
      1.2 Importance.................................................3 
   2. Requirements of Infrastructure ENUM............................4 
      2.1 Provisioning Requirements..................................4 
      2.2 Architecture Requirements..................................5 
      2.3 Application Behavior Requirements..........................5 
   3. Security Considerations........................................6 
   4. References.....................................................6 
   5. Author's Addresses.............................................7 
   6. Intellectual Property Statement................................7 
   7. Disclaimer of Validity.........................................8 
   8. Copyright Statement............................................8 
    
















 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 2] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
    
1.   Infrastructure ENUM 
    
    
1.1    Definition 
    
     a. Infrastructure ENUM is defined as the use of RFC 3761 [iii] by 
        the carrier-of-record for a specific E.164 number [iv] to 
        translate into a URI that specifies a specific point of 
        interconnection to that service providerÆs network that could 
        enable the originating party to establish communication with 
        associated terminating party. It is separate from any URIs that 
        the end-user, who registers their E.164 number, may wish to 
        associate with that E.164 number. 

     b. Carriers use E.164 numbers currently as their main naming and 
        routing vehicle. Carrier ENUM in e164.arpa or another public 
        available tree allows Carriers to link Internet based resources 
        such as URIs to E.164 numbers (Note: this is the other way round 
        then User ENUM). This allows Carrier in addition to 
        interconnecting via the PSTN (or exclusively) to peer via IP-
        based protocols. Carriers may announce all E.164 numbers or 
        number ranges they host, regardless if the final end-user device 
        is on the Internet, on IP-based closed NGNs or on the PSTN, 
        provided an access (e.g. SBC or gateway) to the destination 
        carriers network is available on the Internet. There is also no 
        guarantee that the originating carrier querying Carrier ENUM 
        that is able to access the ingress network element of the 
        destination carriers network. Additional peering and accounting 
        agreements requiring authentication may be necessary. The access 
        provided may also be to a shared network of a group of carriers, 
        resolving the final destination network within the shared 
        network. 
    
1.2    Importance 
    
   User ENUM in many countries requires end user opt-in and may give the 
   end user the right to select the Tier 2 that hosts the terminal NAPTR 
   records. These constraints are problematic for interconnection which 
   requires registration for all served numbers and carrier control of 
   Tier 2 to ensure reliability. 
    
   With the move towards all IP networks applications, interworking must 
   be addressed in order to facilitate global interoperability. 
   Different networks should interwork with each other through secure 
   interfaces that provide a high level of trust, particularly with 
   regard to any routing information obtained from an ENUM database. 
   Consideration must be given to how each network will interwork with 
   other networks. 
 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 3] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
  
   Until now ENUM according to RFC3761 in e164.arpa (User ENUM) has not 
   been seen as useful to an NGN/Telco/VoIP provider as it is reliant on 
   user action in terms of registration, insertion of data and 
   management of that data. Additionally, there is also controversy 
   regarding the inclusion of data within the NAPTR records which may be 
   publicly exposed in User ENUM. 
 
    
2.   Requirements of Infrastructure ENUM 
    
   For ease in thinking about these requirements and how any proposed 
   implementation might address them, they have been divided into three 
   categories: provisioning, architecture, and application behavior. 
    
2.1    Provisioning Requirements 
    

     a. It should not require the introduction of new constructs within 
        existing standards, such as new types or changed semantics of 
        NAPTR records. 

     b. The impact on existing implementations of User ENUM should be 
        kept to a minimum. This implies that modifications to existing 
        RFCs e.g. 3761, 3401-4 should be avoided. 

     c. It should keep the option open for other types of closed-user-
        group type applications, which might not naturally fit into the 
        predominantly voice-oriented - carrier ENUM scenario, like SMS 
        or MMS POI resolution. 

     d. Infrastructure ENUM should not remove the need for 
        authentication that the party inserting, modifying or removing 
        data in NAPTR records has a right to the corresponding number. 
        Authentication is still required and an appropriate 
        authentication procedure needs to be in place between the ENUM 
        Tier 1 Registry and the carrier serving the number. 

     e. Implementation of Infrastructure ENUM should not impact the 
        ability of an end-user, in a competitive environment, to choose 
        a Registrar and/or Tier 2 name server provider for end-user ENUM 
        registrations. 

     f. Designated DNS infrastructure for housing Infrastructure ENUM-
        related NAPTR records should have ôcarrier-classö reliability 
        and performance. 
 
    

 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 4] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
2.2    Architecture Requirements 
    

     a. It should meet all reasonable privacy concerns about visibility 
        of information an end user has no control over, for example 
        discovery of unlisted numbers, or inadvertent disclosure of user 
        identity. 

     b. provide information on how to route a service to a point of 
        carrier interconnection or ALG as expressed as a URI. For 
        privacy and or network security reasons this information may_ 
        need to be restricted to service providers and not generally 
        available to end users. [editorÆs note: some have argued that 
        they might provide a carrier record that generally points to a 
        public interconnection point, but would provide pointers to 
        specific interconnection points for specific interconnecting 
        network providers.]  

     c. It should be possible to introduce the scheme in a timely 
        manner, supporting current carrier needs.  Consequently, it is 
        desirable to deploy the scheme without re-opening already 
        settled questions of roles, responsibilities and international 
        coordination. 

     d. It should leave tree shape intact, i.e. requiring no wholesale 
        changes to existing tree layout. 

     e. It should be applicable for use with all national numbering 
        plans; particular challenges may be to ensure that a global 
        implementation is compatible with the use of variable length 
        numbering (e.g. as used in Germany and Austria) and DDI blocks. 

     f. It should work with both closed and open number plans without 
        resorting to wildcard records in the non-user controlled part of 
        the DNS, both to avoid associated semantic problems as well as 
        keeping the route to DNSSEC deployment open. 

     g. Some other groups, such as the GSM-A, have already decided to 
        use a separate domain of their own for infrastructure ENUM 
        purposes; e.g. "e164enum.net". The envisaged solution should 
        also include these ENUM domains within a global ENUM 
        infrastructure or at least to allow and facilitate interworking 
        between these different domains. 
    
    
2.3    Application Behavior Requirements 
    


 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 5] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
     a. A dialed E.164 number using ENUM should enable a call to go 
        through. 

     b. A single DNS lookup should suffice to resolve any given number. 

     c. A minimum number (ideally one) of independent lookups should be 
        required to obtain as many NAPTR records (end-user and carrier) 
        as possible. 

     d. A minimum number (ideally zero) of dependent lookups should be 
        required to obtain as many NAPTR records (end-user and carrier) 
        as possible. 

     e. Additional functionality should only be imposed on carrier 
        resolvers. 

     f. It should leave user ENUM resolution semantics intact, i.e. 
        requiring no wholesale changes to existing user ENUM resolvers. 

     g. Pre-existing knowledge of the numbering format should be kept to 
        a minimum. 
    
    
3.   Security Considerations 
    
   Existing security considerations for ENUM detailed in RFC 3761 still 
   apply.  Note that some registration validation issues concerning end 
   user ENUM may not apply to carrier ENUM.  Where the Tier 1 registry 
   is able to identify the carrier serving a number (e.g., based on 
   industry data for number block assignments and number portability), 
   registration might be more easily automated and a separate registrar 
   not required. 
    
    
4.   References 
    
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   ii  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   iii Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource         
      Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)         
      Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004. 



 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 6] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
                                                                         

   iv ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan", 
      Recommendation E.164, May 1997. 
    
    
    
    
    
5.   Author's Addresses 
    
   Steven D. Lind 
   AT&T 
   Room A201 
   180 Park Avenue 
   Florham Park, NJ 07932 
   USA 
   Phone: +1-973-236-6787 
   Email: sdlind@att.com 
     
    
6.   Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
 
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
 
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in 
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 7] 
                   Infrastructure ENUM Requirements          July 2005 
 
 
 
 
7.   Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
8.   Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
    





























 
 
Lind                    Expires - January 2006                [Page 8] 
