



Network Working Group                                     P. Saint-Andre
Internet-Draft                                                      &yet
Intended status: Informational                                   D. York
Expires: April 30, 2015                                 Internet Society
                                                        October 27, 2014


                The Chatroom Relay Role at IETF Meetings
                   draft-saintandre-chatroom-relay-02

Abstract

   During IETF meetings, individual volunteers often help sessions run
   more smoothly by relaying information back and forth between the
   physical meeting room and an associated textual chatroom (where
   remote participants can send questions or feedback to the physical
   room).

   This document provides suggestions for fulfilling the role of a
   chatroom relay.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Know Your Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Primary Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Additional Tasks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   During IETF meetings, individual volunteers often help sessions run
   more smoothly by relaying information back and forth between the
   physical meeting room and an associated textual chatroom.  This role
   is critical as it is currently the only "real-time" way for a remote
   attendee to provide feedback or comments back into most IETF meeting
   sessions (whether for an IETF working group, IRTF research group, or
   IETF "birds of a feather" or "BoF" session).  Although there are
   multiple ways that a remote attendee can listen and follow along, the
   chatroom provides a method of returning feedback to the physical
   meeting.

   This document provides suggestions for fulfilling the role of a
   chatroom relay.

2.  Terminology

   A chatroom relay is often referred to as a "Jabber scribe".  This
   term is misleading because nothing prevents the IETF from using a
   technology other than Jabber/XMPP [RFC6120] [XEP-0045] for chatrooms
   (say, IRC or an integrated collaboration environment), and more
   importantly because volunteers are not expected to scribe the
   complete contents of the meeting into the chatroom (which would be a
   much more onerous task than relaying selected information back and
   forth between the physical room and the chatroom).  Use of the term
   "scribe" might discourage people from volunteering to serve in the
   role.




Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


3.  Know Your Users

   The participants in a chatroom typically fall into three categories:

   o  Remote attendees who are listening to the audio stream or in some
      cases following the proceedings using a real-collaboration system
      (currently exemplified by the MeetEcho service).  These
      participants might wish to send questions or feedback to the
      physical room.

   o  IETF meeting attendees who are in another simultaneous session in
      a different physical room.  These participants are often
      monitoring the chatroom session to find out when a particular
      topic is being discussed or to observe what is being discussed in
      the chatroom.  Typically they are not able to listen to the audio
      stream and sometimes they ask for a higher level of commentary so
      that they can know when they might need to change locations to
      participate in the session's physical room.

   o  IETF meeting attendees who are in the same session.  These
      participants like to follow the discussions in the physical room
      and the chatroom at the same time.  They can also provide some
      assistance to chatroom relays.

   Because all chatroom sessions are logged during IETF meetings and the
   logs are publicly available, the logs can be a very useful history of
   what occurs during a meeting.  For that reason any additional
   information that can be supplied to remote participants can be very
   helpful.

4.  Primary Tasks

   Individuals who volunteer for the role of chatroom relay usually
   complete the following tasks:

   o  Relay questions and comments from the chatroom to the physical
      room.  This typically involves going to the microphone to relay
      the comment from the remote participant.

   o  Count the number of chatroom participants who virtually "hum",
      raise their hands, volunteer to provide feedback on documents,
      etc., and feed that information back to the physical room.

   o  Relay information about hums and similar interactions from the
      physical room to the chatroom (preferably after receiving a
      "reading" from the session chairs).





Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


   It is the convention in most sessions that the chatroom relay has the
   privilege to go to the front of the microphone line to relay the
   question(s) from remote participants.  Some chatroom relays choose to
   exercise that privilege while others choose to wait in line along
   with the participants in the physical meeting rooom.

5.  Additional Tasks

   Additionally some chatroom relays often complete the following tasks:

   o  Relay the names of people speaking in the physical room to the
      chatroom.

   o  Relay the slide numbers or slide names to help chatroom
      participants follow along.

   o  Query remote participants about audio streaming quality, and relay
      such information to the session chairs.

   o  Relay to the chatroom participants any logistical or procedural
      issues related to the meeting (for instance, known technical
      glitches at the physical meeting or delays in starting the
      session).

   o  Provide links to the current set of slides and the document being
      discussed so that chatroom participants can easily follow along.

   Although chatroom relays are not generally expected to scribe the
   complete contents of conversations that happen the physical room to
   the chatroom, they sometimes relay the gist of such conversations,
   especially during ad-hoc discussions for which slides are not
   available.  (By prior arrangement between the session chairs and the
   chatroom relay, more detailed scribing might be expected for
   particular sessions.)

6.  Suggestions

   Experience has shown that the following behaviors make it easier to
   act as a chatroom relay.

   If you have volunteered before the session:

   o  Coordinate with the chairs to ensure that remote participants have
      received information about where to find the meeting materials,
      agenda, audio stream, etc. (e.g., this information can be sent to
      a working group discussion list so that remote participants do not
      need to ask about it on entering the chatroom).




Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


   o  Coordinate with the chairs to see if they have any special
      expectations for the chatroom relay (e.g., some chairs might want
      you to actually "scribe" more detailed information about the
      session proceedings into the chatroom).

   o  Ask the session chairs whether it is acceptable for you to advance
      to the front of the mic line with time-sensitive comments from
      remote participants.

   As you are getting settled and ready for the meeting to start:

   o  Seat yourself near the microphone most likely to be used for
      discussions in the physical room, so that you can more easily
      capture the names of people who come to the mic.  Typically this
      will be a seat near the end of a row or in some location where you
      can easily get up out of your seat to go to the microphone.

   o  It can be helpful to open several browser windows or tabs for:

      *  the agenda page for the session

      *  the materials page so that you can relay links to slides if
         necessary

      *  the documents page for the working group or research group (or
         BoF wiki page) in case you want easy access to documents
         mentioned but not in the agenda page

      *  the meeting registration system page (see below)

   o  Determine if the session will be streamed via a real-collaboration
      system such as MeetEcho.  If so, that system might automatically
      post the slide names into the chatroom and this is one less task
      you need to be concerned about.

   o  If the session is large or is expected to be especially active
      (e.g., a controversial BoF), find an assistant who can help you by
      sitting at another mic, taking turns relaying information, etc.

   Identifying one or more assistants is very useful particularly if you
   want to go up to the microphone to speak as an individual or if you
   need to take a break or step out of the physical room at some point.

   During the session:

   o  Identify yourself in both the physical room and the chatroom so
      that participants in both venues know that you are a relay.




Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


   o  Ask chatroom participants what level of information they need
      relayed into the chatroom.  For example if all chatroom
      participants are listening via audio or a system like MeetEcho
      they might need very little information relayed from the room.

   o  Ask chatroom participants to prepend statements they would like
      you to relay with "RELAY" or "MIC" (the former term is less
      ambiguous).

   o  When relaying a question or comment from the chatroom to the
      physical room, say "this is X relaying for Y from the chatroom" so
      that people know you are not speaking for yourself.

   o  It's not expected that you will know the names of everyone who
      comes to the mic.  If you don't know the name of a person at the
      microphone, you have several options:

      *  look at their name badge if you are seated nearby

      *  query them directly (calling out "state your name, please" is
         acceptable)

      *  ask in the chatroom or type something like "?? at the mic",
         since it is likely that someone who is present in both the
         physical room and the chatroom will be able to identify the
         person for you

      *  look up the name of the attendee in the meeting registration
         system (this is typically found at a URL of the form "https://
         www.ietf.org/registration/<meeting>/attendance.py", such as
         "https://www.ietf.org/registration/ietf90/attendance.py"); you
         can quickly look up a name using this system if you are in
         doubt.

   o  Be aware that lag happens between the time when something is said
      in the physical room and the time when someone provides a response
      in the chatroom, and take this into account when the interaction
      is time-sensitive (e.g., during a hum or a show of hands).

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no actions from the IANA.

8.  Security Considerations

   Although XMPP multi-user chat rooms [XEP-0045] can be configured to
   lock down nicknames and require registration with the chatroom in
   order to join, at the time of this writing IETF chatrooms are not so



Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Chatroom Relay Role              October 2014


   configured.  This introduces the possibility of social engineering
   attacks on discussions held in IETF chatrooms.  It can be helpful for
   chatroom relays to be aware of this possibility.

   Denial of service (DoS) attacks of various kinds are possible, e.g.,
   flooding a chatroom with unwanted or automated traffic.

9.  References

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, March 2011.

   [XEP-0045]
              Saint-Andre, P., "Multi-User Chat", XSF XEP 0045, February
              2012.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Dan Burnett, Jelte Jansen, Warren Kumari, Hugo Salgado,
   Yaakov Stein, and Greg Wood for their input.  Thoughts and ideas sent
   by Wes George and Janet Gunn to an IETF 87 mailing list were
   incorporated into this document.

Authors' Addresses

   Peter Saint-Andre
   &yet

   Email: peter@andyet.com
   URI:   https://andyet.com/


   Dan York
   Internet Society

   Email: york@isoc.org
   URI:   https://www.internetsociety.org/














Saint-Andre & York       Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 7]
