



IPWAVE Working Group                                       J. Jeong, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   Y. Shen
Intended status: Standards Track                 Sungkyunkwan University
Expires: November 8, 2020                                        J. Park
                                                                    ETRI
                                                             May 7, 2020


 Basic Support for Security and Privacy in IP-Based Vehicular Networks
                 draft-jeong-ipwave-security-privacy-01

Abstract

   This document describes possible attacks of security and privacy in
   IP Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (IPWAVE).  It also
   proposes countermeasures for those attacks.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 8, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Security Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  False Information Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Impersonation Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Denial-of-Service Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.4.  Message Suspension Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.5.  Tampering Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.6.  Tracking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security Countermeasures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Identification and Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Integrity and Confidentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Non-Repudiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.4.  Remote Attestation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.5.  Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Appendix A.  Changes from draft-jeong-ipwave-security-privacy-00   11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Vehicular networking has become popular by the enhancement of
   Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) [ISO-ITS-IPv6].  The
   vehicular networking can work based on Dedicated Short-Range
   Communications (DSRC) [DSRC].  This DSRC is realized by the IEEE
   Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) [WAVE-1609.0].
   Especially, IEEE 802.11-OCB (Outside the Context of Basic Support
   Set) [IEEE-802.11-OCB] provides the Media Access Control (MAC) for
   vehicles in vehicular networks.  IP-based vehicular networking can be
   supported with IPv6 over IEEE 802.11-OCB [RFC8691], which defines the
   IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND), Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), and
   MAC layer adaptation.

   Vehicles can construct Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET) by
   themselves without any infrastructure node such as a Road-Side Unit
   (RSU).  Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control and Autonomous Driving
   (i.e., Self-Driving) services can take advantage of this vehicular
   networking for safe driving through the wireless communications among
   vehicles.

   When using IP-based vehicular networks in self-driving environments,
   the information exchange among self-driving vehicles are critical to



Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   the safety of vehicles since the information received from other
   vehicles may be used as inputs for vehicle maneuvers.  Thus,
   identifying potential loopholes in the IP-based vehicular networks
   becomes crucial.

   This document describes possible attacks on security and
   vulnerabilities of privacy in IP Wireless Access in Vehicular
   Environments (IPWAVE).  It also proposes countermeasures for those
   attacks and vulnerabilities.

2.  Terminology

   This document uses the definitions defined in the IPWAVE problem
   statement document [ID-IPWAVE-PS].

3.  Security Attacks

   This section explains possible attacks of security and
   vulnerabilities of privacy in IP-based vehicular networks.

   Security and privacy are very important in V2I, V2V, and V2X
   communications in vehicular networks.  Only identified and authorized
   vehicles should be allowed to be involved in vehicular networking.
   Furthermore, in-vehicle devices in a vehicle and mobile devices of a
   driver and passengers are required to communicate with other devices
   in VANET or the Internet in a secure and reliable way.

   In reality, there are many possible security attacks in vehicular
   networks.  The exemplary security attacks are false information
   attack, impersonation attack, denial-of-service attack, message
   suspension attack, tampering attack, and tracking.  By these attacks,
   the vehicles can be put into dangerous situations by false
   information and information loss.

   For those attacks, security countermeasures are required to protect
   vehicles.  With these countermeasures, vehicles can exchange their
   driving data with neighboring vehicles and infrastructure nodes
   (e.g., edge computing device and cloud server) for safe driving as
   well as efficient navigation in road networks.

3.1.  False Information Attack

   Malicious vehicles may intentionally disseminate false driving
   information (e.g., location, speed, and direction) to let the driving
   of other vehicles be unsafe and then other vehicles meet accidents.
   Especially, a representative example is Sybil attack.  This Sybil
   attack makes multiple false identities of non-existing vehicles
   (i.e., virtual bogus vehicles) in order to confuse other good



Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   vehicles in safe driving, and makes these good vehicles take wrong
   maneuvers, leading to fatalities.

   In vehicular networks, a malicious vehicle can create multiple
   virtual bogus vehicles, and generate global IPv6 addresses and
   register them with a Mobility Anchor (MA) via an RSU.  This IP
   address autoconfiguration makes the RSU and MA waste their
   computation power and storage resources for IP address
   autoconfiguration and mobility management.  Thus, the RSU and MA need
   to determine whether a vehicle is genuine or bogus in the IP address
   autoconfiguration and mobility management.

3.2.  Impersonation Attack

   Malicious vehicles can pretend to be other vehicles with forged IP
   addresses or MAC address as IP address spoofing and MAC address
   spoofing, respectively.  This attack is called impersonation attack
   to masquerade a vehicle and user.

   To detect such an impersonation attack, an authentication scheme
   needs to check whether the MAC address and IPv6 address of a vehicle
   is associated with the vehicle's permanent identifier (e.g., a
   driver's certificate identifier) or not.

3.3.  Denial-of-Service Attack

   Malicious vehicles (or compromised vehicles) can generate bogus
   services requests to either a vehicle or a server in the vehicular
   cloud so that either the vehicle or the server is extremely busy with
   the requests, and cannot process valid request in a prompt way.  This
   attack is called Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack.

   For example, in the IPv6 ND for vehicular networks, the vehicular-
   network-wide DAD can be performed via an RSU and a MA to guarantee
   that the IPv6 address of a vehicle's wireless interface is unique in
   the vehicular network.  The ND packets for the DAD process are
   forwarded to other vehicles, an RSU, and an MA.

   To detect and mitigate this DoS attack, the vehicles need to
   collaborate with each other to monitor a suspicious activity related
   to the DoS attack, that is, the generation of messages more than the
   expected threshold in a certain service.

3.4.  Message Suspension Attack

   Malicious vehicles can drop packets originated by other vehicles in
   multihop V2V or V2I communications, which is called a Message
   Suspension Attack.  This packet dropping can hinder the data exchange



Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   for safe driving in cooperative driving environments.  Also, in
   multi-hop V2V or V2I communications, this packet dropping can
   interfere with the reliable data forwarding among the communicating
   entities (e.g., vehicle, client, and server).

   For the reliable data transfer, a vehicle performing the message
   suspension attack needs to be detected by good vehicles and a good
   RSU, and it should be excluded in vehicular communications.

3.5.  Tampering Attack

   An authorized and legitimate vehicle may be compromised by a hacker
   so that it can run a malicious firmware or software (malware), which
   is called a tampering attack.  This tampering attack may endanger the
   vehicle's computing system, steal the vehicle's information, and
   track the vehicle.  Also, such a malware can generate bogus data
   traffic for DoS attack against other vehicles, and track other
   vehicles, and collect other vehicles' information.

   The forgery of firmware or software in a vehicle needs to be
   protected against hackers.  The forgery prevention of firmware such
   as the bootloader of a vehicle's computing system can be performed by
   a secure booting scheme.  The safe update of the firmware can be
   performed by a secure firmware update protocol.  The abnormal
   behaviors by the forgery of firmware or software can be monitored by
   a remote attestation scheme.

3.6.  Tracking

   The MAC address and IPv6 address of a vehicle's wireless interface
   can be used as an identifier.  An hacker can track a moving vehicle
   by collecting and tracing the data traffic related to the MAC address
   or IPv6 address.

   To avoid the illegal tracking by a hacker, the MAC address and IPv6
   address of a vehicle need to be periodically updated.  However, the
   change of those addresses needs to minimize the impact of ongoing
   sessions on performance.

4.  Security Countermeasures

   This section proposes countermeasures against the attacks of security
   and privacy in IP-based vehicular networks.








Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


4.1.  Identification and Authentication

   Good vehicles are ones having valid certificates (e.g., X.509
   certificate), which can be validated by an authentication method
   through an authentication server [RFC5280].

   Along with an X.509 certificate, a Vehicle Identification Number
   (VIN) can be used as a vehicle's identifier to efficiently
   authenticate the vehicle and its driver through a road infrastructure
   node (e.g., RSU and MA), which is connected to an authentication
   server in vehicular cloud.  X.509 certificates can be used as
   Transport Layer Security (TLS) certificates for the mutual
   authentication of a TCP connection between two vehicles or between a
   vehicle and a corresponding node (e.g., client and server) in the
   Internet.

   Good vehicles can also use a Decentralized Identifier (DID) with the
   help of a verifiable claim service.  In this case, vehicles can their
   DID as a unique identifier, and then check the identity of any
   joining vehicle with its verifiable claim.

4.2.  Integrity and Confidentiality

   For secure V2I or V2V communications, a secure channel between two
   communicating entities (e.g., vehicle, RSU, client, and server) needs
   to be used to check the integrity of packets exchanged between them
   and support their confidentiality.  For this secure channel, a pair
   of session keys between two entities (e.g., vehicle, RSU, MA, client,
   and server) needs to be set up.

   For the establishment of the session keys in V2V or V2I
   communications, an Internet Key Exchange Protocol version 2 (IKEv2)
   can be used [RFC7296].  Also, for the session key generation, either
   an RSU or an MA can play a role of a Software-Defined Networking
   (SDN) Controller to make a pair of session keys and other session
   parameters (e.g., a hash algorithm and an encryption algorithm)
   between two communicating entities in vehicular networks
   [ID-SDN-IPsec].

4.3.  Non-Repudiation

   A malicious vehicle can disseminate bogus messages to its neighboring
   vehicles as a sybil attack.  This sybil attack announces wrong
   information of a vehicle's existence and mobility information to
   normal vehicles.  This may cause accidents (e.g., vehicle collision
   and pedestrian damage).  In the case of the occurrence of an
   accident, it is important to localize and identify the criminal




Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   vehicle with a non-repudiation method through the logged data during
   the navigation of vehicles.

   For non-repudiation, the messages generated by a vehicle can be
   logged by its neighboring vehicles.  As an effective non-repudiation,
   a blockchain technology can be used.  Each message can be treated as
   a transaction and the adjacent vehicles can play a role of peers in
   consensus methods such as Proof of Work (PoW) and Proof of Stake
   (PoS) [Bitcoin].

4.4.  Remote Attestation

   To prevent a tampering attack by the forgery of firmware/software, a
   secure booting can be performed by Root of Trust (RoT) and a remote
   attestation can be performed through both the secure booting and RoT
   [ID-NSF-Remote-Attestation][ID-Remote-Attestation-Arch].

   The secure booting can make sure that the bootloader of the vehicle's
   computing system is a legitimate one with the digital signature of
   the boofloader by using the RoT of Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
   [ISO-IEC-TPM] or Google Titan Chip [Google-Titan-Chip].

   A firmware update service can be made in blockchain technologies
   [Vehicular-BlockChain].  The validity of a brand-new firmware can be
   proven by a blockchain of the firmware, having the version history.
   Thus, This blockchain can manage a brand-new firmware or software and
   distribute it in a secure way.

   The remote attestation can monitor the behaviors of the vehicle's
   computing system such that the system is working correctly according
   to the policy and configuration of an administrator or user
   [ID-NSF-Remote-Attestation][ID-Remote-Attestation-Arch].  For this
   remote attestation, a secure channel should be established between a
   verifier and a vehicle.

4.5.  Privacy

   To avoid the tracking of a vehicle with its MAC address, a MAC
   address pseudonym can be used, which updates the MAC address
   periodically.  This update triggers the update of the vehicle's IPv6
   address because the IPv6 address of a network interface is generated
   with the interface's MAC address.  The MAC address and IPv6 address
   can be updated by the guideline in [RFC4086] and a method in
   [RFC4941], respectively.

   The update of the MAC address and the IPv6 address affects the on-
   going traffic flow because the source node or destination node of the
   packets of the flow are identified with the node's MAC address and



Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   IPv6 address.  This update on a vehicle requires the update of the
   neighbor caches of the vehicle's neighboring vehicles for multihop
   V2V communications, as well as the neighbor caches of the vehicle's
   neighboring vehicles and the neighbor tables of an RSU, and an MA in
   multihop V2I communications.

   Without strong confidentiality, the update of the MAC address and
   IPv6 address can be observed by an adversary, so there is no privacy
   benefit in tracking prevention.  The update needs to be notified to
   only the trustworthy vehicles, RSU, and MA.

   Also, for the continuity of an end-to-end (E2E) transport-layer
   (e.g., TCP, UDP, and SCTP) session, the new IP address for the
   transport-layer session can be notified to an appropriate end point
   through a mobility management scheme such as Mobile IP Protocols
   (e.g., Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [RFC6275] and Proxy MIPv6 (PMIPv6)
   [RFC5213]).  This mobility management overhead and impact of
   pseudonyms should be minimized on the performance of vehicular
   networking.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document discussed security considerations for IPWAVE security
   and privacy in Section 3 and Section 4.

6.  Acknowledgments

   This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications
   Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Ministry
   of Science and ICT (MSIT), Korea, (R-20160222-002755, Cloud based
   Security Intelligence Technology Development for the Customized
   Security Service Provisioning).

   This work was supported in part by the MSIT under the Information
   Technology Research Center (ITRC) support program (IITP-
   2019-2017-0-01633) supervised by the IITP.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [ID-IPWAVE-PS]
              Jeong, J., "IPv6 Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments
              (IPWAVE): Problem Statement and Use Cases", draft-ietf-
              ipwave-vehicular-networking-14 (work in progress), March
              2020.





Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   [RFC4086]  Eastlake 3rd, D., Schiller, J., and S. Crocker,
              "Randomness Requirements for Security", RFC 4086, June
              2005.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Ed., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V.,
              Chowdhury, K., and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6",
              RFC 5213, August 2008.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [RFC6275]  Perkins, C., Ed., Johnson, D., and J. Arkko, "Mobility
              Support in IPv6", RFC 6275, July 2011.

   [RFC7296]  Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P., Nir, Y., Eronen, P., and T.
              Kivinen, "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2
              (IKEv2)", RFC 7296, October 2014.

   [RFC8691]  Benamar, N., Haerri, J., Lee, J., and T. Ernst, "Basic
              Support for IPv6 Networks Operating Outside the Context of
              a Basic Service Set over IEEE Std 802.11", RFC 8691,
              December 2019.

7.2.  Informative References

   [Bitcoin]  Nakamoto, S., "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash
              System", URL: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, May 2009.

   [DSRC]     ASTM International, "Standard Specification for
              Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between
              Roadside and Vehicle Systems - 5 GHz Band Dedicated Short
              Range Communications (DSRC) Medium Access Control (MAC)
              and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications",
              ASTM E2213-03(2010), October 2010.

   [Google-Titan-Chip]
              Google, "Titan in depth: Security in plaintext", URL:
              https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/gcp/titan-in-depth-
              security-in-plaintext, October 2018.






Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


   [ID-NSF-Remote-Attestation]
              Pastor, A., Lopez, D., and A. Shaw, "Remote Attestation
              Procedures for Network Security Functions (NSFs) through
              the I2NSF Security Controller", draft-pastor-i2nsf-nsf-
              remote-attestation-07 (work in progress), February 2019.

   [ID-Remote-Attestation-Arch]
              Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote Attestation Procedures Architecture",
              draft-ietf-rats-architecture-02 (work in progress), March
              2020.

   [ID-SDN-IPsec]
              Marin-Lopez, R., Lopez-Millan, G., and F. Pereniguez-
              Garcia, "Software-Defined Networking (SDN)-based IPsec
              Flow Protection", draft-ietf-i2nsf-sdn-ipsec-flow-
              protection-07 (work in progress), August 2019.

   [IEEE-802.11-OCB]
              "Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and
              Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications", IEEE Std
              802.11-2016, December 2016.

   [ISO-IEC-TPM]
              ISO/IEC JTC 1, "Information technology - Trusted Platform
              Module - Part 1: Overview", ISO/IEC 11889-1:2015, August
              2015.

   [ISO-ITS-IPv6]
              ISO/TC 204, "Intelligent Transport Systems -
              Communications Access for Land Mobiles (CALM) - IPv6
              Networking", ISO 21210:2012, June 2012.

   [Vehicular-BlockChain]
              Dorri, A., Steger, M., Kanhere, S., and R. Jurdak,
              "BlockChain: A Distributed Solution to Automotive Security
              and Privacy", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 55, No.
              12, December 2017.

   [WAVE-1609.0]
              IEEE 1609 Working Group, "IEEE Guide for Wireless Access
              in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) - Architecture", IEEE Std
              1609.0-2013, March 2014.








Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Basic Support for Security and Privacy         May 2020


Appendix A.  Changes from draft-jeong-ipwave-security-privacy-00

   The following changes are made from draft-jeong-ipwave-security-
   privacy-00:

   o  This version has a submission date update to maintain the active
      status of the draft.

   o  This version updates the version numbers of the referenced drafts.

Authors' Addresses

   Jaehoon (Paul) Jeong (editor)
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering
   Sungkyunkwan University
   2066 Seobu-Ro, Jangan-Gu
   Suwon, Gyeonggi-Do  16419
   Republic of Korea

   Phone: +82 31 299 4957
   Fax:   +82 31 290 7996
   EMail: pauljeong@skku.edu
   URI:   http://iotlab.skku.edu/people-jaehoon-jeong.php


   Yiwen (Chris) Shen
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering
   Sungkyunkwan University
   2066 Seobu-Ro, Jangan-Gu
   Suwon, Gyeonggi-Do  16419
   Republic of Korea

   Phone: +82 31 299 4106
   Fax:   +82 31 290 7996
   EMail: chrisshen@skku.edu
   URI:   http://iotlab.skku.edu/people-chris-shen.php


   Jung-Soo Park
   Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
   218 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu
   Daejeon  34129
   Republic of Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 6514
   EMail: pjs@etri.re.kr





Jeong, et al.           Expires November 8, 2020               [Page 11]
