 



ITS Working Group                                             Minpeng Qi
Internet-Draft                                              China Mobile
Intended Status: Standards Track
Expires: January 7, 2017                                    July 7, 2016 
                                                            


  Authentication Problem Statement for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication
                      draft-qi-its-v2vauth-00


Abstract

   This document specifies the problem statement for authentication
   issue analysis in the vehicle-to-vehicle communication. It gives
   privacy protection and certification considerations for
   authentication designing.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Minpeng Qi                Expires January 7, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      V2V Authentication Problem Statement    July 7, 2016


   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2  Privacy consideration in authentication . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3  Authentication by using Certificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4  Authentication by using other credential  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5  Security Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5





   



   

   

   














Minpeng Qi                Expires January 7, 2017                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    V2V Authentication Problem Statement       July 7, 2016


1  Introduction

   During the V2V communication, attacker could personate as a legal
   vehicle to communicate with others if there is no authentication.
   Attackers could also sends any fake message out, or collect sensitive
   information without any worries to be caught. It will pollute the
   environment for V2V communication. As a result, authentication is
   needed for V2V.
   This document considers some authentication issues raised in V2V
   environment, including privacy and certification usage.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2  Privacy consideration in authentication 

   Privacy is very important for V2V communication. During V2V
   communication, the peer could bind vehicle's identity and location
   together. This will cause tracking problem. So vehicle's effective
   identity MUST NOT be revealed to the peer. However, as mentioned
   above, vehicle could not be as completely anonymous when communicate
   with the peer, as this will lead to illegal behavior happening. So
   privacy protection should be designed carefully.

   A possible compromised mechanism is using a temporary identity instead
   of vehicle's real identity, or could be recognized as permanent
   identity, in the communication process. The temporary ID MUST be able
   to be bound with permanent ID in some way. The binding relationship
   SHOULD be revealed to specified 3rd party and could be traced back
   under some situation. If not, it means temporary ID could not be bound
   with permanent ID, or the binding relationship is only kept with the
   vehicle. This permanent ID could be seen as another kind of anonymous
   ID, because it will cause permanent ID could not be traced back when
   attacking is happened with such temporary ID. And that's should be
   prevented. So temporary ID must be bound with its permanent ID and be
   revealed. As a result, this temporary ID could be considered as a
   pseudonym. For example, when using certificate in authentication,
   common name in certificate could be seen as such pseudonym, the
   information registered in CA for certificate issuing could be seen as
   such permanent ID. CA could be seen as the 3rd part to keep the
   binding relationship. And this should also be applied for other
   solution when certificate is not used in authentication.

   In another aspect, a temporary ID should not be available with a long
   time. Privacy in a nutshell encompasses the inability for any entity
   to track a vehicle UE beyond a short (e.g. 5 minutes) time interval.

   
Minpeng Qi                Expires January 7, 2017                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    V2V Authentication Problem Statement       July 7, 2016


3  Security Considerations
   For mutual authentication of V2V communication, the easiest
   implementation is using certificate. All vehicles own certificates
   and send its proper certificates or certificate chain to the peer in
   order to prove its identity.

   Considering different certificate issued to different vehicles by
   different CA, vehicle should maintain a lot of certificates of root
   CA, which is used for verify certificate sent by the peer. However,
   in some regions/area/countries where vehicles are manufactured,
   vehicle may be required to hold certificate issued by special CA.
   This leads problem that those vehicle may be not able to be verified
   when communicates with other vehicles, as the other vehicles may not
   have certificate for such special root CA.

   Another problem is raised for delay time. The time window is small for
   V2V communication due to the high movement of vehicles. It has strict
   requirement as such communication could be seen as real-time
   communication. However, when vehicle gets certificate chains from the
   peer, it should verify each certificate in the chain to get the result.
   It will cause time consuming.

   Another issue for certificate is validity period. It the period is too
   long, the leaking risk will be raised. Then compromised certificate
   should be revoked. If we need to consider such issue, additional
   mechanism should be introduced in vehicle, such as OCSP, or CRL.
   Vehicle should be able to verify the validity of received certificate
   from peers through OCSP protocol. Connecting CA is needed in this case.
   Applying OCSP protocol will cause additional delay in authentication.
   So it is not very fit for V2V communication scenarios. Or it should be
   able to maintain a CRL database. When using CRL, vehicle needs to
   download CRL file before using it, or when the old file is out of
   date. This is similar like using OCSP. What is more, maintenance of
   CRL database will require additional storage. It is not advisable as
   vehicle's performance is usually limited. Therefore, when certificate
   is used in authentication, the validity of certificates needs to be
   set in a reasonable range. With fast expiration of certificates, the
   risk of leakage could be reduced. And it could avoid checking the
   validity of certificate. In another aspect, the privacy protection also
   requires short certificate validity time, as common name needs to be
   changed in short time.

   However, it the validity time is too short, it also has some problems.
   It requires CA should issues certificate issuing very frequently. So
   it requires vehicle should communicate with CA in a frequent way,
   nearly like always online. But this requirement is hardly fulfilled.
   When vehicle is driven outside in the wild, it is difficult to keep
   the connection between vehicle and CA. There is another option, that
   CA could issue a bulk certificates to vehicle. Such certificates have
   

Minpeng Qi                Expires January 7, 2017                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    V2V Authentication Problem Statement       July 7, 2016


   different expiration times to implement time interval. In this way,
   vehicle needs to maintain many certificates. If CA will issue all
   certificates expired in a year once, and the time interval is 5
   minutes as mentioned above (in privacy section), it means more than
   100,000 certificates should be stored in vehicle. That's huge burden
   for vehicle. What is more, such certificates should be used one by one,
   with validate time sequence strictly. This will bring more cost for
   vehicle implementation. But it still has same problem that certificate
   could be leaked, especially for the certificates whose expiration date
   is longer.

   In a word, if we want to use certificate in authentication, a new
   mechanism for certificate fitting for V2V communication is needed,
   which should covers certificate's generation, issue, verification,
   validation and revocation. Or some attached mechanism for certificate
   should be designed.

4  Authentication by using other credential

   TBD.
   (This section should consider problems raised by any other mechanism
   without using certificate.)

5  Security Consideration

   This documents are specifies security issues.

6  Acknowledgements

7  References


Authors' Addresses

   Minpeng Qi
   China Mobile
   32 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xicheng District
   Beijing 100053
   China

   Email: qiminpeng@chinamobile.com



Minpeng Qi                Expires January 7, 2017                [Page 5]
