


Internet Engineering Task Force                              Nam-Seok Ko
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Intended status: Informational                               C. Williams
Expires: January 7, 2010                                      Consultant
                                                                  J. Qin
                                                                     ZTE
                                                            July 6, 2009


                         MIF Security Analysis
              draft-ko-mif-security-considerations-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.






Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            MIF Security Analysis                July 2009


Abstract

   MIF is working to describe the issues of attaching to multiple
   networks on hosts and document existing practice.  The group is also
   expected to analyze the impacts and effectiveness of these existing
   mechanisms.  A MIF node will have various security considerations
   that must be reviewed.  This document provides security analysis for
   MIF.  MIF security requirements are also presented.


1.  Introduction

   A host attached to multiple networks has to make decisions about
   default router selection, address selection, DNS server selection,
   choice of interface for packet transmission, and the treatment of
   configuration information received from the various networks.  The
   interfaces may be physical or virtual.  The communications over such
   interfaces may be with the same or different network domain.
   Configuration parameters for the enablement of such communication may
   be specific to an interface or global.  Communications may be
   simultaneous with each interface.

   MIF is dealing with issues of attaching to multiple networks on
   hosts.  This document will analyze the impacts and effectiveness with
   respect to security on those practices and solutions.  It is the goal
   to capture all these in one single document so that MIF will be able
   to make appropriate considerations as this work proceeds.  A major
   area of analysis is not just the current practice solutions but also
   the security considerations for such mechanisms.  The working group
   is considering both IPv4 and IPv6 and such security examination will
   be done with this in mind.


2.  MIF Security Analysis

   This first revision of the draft will detail the threat analysis and
   provide security recommendations.  As MIF progresses with proposals a
   section may be added for security implications of current MIF
   practices and solutions.

   As is defined in [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement] a MIF host is
   defined to be configured with more than one IP addresses and those
   addresses may be from different administrative domains.
   Communications using these IP addresses will happen independently and
   may occur simultaneously.  With a MIF host security attacks relating
   to this specific definition are realized.

   Once such attack is directed at the ability of MIF node to



Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            MIF Security Analysis                July 2009


   communicate either on one or more of its interfaces.  Such an attack
   is initiated by preventing the specific configuration objects from
   being delivered.  An attacker could launch a flooding attack on the
   entities that provide the intelligence to deal with configuration and
   policy information for the interfaces.  By preventing the MIF node
   from delivering the configuration as well as the address selection
   policy information to nodes, the MIF node is kept from properly
   communicating either on one or more interfaces.

   Another attack a MIF node is vulnerable is that it may be hijacked by
   malicious injection of illegitimate configuration object information
   of one interface via another interface.  In this threat the attacker
   injects malicious policy information that could redirect packets and
   attack the remote network via one of the other interfaces of the MIF
   node.

   Malicious nodes may also tap to collect the network policy
   information of one interface from another interface and leak it to
   unauthorized parties.

   Protection against hijacking attacks, flooding attacks (DOS), and
   leakage of confidential information for MIF nodes have implications
   on the MIF problem statement security requirements.  The next section
   covers these MIF security requirements.


3.  Security Requirements

3.1.  MIF Security Requirements

   The security requirements are enumerated as:

   o  MIF must not allow the unwanted injection of configuration objects
      targeted to specific interface(s) to other interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the usage of one interface to hijack the network
      connection of another interface.  Such a hijack could lead to
      attacks on remote networks that the interface is providing
      communication over.

   o  MIF must provide for security independence among the interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the access of security policy information of one
      interface from other interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the leakage of confidential information from one
      interface to other interfaces.




Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            MIF Security Analysis                July 2009


   o  MIF must prevent attacks by malicious nodes to use one interface
      to prevent legitimate configuration objects from reaching other
      interfaces or preventing those interfaces from executing on the
      configuration objects.

   o  MIF should provide for the integrity of the network configuration
      objects it receives for the respective interfaces.

   o  MIF should provide for the authentication and authorization of the
      sources of network configuration objects for the respective
      interfaces.

   o  A MIF node should not be more vulnerable to security breaches than
      a traditionally non-MIF node (one that has a single interface with
      single network connection).  The enablement of additional
      interfaces (virtual or physical) should not cause the other
      network connections to become more vulnerable to security
      breaches.

   Through the study of the security implications of existing MIF
   practices and the realization of these security goals, the MIF
   configured node will be better prepared to resist a large class of
   DOS, privacy and integrity attacks.

3.2.  MIF and Ingress filtering

   The adoption of ingress filtering in the MIF scenarios where the
   general belief has been that ingress filtering is difficult to
   implement.  A security analysis should understand these implications.
   Such considerations are documented in [RFC3704].  The goal here is to
   understand the security implications with a MIF node as they relate
   to ingress filtering and at a minimum a best practice guideline be
   specified.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document covers the security considerations for MIF.  In
   general, MIF must have the security capabilities to protect MIF node
   from any malicious attempts caused by security holes such as denial
   of service attacks.  The MIF solution must not compromise the
   security architecture of the basic IPv4/IPv6 networks.  MIF is
   required to provide an admission control mechanism to regulate any
   MIF events.  MIF could rely on the security mechanism of each
   interface on MIF node.  Mechanisms used by MIF to exchange policies
   MUST support security feature to protect this flow of information.





Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            MIF Security Analysis                July 2009


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.


6.  Informative References

   [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement]
              Blanchet, M. and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces Problem
              Statement", draft-blanchet-mif-problem-statement-01 (work
              in progress), June 2009.

   [I-D.chown-addr-select-considerations]
              Chown, T., "Considerations for IPv6 Address Selection
              Policy Changes", draft-chown-addr-select-considerations-02
              (work in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.savolainen-6man-fqdn-based-if-selection]
              Savolainen, T., "Domain name based network interface
              selection",
              draft-savolainen-6man-fqdn-based-if-selection-00 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [I-D.savolainen-mif-dns-server-selection]
              Savolainen, T., "DNS Server Selection on Multi-Homed
              Hosts", draft-savolainen-mif-dns-server-selection-00 (work
              in progress), February 2009.

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
              Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC1661]  Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51,
              RFC 1661, July 1994.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
              RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC3704]  Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
              Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing



Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            MIF Security Analysis                July 2009


              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC5113]  Arkko, J., Aboba, B., Korhonen, J., and F. Bari, "Network
              Discovery and Selection Problem", RFC 5113, January 2008.

   [RFC5221]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
              "Requirements for Address Selection Mechanisms", RFC 5221,
              July 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Nam-Seok Ko
   ETRI
   FMC Technology Research Team, ETRI, 161 Gajeong-don, Yuseong-gu,
   Daejeon, Korea  305-350
   +82 42 860 5560

   Email: nsko@etri.re.kr


   Carl Williams
   Consultant
   Palo Alto, California  94306
   United States

   Email: carl.williams@mcsr-labs.org


   Jacni Qin
   ZTE
   Shanghai, Pudong District
   China

   Email: jacniq@gmail.com












Ko, et al.               Expires January 7, 2010                [Page 6]


