
   Network Working Group                            Luyuan Fang (Ed) 
   Internet Draft                                  Michael Behringer 
   Category: Informational                       Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Expires: August 2007                                  Ross Callon 
                                                    Juniper Networks 
                                                       J. L. Le Roux 
                                                      France Telecom 
                                                       Raymond Zhang 
                                                     British Telecom 
                                                         Paul Knight 
                                                              Nortel 
                                                        Yaakov Stein 
                                             RAD Data Communications 
                                                                     
                                                       February 2007 
 
 
              Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks 
              draft-fang-mpls-gmpls-security-framework-00.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   This memo provides information for the Internet community. It does 
   not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this 
   memo is unlimited. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
Copyright Notice 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      1 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document provides a security framework for Multiprotocol Label 
   Switching (MPLS) and Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Networks (MPLS and GMPLS are described in [RFC3031] and 
   [RFC3945]). This document addresses the security aspects that are 
   relevant in the context of MPLS and GMPLS. It describes the 
   security threats, the related defensive techniques, and the 
   mechanisms for detection and reporting. This document gives 
   emphasis to RSVP-TE and LDP security considerations, as well as  
   Inter-AS and Inter-provider security considerations for building 
   and maintaining MPLS and GMPLS networks across different domains or 
   different Service Providers.  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction..................................................3 
   1.1.  Structure of This Document.................................4 
   1.2.  Contributors...............................................5 
   2. Terminology...................................................5 
   2.1.  Terminology................................................5 
   2.2.  Acronyms and Abbreviations.................................7 
   3. Security Reference Models.....................................7 
   4. Security Threats..............................................9 
   4.1.  Attacks on the Control Plane..............................10 
   4.2.  Attacks on the Data Plane.................................13 
   5. Defensive Techniques for MPLS/GMPLS Networks.................15 
   5.1.  Cryptographic techniques..................................16 
   5.2.  Authentication............................................24 
   5.3.  Access Control techniques.................................25 
   5.4.  Use of Isolated Infrastructure............................29 
   5.5.  Use of Aggregated Infrastructure..........................30 
   5.6.  Service Provider Quality Control Processes................30 
   5.7.  Deployment of Testable MPLS/GMPLS Service.................31 
   6. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks.....31 
   7. Service Provider General Security Requirements...............32 
   7.1.  Protection within the Core Network........................32 
   7.2.  Protection on the User Access Link........................36 
   7.3.  General Requirements for MPLS/GMPLS Providers.............38 
   8. Inter-provider Security Requirements.........................38 
   8.1.  Control Plane Protection..................................39 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      2 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   8.2.  Data Plane Protection.....................................43 
   9. Security Considerations......................................44 
   10.  IANA Considerations........................................45 
   11.  Normative References.......................................45 
   12.  Informational References...................................46 
   13.  Author's Addresses.........................................47 
   14.  Acknowledgement............................................49 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Security is an important aspect of all networks, MPLS and GMPLS 
   networks being no exception.  
    
   MPLS and GMPLS are described in [RFC3031] [RFC3945]. Various 
   security considerations have been addressed in each of the many 
   RFCs that address on MPLS and GMPLS technologies, but there has not 
   been a single document which provides general security 
   considerations. The motivation for creating this document is to 
   provide a comprehensive and consistent security framework for MPLS 
   and GMPLS networks. Each individual document may point to this 
   document for general security considerations in addition to 
   providing the security considerations which are specific to the 
   particular technologies the document is describing.  
    
   In this document, we first describe the security threats that are 
   relevant in the context of MPLS and GMPLS, and the defensive 
   techniques that can be used to combat those threats. We consider 
   security issues deriving both from malicious or incorrect behavior 
   of users and other parties and from negligent or incorrect behavior 
   of the providers. An important part of security defense is the 
   detection and report of a security attack, which is also addressed 
   in this document.  
    
   We then discuss the possible service provider security requirements 
   in a MPLS or GMPLS environment. The users have expectations that 
   need to be met on the security characteristics of MPLS or GMPLS 
   networks. These will include the security requirements for MPLS and 
   GMPLS supporting equipments, and the provider operation security 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      3 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   requirements. The service providers must protect their network 
   infrastructure, and make it secure to the level required to provide 
   services over their MPLS or GMPLS networks.  
    
   Inter-As and Inter-provider security are discussed with special 
   emphasis, since the security risk factors are higher with inter-
   provider connections. Depending on different MPLS or GMPLS 
   techniques used, the degree of risk and the mitigation 
   methodologies vary. This document discusses the security aspects 
   and requirements for certain basic MPLS and GMPLS techniques and 
   inter-connection models. This document does not attempt to cover 
   all current and future MPLS and GMPLS technologies, since it is not 
   within the scope of this document to analyze the security 
   properties of specific technologies. 
    
   It is important to clarify that, in this document; we limit 
   ourselves to describing the providers' security requirements that 
   pertain to MPLS and GMPLS networks. Readers may refer to the 
   "Security Best Practices Efforts and Documents" [opsec effort] and 
   "Security Mechanisms for the Internet" [RFC3631] for general 
   network operation security considerations. It is not our intention, 
   however, to formulate precise "requirements" on each specific 
   technology in terms of defining the mechanisms and techniques that 
   must be implemented to satisfy such security requirements. 
    
   1.1. Structure of This Document 
    
   This document is organized as follows. In Section 2, we define the 
   terminology used in the document. In section 3, we define the 
   security reference models for security in MPLS/GMPLS networks, 
   which we use in the rest of the document. In Section 4, we describe 
   the security threats that are specific of MPLS and GMPLS. In 
   Section 5, we review defense techniques that may be used against 
   those threats. In Section 6, we describe how attacks may be 
   detected and reported. In Section 7, we describe security 
   requirements that the provider may have in order to guarantee the 
   security of the network infrastructure to provide MPLS/GMPLS 
   services. In section 8, we discuss Inter-provider security 
   requirements. Finally, in Section 9, we discuss security 
   considerations of this document. 
    
   This document has used relevant content from RFC 4111 "Security 
   Framework of Provider Provisioned VPN" [RFC4111], and "MPLS 
   InterCarrier Interconnect Technical Specification" [MFA MPLS ICI] 
   in the Inter-provider security discussion. We acknowledge the 
   authors of these documents for the valuable information and text. 
    
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      4 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   1.2. Contributors 
    
   As the design team members of MPLS security Framework, the 
   following made significant contributions to this document. 
    
         Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
         Monique Morrow, Cisco systems, Inc. 
         Jerry Ash, AT&T 
    
          
    
2. Terminology 
    
   2.1.  Terminology 
 
   This document uses MPLS and GMPLS specific terminology. Definitions 
   and details about MPLS and GMPLS terminology can be found in 
   [RFC3031] and [RFC3945]. The most important definitions are 
   repeated in this section, for other definitions the reader is 
   referred to [RFC3031] and [RFC3945]. 
    
    
   CE: Customer Edge device. A Customer Edge device is a router or a 
   switch in the customer network interfacing with the Service 
   Provider's network. 
    
   Forwarding equivalence class (FEC): A group of IP packets which are 
   forwarded in the same manner (e.g., over the same path, with the 
   same forwarding treatment) 
    
   Label: A short fixed length physically contiguous identifier which 
   is used to identify a FEC, usually of local significance. 
    
   Label switched hop: the hop between two MPLS nodes, on which 
   forwarding is done using labels. 
    
   Label switched path (LSP): The path through one or more LSRs at one 
   level of the hierarchy followed by a packets in a particular FEC. 
    
   Label switching router (LSR): an MPLS node which is capable of 
   forwarding native L3 packets 
    
   Layer 2: the protocol layer under layer 3 (which therefore offers 
   the services used by layer 3).  Forwarding, when done by the 
   swapping of short fixed length labels, occurs at layer 2 regardless 
   of whether the label being examined is an ATM VPI/VCI, a frame 
   relay DLCI, or an MPLS label. 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      5 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   Layer 3: the protocol layer at which IP and its associated routing 
   protocols operate link layer synonymous with layer 2. 
    
   Loop detection: a method of dealing with loops in which loops are 
   allowed to be set up, and data may be transmitted over the loop, 
   but the loop is later detected. 
    
   Loop prevention: a method of dealing with loops in which data is 
   never transmitted over a loop. 
    
   Label stack: an ordered set of labels. 
 
   Merge point: a node at which label merging is done 
    
   MPLS domain: a contiguous set of nodes which operate MPLS routing 
   and forwarding and which are also in one Routing or Administrative 
   Domain. 
    
   MPLS edge node: an MPLS node that connects an MPLS domain with a 
   node which is outside of the domain, either because it does not run 
   MPLS, and/or because it is in a different domain.  Note that if an 
   LSR has a neighboring host which is not running MPLS, that that LSR 
   is an MPLS edge node. 
    
   P: Provider Router. The Provider Router is a router in the Service 
   Provider's core network that does not have interfaces directly 
   towards the customer. A P router is used to interconnect the PE 
   routers.  
    
   MPLS egress node: an MPLS edge node in its role in handling traffic 
   as it leaves an MPLS domain 
    
   MPLS ingress node: an MPLS edge node in its role in handling 
   traffic as it enters an MPLS domain 
    
   MPLS label: a label which is carried in a packet header, and which 
   represents the packet's FEC 
    
   MPLS node: a node which is running MPLS.  An MPLS node will be 
   aware of MPLS control protocols, will operate one or more L3 
   routing protocols, and will be capable of forwarding packets based 
   on labels. An MPLS node may optionally be also capable of 
   forwarding native L3 packets. 
    
   MultiProtocol Label Switching (MPLS): an IETF working group and the 
   effort associated with the working group 
 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      6 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   PE: Provider Edge device. The Provider Edge device is the equipment 
   in the Service Provider's network that interfaces with the 
   equipment in the customer's network. 
    
 
   SP: Service Provider.  
    
   VPN: Virtual Private Network. Restricted communication between a 
   set of sites, making use of an IP backbone which is shared by 
   traffic that is not going to or coming from those sites. [RFC4110]. 
    
   2.2. Acronyms and Abbreviations 
    
      AS                Autonomous System 
      ASBR      Autonomous System Border Router 
      ATM       Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
      BGP       Border Gateway Protocol 
      FEC       Forwarding Equivalence Class 
      GMPLS     Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      IGP       Interior Gateway Protocol 
      IP        Internet Protocol 
      LDP       Label Distribution Protocol 
      L2        Layer 2  
      L3        Layer 3 
      LSP       Label Switched Path 
      LSR       Label Switching Router 
      MPLS      MultiProtocol Label Switching 
      MP-BGP    Multi-Protocol BGP 
      PCE       Path Calculation Element 
      PSN       Packet-Switched Network 
      RSVP-TE   Resource Reservation Protocol with Traffic Engineering 
                     Extensions 
      TTL       Time-To-Live 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
    
    
3. Security Reference Models 
   This section defines a reference model for security in MPLS/GMPLS 
   networks.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS core network is defined here as the central network 
   infrastructure (P and PE routers). A MPLS/GMPLS core network 
   consists of one or more SP networks. All network elements in the 
   core are under the operational control of one or more MPLS/GMPLS 
   service providers. Even if the MPLS/GMPLS core is provided by 
   several service providers, towards the end users it appears as a 
   single zone of trust. However, when several service providers 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      7 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   provide together an MPLS/GMPLS core, each SP still needs to secure 
   itself against the other SPs.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS end user is a company, institution or residential 
   client of the SP.  
    
   This document defines each MPLS in a single domain a trusted zone. 
   A primary concern is about security aspects that relate to breaches 
   of security from the "outside" of a trusted zone to the "inside" of 
   this zone. Figure 1 depicts the concept of trusted zones within the 
   MPLS/GMPLS framework.  
 
 
 
                      /-------------\        
   +------------+    /               \         +------------+ 
   | MPLS/GMPLS +---/                 \--------+     MPLS   | 
   | user          |  MPLS/GMPLS Core  |             user   | 
   | site       +---\                 /XXX-----+     site   | 
   +------------+    \               / XXX     +------------+ 
                      \-------------/  | | 
                                       | | 
                                       | +------\ 
                                       +--------/  "Internet" 
    
        MPLS/GMPLS Core with user connections and Internet connection 
    
   Figure 1: The MPLS/GMPLS trusted zone model 
    
    
   The trusted zone defined is the MPLS/GMPLS core/network in a single 
   AS within a single Service Provider.  
    
   In principle the trusted zones should be separate; however, 
   typically MPLS core networks also offer Internet access, in which 
   case a transit point (marked with "XXX" in the figure 1) is 
   defined. In the case of MPLS/GMPLS inter-provider connection, the 
   trusted zone ends at the ASBR (marked with "B" in the figure 2) of 
   the considered AS/provider. 
    
   A key requirement of MPLS and GMPLS networks is that the security 
   of the trusted zone not be compromised by interconnecting the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core infrastructure with another provider core 
   (MPLS/GMPLS or non-MPLS/GMPLS), Internet, or end user access.  
    
   In addition, neighbors may be trusted or untrusted. Neighbors may 
   be authorized or unauthorized. Even though a neighbor may be 
   authorized for communication, it may not be trusted. For example, 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      8 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   when connecting with another provider ASBRs to set up inter-AS 
   LSPs, the other provider is considered as an untrusted but 
   authorized neighbor. 
 
                 
                +---------------+        +----------------+ 
                |               |        |                | 
                | MPLS/GMPLS   ASBR1----ASBR3  MPLS/GMPLS | 
          CE1--PE1   Network    |        |     Network   PE2--CE2 
                | Provider A   ASBR2----ASBR4  Provider B | 
                |               |        |                | 
                +---------------+        +----------------+ 
                 
        
   For Provider A: 
        Trusted Zone: Provider A MPSL/GMPLS network 
        Trusted neighbor: PE1, ASBR1, ASBR2 
        Authorized but untrusted neighbor: provider B 
        Unauthorized neighbor: CE1, CE2 
 
   Figure 2. MPLS/GMPLS trusted zone and authorized neighbor 
    
    
   Security against threats that originate within the same trusted 
   zone as their targets (for example, attacks from within the core 
   network) is outside the scope of this document.  
    
   Also outside the scope are all aspects of network security which 
   are independent of whether a network is a MPLS/GMPLS network (for 
   example, attacks from the Internet to a user web-server which is 
   connected through the MPLS/GMPLS network will not be considered 
   here, unless the way the MPLS/GMPLS network is provisioned could 
   make a difference to the security of this user server). 
 
4. Security Threats 
    
   This section discusses the various network security threats that 
   may endanger MPLS/GMPLS networks.  The discussion is limited to 
   those threats that are unique to MPLS/GMPLS networks, or that 
   affect MPLS/GMPLS network in unique ways. 
    
   A successful attack on a particular MPLS/GMPLS network or on a 
   service provider's MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure may cause one or more 
   of the following ill effects: 
    
    - Observation, modification, or deletion of provider/user data. 
    - Replay of provider/user data. 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      9 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    - Injection of non-authentic data into a provider/user traffic 
      stream. 
    - Traffic pattern analysis on provider/user traffic. 
    - Disruption of provider/user connectivity. 
    - Degradation of provider service quality. 
    
   It is useful to consider that threats, whether malicious or 
   accidental, may come from different categories of sources.  For 
   example they may come from: 
    
   - Other users whose services are provided by the same MPLS/GMPLS 
   core. 
   - The MPLS/GMPLS service provider or persons working for it. 
   - Other persons who obtain physical access to a MPLS/GMPLS service 
   provider site. 
   - Other persons who use social engineering methods to influence 
   behavior of service provider personnel. 
   - Users of the MPLS/GMPLS network itself, i.e. intra-VPN threats.  
   (Such threats are beyond the scope of this document.) 
   - Others i.e. attackers from the Internet at large. 
   - Other service provider in the case of MPLS/GMPLS Inter-provider 
   connection. The core of the other provider may or may not be using 
   MPLS/GMPLS core. 
    
    
   Given that security is generally a compromise between expense and 
   risk, it is also useful to consider the likelihood of different 
   attacks occurring.  There is at least a perceived difference in the 
   likelihood of most types of attacks being successfully mounted in 
   different environments, such as: 
    
    - A MPLS/GMPLS inter-connecting with another provider's core 
    - A MPLS/GMPLS transiting the public Internet  
    
   Most types of attacks become easier to mount and hence more likely 
   as the shared infrastructure via which service is provided expands 
   from a single service provider to multiple cooperating providers to 
   the global Internet.  Attacks that may not be of sufficient 
   likeliness to warrant concern in a closely controlled environment 
   often merit defensive measures in broader, more open environments. 
    
   The following sections discuss specific types of exploits that 
   threaten MPLS/GMPLS networks. 
    
   4.1. Attacks on the Control Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the control structures 
   operated by the service provider with MPLS/GMPLS cores. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      10 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
4.1.1.  LSP creation by an unauthorized element 
 
   The unauthorized element can be a local CE or a router in another 
   domain.  An unauthorized element can generate MPLS signaling 
   messages.  At the least, this can result in extra control plane and 
   forwarding state, and if successful, network bandwidth could be 
   reserved unnecessarily. 
    
4.1.2.  LSP message interception 
    
   This threat might be accomplished by monitoring network traffic, 
   although it would require physical intrusion.  If successful, it 
   could provide information leading to label spoofing attacks.  It 
   also raises confidentiality issues. 
    
4.1.3.  Attacks against RSVP-TE 
 
   RSVP-TE, described in [RFC3209], is the control protocol used to 
   set up GMPLS and traffic engineered MPLS tunnels. 
    
   There are two major types of attacks against an MPLS domain based 
   on RSVP-TE. The attacker may set up numerous unauthorized LSPs, or 
   may send a storm of RSVP messages in a DoS attack.  It has been 
   demonstrated that unprotected routers running RSVP can be 
   effectively disabled by both types of DoS attacks. 
    
   These attacks may even be combined, by using the unauthorized LSPs 
   to transport additional RSVP (or other) messages across routers 
   where they might otherwise be filtered out.  RSVP attacks can be 
   launched against adjacent routers at the border with the attacker, 
   or against non-adjacent routers within the MPLS domain, if there is 
   no effective mechanism to filter them out. 
    
4.1.4.  Attacks against LDP 
    
   LDP, described in [RFC3036], is the control protocol used to set up 
   non-TE MPLS tunnels. 
    
   There are two significant types of attack against LDP.  An 
   unauthorized network element can establish an LDP session by 
   sending LDP Hello and LDP Init messages, leading to the potential 
   setup of an LSP, as well as accompanying LDP state table 
   consumption.  Even without successfully established LSPs, an 
   attacker can launch a DoS attack in the form of a storm of LDP 
   Hello messages and/or LDP TCP Syn messages, leading to high CPU 
   utilization on the target router. 
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      11 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
4.1.5.  Denial of Service Attacks on the Network Infrastructure 
    
   DoS attacks could be accomplished through an MPLS signaling storm, 
   resulting in high CPU utilization and possibly leading to control 
   plane resource starvation. 
    
   Control plane DOS attacks can be mounted specifically against the 
   mechanisms the service provider uses to provide various services, 
   or against the general infrastructure of the service provider e.g. 
   P routers or shared aspects of PE routers.  (Attacks against the 
   general infrastructure are within the scope of this document only 
   if the attack happens in relation with the MPLS/GMPLS 
   infrastructure, otherwise is not MPLS/GMPLS-specific issue.) 
    
   The attacks described in the following sections may each have 
   denial of service as one of their effects.  Other DOS attacks are 
   also possible. 
    
4.1.6.  Attacks on the Service Provider MPLS/GMPLS Equipment Via 
Management Interfaces 
    
   This includes unauthorized access to service provider 
   infrastructure equipment, for example to reconfigure the equipment 
   or to extract information (statistics, topology, etc.) pertaining 
   to the network. 
 
4.1.7.  Social Engineering Attacks on the Service Provider 
Infrastructure 
 
   Attacks in which the service provider network is reconfigured or 
   damaged, or in which confidential information is improperly 
   disclosed, may be mounted through manipulation of service provider 
   personnel. These types of attacks are MPLS/GMPLS-specific if they 
   affect MPLS/GMPLS-serving mechanisms. 
    
    
4.1.8.  Cross-connection of Traffic Between Users 
    
   This refers to the event where expected isolation between separate 
   users (who may be VPN users) is breached.  This includes cases such 
   as: 
    
    - A site being connected into the "wrong" VPN. 
    - Traffic being replicated and sent to an unauthorized 
       user. 
    - Two or more VPNs being improperly merged together. 
    - A point-to-point VPN connecting the wrong two points. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      12 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    - Any packet or frame being improperly delivered outside the VPN 
      to which it belongs. 
    
   Mis-connection or cross-connection of VPNs may be caused by service 
   provider or equipment vendor error, or by the malicious action of 
   an attacker. The breach may be physical (e.g. PE-CE links mis-
   connected) or logical (improper device configuration). 
    
   Anecdotal evidence suggests that the cross-connection threat is one 
   of the largest security concerns of users (or would-be users). 
    
4.1.9.  Attacks Against User Routing Protocols 
    
   This encompasses attacks against underlying routing protocols that 
   are run by the service provider and that directly support the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core.  (Attacks against the use of routing protocols for 
   the distribution of backbone (non-VPN) routes are beyond the scope 
   of this document.)  Specific attacks against popular routing 
   protocols have been widely studied and described in [Beard]. 
    
4.1.10. Other Attacks on Control Traffic 
    
   Besides routing and management protocols (covered separately in the 
   previous sections) a number of other control protocols may be 
   directly involved in delivering the services by the MPLS/GMPLS 
   core. These include but may not be limited to: 
    
    - MPLS signaling (LDP, RSVP-TE) discussed above in subsections 
   4.1.4 and 4.1.3 
    - PCE signaling 
    - IPsec signaling (IKE) 
    - L2TP 
    - BGP-based membership discovery 
    - Database-based membership discovery (e.g. RADIUS-based) 
    
   Attacks might subvert or disrupt the activities of these protocols, 
   for example via impersonation or DOS attacks. 
    
    
   4.2. Attacks on the Data Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the provider or end user's 
   data.  Note that from the MPLS/GMPLS network end user's point of 
   view, some of this might be control plane traffic, e.g. routing 
   protocols running from the user site A to the user site B via an L2 
   or L3 connection which may be some type of VPN. 
    
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      13 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
4.2.1.  Unauthorized Observation of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to "sniffing" provider/end user packets and examining 
   their contents.  This can result in exposure of confidential 
   information.  It can also be a first step in other attacks 
   (described below) in which the recorded data is modified and re-
   inserted, or re-inserted as-is. 
    
4.2.2.  Modification of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to modifying the contents of packets as they traverse 
   the MPLS/GMPLS core. 
    
4.2.3.  Insertion of Non-Authentic Data Traffic: Spoofing and 
Replay 
    
   This refers to the insertion (or "spoofing") into the user packets 
   that do not belong there, with the objective of having them 
   accepted by the recipient as legitimate.  Also included in this 
   category is the insertion of copies of once-legitimate packets that 
   have been recorded and replayed. 
    
4.2.4.  Unauthorized Deletion of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to causing packets to be discarded as they traverse the 
   MPLS/GMPLS networks.  This is a specific type of Denial of Service 
   attack. 
    
4.2.5.  Unauthorized Traffic Pattern Analysis 
    
   This refers to "sniffing" provider/user packets and examining 
   aspects or meta-aspects of them that may be visible even when the 
   packets themselves are encrypted.  An attacker might gain useful 
   information based on the amount and timing of traffic, packet 
   sizes, source and destination addresses, etc.  For most users, this 
   type of attack is generally considered to be significantly less of 
   a concern than the other types discussed in this section. 
    
4.2.6.  Denial of Service Attacks 
    
   Denial of Service (DOS) attacks are those in which an attacker 
   attempts to disrupt or prevent the use of a service by its 
   legitimate users.  Taking network devices out of service, modifying 
   their configuration, or overwhelming them with requests for service 
   are several of the possible avenues for DOS attack. 
    
   Overwhelming the network with requests for service, otherwise known 
   as a "resource exhaustion" DOS attack, may target any resource in 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      14 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   the network e.g. link bandwidth, packet forwarding capacity, 
   session capacity for various protocols, CPU power, and so on. 
    
   DOS attacks of the resource exhaustion type can be mounted against 
   the data plane of a particular provider or end-user by attempting 
   to insert (spoofing) an overwhelming quantity of non-authentic data 
   into the provider/end user network from the outside of the trusted 
   zone. Potential results might be to exhaust the bandwidth available 
   to that provider/end user or to overwhelm the cryptographic 
   authentication mechanisms of the provider or end user. 
    
   Data plane resource exhaustion attacks can also be mounted by 
   overwhelming the service provider's general (MPLS/GMPLS-
   independent) infrastructure with traffic.  These attacks on the 
   general infrastructure are not usually a MPLS/GMPLS-specific issue, 
   unless the attack is mounted by another MPLS/GMPLS network user 
   from a privileged position.  (E.g. a MPLS/GMPLS network user might 
   be able to monopolize network data plane resources and thus disrupt 
   other users.) 
 
 
5. Defensive Techniques for MPLS/GMPLS Networks 
    
   The defensive techniques discussed in this document are intended to 
   describe methods by which some security threats can be addressed.  
   They are not intended as requirements for all MPLS/GMPLS 
   implementations.  The MPLS/GMPLS provider should determine the 
   applicability of these techniques to the provider's specific 
   service offerings, and the end user may wish to assess the value of 
   these techniques to the user's service requirements. 
    
   The techniques discussed here include encryption, authentication, 
   filtering, firewalls, access control, isolation, aggregation, and 
   other techniques. 
    
   Nothing is ever 100% secure.  Defense therefore involves protecting 
   against those attacks that are most likely to occur and/or that 
   have the most dire consequences if successful.  For those attacks 
   that are protected against, absolute protection is seldom 
   achievable; more often it is sufficient just to make the cost of a 
   successful attack greater than what the adversary will be willing 
   to expend. 
    
   Successfully defending against an attack does not necessarily mean 
   the attack must be prevented from happening or from reaching its 
   target.  In many cases the network can instead be designed to 
   withstand the attack.  For example, the introduction of non-
   authentic packets could be defended against by preventing their 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      15 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   introduction in the first place, or by making it possible to 
   identify and eliminate them before delivery to the MPLS/GMPLS 
   user's system.  The latter is frequently a much easier task. 
    
   5.1. Cryptographic techniques 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS defenses against a wide variety of attacks can be 
   enhanced by the proper application of cryptographic techniques.  
   These are the same cryptographic techniques which are applicable to 
   general network communications.  In general, these techniques can 
   provide confidentiality (encryption) of communication between 
   devices, authentication of the identities of the devices, and can 
   ensure that it will be detected if the data being communicated is 
   changed during transit. 
    
    
   Several aspects of authentication are addressed in some detail in a 
   separate "Authentication" section. 
    
   Encryption adds complexity to a service, and thus it may not be a 
   standard offering within every user service. There are a few 
   reasons why encryption may not be a standard offering within every 
   user service. Encryption adds an additional computational burden to 
   the devices performing encryption and decryption.  This may reduce 
   the number of user connections which can be handled on a device or 
   otherwise reduce the capacity of the device, potentially driving up 
   the provider's costs.  Typically, configuring encryption services 
   on devices adds to the complexity of the device configuration and 
   adds incremental labor cost.  Packet sizes are typically increased 
   when the packets are secured, increasing the network traffic load 
   and adding to the likelihood of packet fragmentation with its 
   increased overhead.  (This packet length increase can often be 
   mitigated to some extent by data compression techniques, but at the 
   expense of additional computational burden.) Finally, some 
   providers may employ enough other defensive techniques, such as 
   physical isolation or filtering/firewall techniques, that they may 
   not perceive additional benefit from encryption techniques. 
    
   The trust model among the MPLS/GMPLS user, the MPLS/GMPLS provider, 
   and other parts of the network is a key element in determining the 
   applicability of encryption for any specific MPLS/GMPLS 
   implementation. In particular, it determines where encryption 
   should be applied: 
   -  If the data path between the user's site and the 
      provider's PE is not trusted, then encryption may be used 
      on the PE-CE link. 
   -  If some part of the backbone network is not trusted, 
      particularly in implementations where traffic may travel 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      16 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
      across the Internet or multiple provider networks, then 
      the PE-PE traffic may be encrypted.  
   -  If the user does not trust any zone outside of its 
      premises, it may require end-to-end or CE-CE encryption 
      service. This service fits within the scope of this 
      MPLS/GMPLS security framework when the CE is provisioned 
      by the MPLS/GMPLS provider. 
   -  If the user requires remote access to a its site from a 
      system at a location which is not a customer location (for 
      example, access by a traveler) there may be a requirement 
      for encrypting the traffic between that system and an 
      access point or at a customer site. If the MPLS/GMPLS 
      provider provides the access point, then the customer must 
      cooperate with the provider to handle the access control 
      services for the remote users. These access control 
      services are usually implemented using encryption, as 
      well. 
    
   Although CE-CE encryption provides confidentiality against third-
   party interception, if the MPLS/GMPLS provider has complete 
   management control over the CE (encryption) devices, then it may be 
   possible for the provider to gain access to the user's traffic or 
   internal network. Encryption devices can potentially be configured 
   to use null encryption, bypass encryption processing altogether, or 
   provide some means of sniffing or diverting unencrypted traffic. 
   Thus an implementation using CE-CE encryption needs to consider the 
   trust relationship between the MPLS/GMPLS user and provider. 
   MPLS/GMPLS users and providers may wish to negotiate a service 
   level agreement (SLA) for CE-CE encryption that will provide an 
   acceptable demarcation of responsibilities for management of 
   encryption on the CE devices. The demarcation may also be affected 
   by the capabilities of the CE devices. For example, the CE might 
   support some partitioning of management, a configuration lock-down 
   ability, or allow both parties to verify the configuration. In 
   general, the MPLS/GMPLS user needs to have a fairly high level of 
   trust that the MPLS/GMPLS provider will properly provision and 
   manage the CE devices, if the managed CE-CE model is used. 
    
    

5.1.1.  IPsec in MPLS/GMPLS 
 
   IPsec [RFC4301] [RFC4302] [RFC4305] [RFC4306] [RFC2411] is the 
   security protocol of choice for encryption at the IP layer (Layer 
   3).  IPsec provides robust security for IP traffic between pairs of 
   devices.  Non-IP traffic must be converted to IP (e.g. by 
   encapsulation) in order to exploit IPsec.  
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      17 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
    
   In the MPLS/GMPLS model, IPsec can be employed to protect IP 
   traffic between PEs, between a PE and a CE, or from CE to CE.  CE-
   to-CE IPsec may be employed in either a provider-provisioned or a 
   user-provisioned model.  Likewise, encryption of data which is 
   performed within the user's site is outside the scope of this 
   document, since it is simply handled as user data by the MPLS/GMPLS 
   core. 
    
   IPsec does not itself specify an encryption algorithm.  It can use 
   a variety of encryption algorithms, with various key lengths, such 
   as AES encryption.  There are trade-offs between key length, 
   computational burden, and the level of security of the encryption.  
   A full discussion of these trade-offs is beyond the scope of this 
   document.  In practice, any currently recommended IPsec encryption 
   offers enough security to substantially reduce the likelihood of 
   being directly targeted by an attacker; other weaker links in the 
   chain of security are likely to be attacked first.  MPLS/GMPLS 
   users may wish to use a Service Level Agreement (SLA) specifying 
   the Service Provider's responsibility for ensuring data 
   confidentiality, rather than analyzing the specific encryption 
   techniques used in the MPLS/GMPLS service. 
    
   For many of the MPLS/GMPLS provider's network control messages and 
   some user requirements, cryptographic authentication of messages 
   without encryption of the contents of the message may provide 
   acceptable security.  Using IPsec, authentication of messages is 
   provided by the Authentication Header (AH) or through the use of 
   the Encapsulating Security Protocol (ESP) with authentication only.  
   Where control messages require authentication but do not use IPsec, 
   then other cryptographic authentication methods are available.  
   Message authentication methods currently considered to be secure 
   are based on hashed message authentication codes (HMAC) [RFC2104] 
   implemented with a secure hash algorithm such as Secure Hash 
   Algorithm 1 (SHA-1) [RFC3174]. 
    
   The currently recommended mechanism to provide a combination of 
   confidentiality, data origin authentication, and connectionless 
   integrity is the use of AES in CCM (Counter with CBC-MAC) mode 
   (AES-CCM) [AES-CCM], with an explicit initialization vector (IV), 
   as the IPsec ESP. 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS which provide differentiated services based on traffic 
   type may encounter some conflicts with IPsec encryption of traffic.  
   Since encryption hides the content of the packets, it may not be 
   possible to differentiate the encrypted traffic in the same manner 
   as unencrypted traffic.  Although DiffServ markings are copied to 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      18 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   the IPsec header and can provide some differentiation, not all 
   traffic types can be accommodated by this mechanism. 
    

5.1.2.  Encryption for device configuration and management 
 
   For configuration and management of MPLS/GMPLS devices, encryption 
   and authentication of the management connection at a level 
   comparable to that provided by IPsec is desirable.   
    
   Several methods of transporting MPLS/GMPLS device management 
   traffic offer security and confidentiality. 
   -  Secure Shell (SSH) offers protection for TELNET [STD-8] or 
      terminal-like connections to allow device configuration. 
   -  SNMP v3 [STD62] provides encrypted and authenticated protection 
      for SNMP-managed devices. 
   -  Transport Layer Security (TLS) [RFC4346] and the closely-related 
      Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)  are widely used for securing HTTP-
      based communication, and thus can provide support for most XML- 
      and SOAP-based device management approaches. 
   -  As of 2004, there is extensive work proceeding in several 
      organizations (OASIS, W3C, WS-I, and others) on securing device 
      management traffic within a "Web Services" framework, using a 
      wide variety of security models, and providing support for 
      multiple security token formats, multiple trust domains, 
      multiple signature formats, and multiple encryption 
      technologies.   
   -  IPsec provides the services with security and confidentiality at 
      the network layer. With regards to device management, its 
      current use is primarily focused on in-band management of user-
      managed IPsec gateway devices. 
 

5.1.3.  Cryptographic techniques for MPLS Pseudowires 
 
 
    

5.1.4.  5.1.3  Security Considerations for MPLS Pseudowires 
  
   In addition to IP traffic, MPLS networks may be used to transport 
   other services such as Ethernet, ATM, frame relay, and TDM. This is 
   done by setting up pseudowires (PWs) that tunnel the native service 
   through the MPLS core by encapsulating at the edges. The PWE 
   architecture is defined in [RFC3985].  

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      19 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
     
   PW tunnels may be set up using the PWE control protocol based on 
   LDP [RFC4447], and thus security considerations for LDP will most 
   likely be applicable to the PWE3 control protocol as well.   
     
   PW user packets contain at least one MPLS label (the PW label) and 
   may contain one or more MPLS tunnel labels.  After the label stack 
   there is a four-byte control word (which is optional for some PW 
   types), followed by the native service payload.  It must be 
   stressed that encapsulation of MPLS PW packets in IP for the 
   purpose of enabling use of IPsec mechanisms is not a valid option. 
     
   The PW client traffic may be secured by use of mechanisms beyond 
   the scope of this document.  
    
    
5.1.5.  End-to-end vs. hop-by-hop encryption tradeoffs in 
MPLS/GMPLS 
 
   In MPLS/GMPLS, encryption could potentially be applied to the 
   MPLS/GMPLS traffic at several different places.  This section 
   discusses some of the tradeoffs in implementing encryption in 
   several different connection topologies among different devices 
   within a MPLS/GMPLS network. 
    
   Encryption typically involves a pair of devices which encrypt the 
   traffic passing between them.  The devices may be directly 
   connected (over a single "hop"), or there may be intervening 
   devices which transport the encrypted traffic between the pair of 
   devices.  The extreme cases involve using encryption between every 
   adjacent pair of devices along a given path (hop-by-hop), or using 
   encryption only between the end devices along a given path (end-to-
   end).  To keep this discussion within the scope of this document, 
   the latter ("end-to-end") case considered here is CE-to-CE rather 
   than fully end-to-end. 
    
   Figure 3 depicts a simplified topology showing the Customer Edge 
   (CE) devices, the Provider Edge (PE) devices, and a variable number 
   (three are shown) of Provider core (P) devices which might be 
   present along the path between two sites in a single VPN, operated 
   by a single service provider (SP). 
    
    
   Site_1---CE---PE---P---P---P---PE---CE---Site_2 
    
   Figure 3: Simplified topology traversing through MPLS/GMPLS core 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      20 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
    
   Within this simplified topology, and assuming that P devices are 
   not to be involved with encryption, there are four basic feasible 
   configurations for implementing encryption on connections among the 
   devices: 
    
   1) Site-to-site (CE-to-CE) - Encryption can be configured between 
   the two CE devices, so that traffic will be encrypted throughout 
   the SP's network. 
    
   2) Provider edge-to-edge (PE-to-PE) - Encryption can be configured 
   between the two PE devices.  Unencrypted traffic is received at one 
   PE from the customer's CE, then it is encrypted for transmission 
   through the SP's network to the other PE, where it is decrypted and 
   sent to the other CE. 
    
   3) Access link (CE-to-PE) - Encryption can be configured between 
   the CE and PE, on each side (or on only one side). 
    
   4) Configurations 2 and 3 above can also be combined, with 
   encryption running from CE to PE, then PE to PE, then PE to CE. 
    
   Among the four feasible configurations, key tradeoffs in 
   considering encryption include: 
    
   - Vulnerability to link eavesdropping - assuming an attacker can 
      observe the data in transit on the links, would it be protected 
   by encryption? 
    
   - Vulnerability to device compromise - assuming an attacker can get 
   access to a device (or freely alter its configuration), would the 
   data be protected? 
    
   - Complexity of device configuration and management - given the 
   number of sites per VPN customer as Nce and the number of PEs 
   participating in a given VPN as Npe, how many device configurations 
   need to be created or maintained, and how do those configurations 
   scale? 
    
   - Processing load on devices - how many encryption or decryption 
   operations must be done given P packets? - This influences 
   considerations of device capacity and perhaps end-to-end delay. 
    
   - Ability of SP to provide enhanced services (QoS, firewall, 
   intrusion detection, etc.) - Can the SP inspect the data in order 
   to provide these services? 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      21 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   These tradeoffs are discussed for each configuration, below: 
    
   1) Site-to-site (CE-to-CE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping  - protected on all links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE compromise 
   Complexity - single administration, responsible for one device per 
        site (Nce devices), but overall configuration per VPN scales as 
        Nce**2 
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is either 
        encrypted or decrypted (2P) 
   Enhanced services - severely limited; typically only Diffserv 
        markings are visible to SP, allowing some QoS services 
    
   2) Provider edge-to-edge (PE-to-PE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping  - vulnerable on CE-PE links; protected on SP's 
        network links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - single administration, Npe devices to configure.  
        (Multiple sites may share a PE device so Npe is typically much 
        less than Nce.)  Scalability of the overall configuration 
        depends on the PPVPN type: If the encryption is separate per 
        VPN context, it scales as Npe**2 per customer VPN.  If the 
        encryption is per-PE, it scales as Npe**2 for all customer VPNs 
        combined. 
   Processing load - on each of two PEs, each packet is either 
        encrypted or decrypted (2P) 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   3) Access link (CE-to-PE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping  - protected on CE-PE link; vulnerable on SP's 
        network links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - two administrations (customer and SP) with device 
        configuration on each side (Nce + Npe devices to configure) but 
        since there is no mesh the overall configuration scales as Nce. 
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is either 
        encrypted or decrypted, plus on each of two PEs, each packet is 
        either encrypted or decrypted (4P) 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   4) Combined Access link and PE-to-PE (essentially hop-by-hop) 
    
   Link eavesdropping  - protected on all links 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      22 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - two administrations (customer and SP) with device 
        configuration on each side (Nce + Npe devices to configure).  
        Scalability of the overall configuration depends on the PPVPN 
        type: If the encryption is separate per VPN context, it scales 
        as Npe**2 per customer VPN.  If the encryption is per-PE, it 
        scales as Npe**2 for all customer VPNs combined. 
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is either 
        encrypted or decrypted, plus on each of two PEs, each packet is 
        both encrypted and decrypted (6P) 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   Given the tradeoffs discussed above, a few conclusions can be made: 
    
   - Configurations 2 and 3 are subsets of 4 that may be appropriate 
   alternatives to 4 under certain threat models; the remainder of 
   these conclusions compare 1 (CE-to-CE) vs. 4 (combined access links 
   and PE-to-PE). 
    
   - If protection from link eavesdropping is most important, then 
   configurations 1 and 4 are equivalent. 
    
   - If protection from device compromise is most important and the 
   threat is to the CE devices, both cases are equivalent; if the 
   threat is to the PE devices, configuration 1 is best. 
    
   - If reducing complexity is most important, and the size of the 
   network is very small, configuration 1 is the best.  Otherwise 
   configuration 4 is the best because rather than a mesh of CE 
   devices it requires a smaller mesh of PE devices.  Also under some 
   PPVPN approaches the scaling of 4 is further improved by sharing 
   the same PE-PE mesh across all VPN contexts. The scaling advantage 
   of 4 may be increased or decreased in any given situation if the CE 
   devices are simpler to configure than the PE devices, or vice-
   versa. 
    
   - If the overall processing load is a key factor, then 1 is best. 
    
   - If the availability of enhanced services support from the SP is 
   most important, then 4 is best. 
    
   As a quick overall conclusion, CE-to-CE encryption provides greater 
   protection against device compromise but this comes at the cost of 
   enhanced services and at the cost of operational complexity due to 
   the Order(n**2) scaling of a larger mesh.   
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      23 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   This analysis of site-to-site vs. hop-by-hop encryption tradeoffs 
   does not explicitly include cases of multiple providers cooperating 
   to provide a PPVPN service, public Internet VPN connectivity, or 
   remote access VPN service, but many of the tradeoffs will be 
   similar. 
 
 
   5.2. Authentication 
    
   In order to prevent security issues from some Denial-of-Service 
   attacks or from malicious misconfiguration, it is critical that 
   devices in the MPLS/GMPLS should only accept connections or control 
   messages from valid sources.  Authentication refers to methods to 
   ensure that message sources are properly identified by the 
   MPLS/GMPLS devices with which they communicate.  This section 
   focuses on identifying the scenarios in which sender authentication 
   is required, and recommends authentication mechanisms for these 
   scenarios. 
    
   Cryptographic techniques (authentication and encryption) do not 
   protect against some types of denial of service attacks, 
   specifically resource exhaustion attacks based on CPU or bandwidth 
   exhaustion. In fact, the processing required to decrypt and/or 
   check authentication may in some cases increase the effect of these 
   resource exhaustion attacks. Cryptographic techniques may however, 
   be useful against resource exhaustion attacks based on exhaustion 
   of state information (e.g., TCP SYN attacks). 
    
   The MPLS user plane, as presently defined, is not amenable to 
   source authentication as there are no source identifiers in the 
   MPLS packet to authenticate. The MPLS label is only locally 
   meaningful, and identifies a downstream semantic rather than an 
   upstream source. 
     
   When the MPLS payload carries identifiers that may be authenticated 
   (e.g., IP packets), authentication may be carried out at the client 
   level, but this does not help the MPLS service provider as these 
   client identifiers belong to an external non-trusted network. 
     
     
    

5.2.1.  Management System Authentication 
 
   Management system authentication includes the authentication of a 
   PE to a centrally-managed directory server, when directory-based 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      24 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   "auto-discovery" is used.  It also includes authentication of a CE 
   to the configuration server, when a configuration server system is 
   used. 
    
    

5.2.2.  Peer-to-peer Authentication 
 
   Peer-to-peer authentication includes peer authentication for 
   network control protocols (e.g. LDP, BGP, etc.), and other peer 
   authentication (i.e. authentication of one IPsec security gateway 
   by another). 
    

5.2.3.  Cryptographic techniques for authenticating identity 
    
   Cryptographic techniques offer several mechanisms for 
   authenticating the identity of devices or individuals. These 
   include the use of shared secret keys, one-time keys generated by 
   accessory devices or software, user-ID and password pairs, and a 
   range of public-private key systems. Another approach is to use a 
   hierarchical Certificate Authority system to provide digital 
   certificates. 
    
   This section describes or provides references to the specific 
   cryptographic approaches for authenticating identity.  These 
   approaches provide secure mechanisms for most of the authentication 
   scenarios required in securing a MPLS/GMPLS network. 
    
   5.3. Access Control techniques 
    
   Access control techniques include packet-by-packet or packet-flow-
   by-packet-flow access control by means of filters and firewalls, as 
   well as by means of admitting a "session" for a 
   control/signaling/management protocol. Enforcement of access 
   control by isolated infrastructure addresses is discussed in 
   another section of this document. 
    
   In this document, we distinguish between filtering and firewalls 
   based primarily on the direction of traffic flow.  We define 
   filtering as being applicable to unidirectional traffic, while a 
   firewall can analyze and control both sides of a conversation.   
    
   There are two significant corollaries of this definition: 
   - Routing or traffic flow symmetry: A firewall typically requires 
   routing symmetry, which is usually enforced by locating a firewall 
   where the network topology assures that both sides of a 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      25 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   conversation will pass through the firewall.  A filter can operate 
   upon traffic flowing in one direction, without considering traffic 
   in the reverse direction. 
   - Statefulness: Since it receives both sides of a conversation, a 
   firewall may be able to interpret a significant amount of 
   information concerning the state of that conversation, and use this 
   information to control access.  A filter can maintain some limited 
   state information on a unidirectional flow of packets, but cannot 
   determine the state of the bi-directional conversation as precisely 
   as a firewall. 
    
5.3.1.  Filtering 
 
   It is relatively common for routers to filter data packets. That 
   is, routers can look for particular values in certain fields of the 
   IP or higher level (e.g., TCP or UDP) headers. Packets which match 
   the criteria associated with a particular filter may either be 
   discarded or given special treatment.  
    
   In discussing filters, it is useful to separate the Filter 
   Characteristics which may be used to determine whether a packet 
   matches a filter from the Packet Actions which are applied to those 
   packets which match a particular filter.  
    
   o Filter Characteristics 
    
   Filter characteristics are used to determine whether a particular 
   packet or set of packets matches a particular filter.  
    
   In many cases filter characteristics may be stateless. A stateless 
   filter is one which determines whether a particular packet matches 
   a filter based solely on the filter definition, normal forwarding 
   information (such as the next hop for a packet), and the 
   characteristics of that individual packet. Typically stateless 
   filters may consider the incoming and outgoing logical or physical 
   interface, information in the IP header, and information in higher 
   layer headers such as the TCP or UDP header. Information in the IP 
   header to be considered may for example include source and 
   destination IP address, Protocol field, Fragment Offset, and TOS 
   field. Filters also may consider fields in the TCP or UDP header 
   such as the Port fields as well as the SYN field in the TCP header.  
    
   Stateful filtering maintains packet-specific state information, to 
   aid in determining whether a filter has been met. For example, a 
   device might apply stateless filters to the first fragment of a 
   fragmented IP packet. If the filter matches, then the data unit ID 
   may be remembered and other fragments of the same packet may then 
   be considered to match the same filter. Stateful filtering is more 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      26 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   commonly done in firewalls, although firewall technology may be 
   added to routers. 
    
   o Actions based on Filter Results 
    
   If a packet, or a series of packets, matches a specific filter, 
   then there are a variety of actions which may be taken based on 
   that filter match. Examples of such actions include: 
    
     - Discard 
    
   In many cases filters may be set to catch certain undesirable 
   packets. Examples may include packets with forged or invalid source 
   addresses, packets which are part of a DOS or DDOS attack, or 
   packets which are trying to access resources which are not 
   permitted (such as network management packets from an unauthorized 
   source). Where such filters are activated, it is common to silently 
   discard the packet or set of packets matching the filter. The 
   discarded packets may of course also be counted and/or logged.  
    
     - Set CoS 
    
   A filter may be used to set the Class of Service associated with 
   the packet.  
    
     - Count packets and/or bytes 
    
     - Rate Limit 
    
   In some cases the set of packets which match a particular filter 
   may be limited to a specified bandwidth. In this case packets 
   and/or bytes would be counted, and would be forwarded normally up 
   to the specified limit. Excess packets may be discarded, or may be 
   marked (for example by setting a "discard eligible" bit in the IP 
   ToS field or the MPLS EXP field).  
    
     - Forward and Copy 
    
   It is useful in some cases to forward some set of packets normally, 
   but to also send a copy to a specified other address or interface. 
   For example, this may be used to implement a lawful intercept 
   capability, or to feed selected packets to an Intrusion Detection 
   System.  
    
   o Other Issues related to Use of Packet Filters 
     
   There may be a very wide variation in the performance impact of 
   filtering. This may occur both due to differences between 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      27 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   implementations, and also due to differences between types or 
   numbers of filters deployed. For filtering to be useful, the 
   performance of the equipment has to be acceptable in the presence 
   of filters.  
    
   The precise definition of "acceptable" may vary from service 
   provider to service provider, and may depend upon the intended use 
   of the filters. For example, for some uses a filter may be turned 
   on all the time in order to set CoS, to prevent an attack, or to 
   mitigate the effect of a possible future attack. In this case it is 
   likely that the service provider will want the filter to have 
   minimal or no impact on performance. In other cases, a filter may 
   be turned on only in response to a major attack (such as a major 
   DDOS attack). In this case a greater performance impact may be 
   acceptable to some service providers.  
    
   A key consideration with the use of packet filters is that they can 
   provide few options for filtering packets carrying encrypted data.  
   Since the data itself is not accessible, only packet header 
   information or other unencrypted fields can be used for filtering. 
    
5.3.2.  Firewalls 
    
   Firewalls provide a mechanism for control over traffic passing 
   between different trusted zones in the MPLS/GMPLS model, or between 
   a trusted zone and an untrusted zone.  Firewalls typically provide 
   much more functionality than filters, since they may be able to 
   apply detailed analysis and logical functions to flows, and not 
   just to individual packets.  They may offer a variety of complex 
   services, such as threshold-driven denial-of-service attack 
   protection, virus scanning, acting as a TCP connection proxy, etc. 
    
   As with other access control techniques, the value of firewalls 
   depends on a clear understanding of the topologies of the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core network, the user networks, and the threat model.  
   Their effectiveness depends on a topology with a clearly defined 
   inside (secure) and outside (not secure). 
    
    
    
   Firewalls may be applied to help protect MPLS/GMPLS core network 
   functions from attacks originating from the Internet or from 
   MPLS/GMPLS user sites, but typically other defensive techniques 
   will be used for this purpose. 
    
   Where firewalls are employed as a service to protect user VPN sites 
   from the Internet, different VPN users, and even different sites of 
   a single VPN user, may have varying firewall requirements.  The 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      28 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   overall PPVPN logical and physical topology, along with the 
   capabilities of the devices implementing the firewall services, 
   will have a significant effect on the feasibility and manageability 
   of such varied firewall service offerings. 
    
   Another consideration with the use of firewalls is that they can 
   provide few options for handling packets carrying encrypted data.  
   Since the data itself is not accessible, only packet header 
   information, other unencrypted fields, or analysis of the flow of 
   encrypted packets can be used for making decisions on accepting or 
   rejecting encrypted traffic. 
    
    
5.3.3.  Access Control to management interfaces 
    
   Most of the security issues related to management interfaces can be 
   addressed through the use of authentication techniques as described 
   in the section on authentication.  However, additional security may 
   be provided by controlling access to management interfaces in other 
   ways. 
    
   Management interfaces, especially console ports on MPLS/GMPLS 
   devices, may be configured so they are only accessible out-of-band, 
   through a system which is physically and/or logically separated 
   from the rest of the MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure. 
    
   Where management interfaces are accessible in-band within the 
   MPLS/GMPLS domain, filtering or firewalling techniques can be used 
   to restrict unauthorized in-band traffic from having access to 
   management interfaces.  Depending on device capabilities, these 
   filtering or firewalling techniques can be configured either on 
   other devices through which the traffic might pass, or on the 
   individual MPLS/GMPLS devices themselves. 
    
   5.4. Use of Isolated Infrastructure 
 
   One way to protect the infrastructure used for support of 
   MPLS/GMPLS is to separate the resources for support of MPLS/GMPLS 
   services from the resources used for other purposes (such as 
   support of Internet services). In some cases this may make use of 
   physically separate equipment for VPN services, or even a 
   physically separate network.  
    
   For example, PE-based L3 VPNs may be run on a separate backbone not 
   connected to the Internet, or may make use of separate edge routers 
   from those used to support Internet service. Private IP addresses 


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      29 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   (local to the provider and non-routable over the Internet) are 
   sometimes used to provide additional separation. 
    
    
   5.5. Use of Aggregated Infrastructure 
    
   In general it is not feasible to use a completely separate set of 
   resources for support of each service. In fact, one of the main 
   reasons for MPLS/GMPLS enabled services is to allow sharing of 
   resources between multiple users, including multiple VPNs, etc. 
   Thus even if certain services make use of a separate network from 
   Internet services, nonetheless there will still be multiple 
   MPLS/GMPLS users sharing the same network resources. In some cases 
   MPLS/GMPLS services will share the use of network resources with 
   Internet services or other services.  
    
   It is therefore important for MPLS/GMPLS services to provide 
   protection between resource utilization by different users. Thus a 
   well-behaved MPLS/GMPLS user should be protected from possible 
   misbehavior by other users. This requires that limits are placed on 
   the amount of resources which can be used by any one VPN. For 
   example, both control traffic and user data traffic may be rate 
   limited. In some cases or in some parts of the network where a 
   sufficiently large number of queues are available each VPN (and 
   optionally each VPN and CoS within the VPN) may make use of a 
   separate queue. Control-plane resources such as link bandwidth as 
   well as CPU and memory resources may be reserved on a per-VPN 
   basis.  
    
   The techniques which are used to provision resource protection 
   between multiple users served by the same infrastructure can also 
   be used to protect MPLS/GMPLS networks and services from Internet 
   services.  
    
   In general the use of aggregated infrastructure allows the service 
   provider to benefit from stochastic multiplexing of multiple bursty 
   flows, and also may in some cases thwart traffic pattern analysis 
   by combining the data from multiple users.  
    
   5.6. Service Provider Quality Control Processes 
    
   Deployment of provider-provisioned VPN services in general requires 
   a relatively large amount of configuration by the service provider. 
   For example, the service provider needs to configure which VPN each 
   site belongs to, as well as QoS and SLA guarantees. This large 
   amount of required configuration leads to the possibility of 
   misconfiguration.  
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      30 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   It is important for the service provider to have operational 
   processes in place to reduce the potential impact of 
   misconfiguration. CE to CE authentication may also be used to 
   detect misconfiguration when it occurs.  
    
   5.7. Deployment of Testable MPLS/GMPLS Service.   
    
   This refers to solutions that can be readily tested to make sure 
   they are configured correctly.  E.g. for a point-point connection, 
   checking that the intended connectivity is working pretty much 
   ensures that there is not connectivity to some unintended site. 
    
 
6. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS network and service may be subject to attacks from a 
   variety of security threats.  Many threats are described in another 
   part of this document.  Many of the defensive techniques described 
   in this document and elsewhere provide significant levels of 
   protection from a variety of threats.  However, in addition to 
   silently employing defensive techniques to protect against attacks, 
   MPLS/GMPLS services can also add value for both providers and 
   customers by implementing security monitoring systems which detect 
   and report on any security attacks which occur, regardless of 
   whether the attacks are effective. 
    
   Attackers often begin by probing and analyzing defenses, so systems 
   which can detect and properly report these early stages of attacks 
   can provide significant benefits. 
    
   Information concerning attack incidents, especially if available 
   quickly, can be useful in defending against further attacks.  It 
   can be used to help identify attackers and/or their specific 
   targets at an early stage.  This knowledge about attackers and 
   targets can be used to further strengthen defenses against specific 
   attacks or attackers, or improve the defensive services for 
   specific targets on an as-needed basis.  Information collected on 
   attacks may also be useful in identifying and developing defenses 
   against novel attack types. 
    
   Monitoring systems used to detect security attacks in MPLS/GMPLS 
   will typically operate by collecting information from the Provider 
   Edge (PE), Customer Edge (CE), and/or Provider backbone (P) 
   devices.  Security monitoring systems should have the ability to 
   actively retrieve information from devices (e.g., SNMP get) or to 
   passively receive reports from devices (e.g., SNMP notifications).  
   The specific information exchanged will depend on the capabilities 
   of the devices and on the type of VPN technology.  Particular care 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      31 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   should be given to securing the communications channel between the 
   monitoring systems and the MPLS/GMPLS devices. 
    
   The CE, PE, and P devices should employ efficient methods to 
   acquire and communicate the information needed by the security 
   monitoring systems.  It is important that the communication method 
   between MPLS/GMPLS devices and security monitoring systems be 
   designed so that it will not disrupt network operations.  As an 
   example, multiple attack events may be reported through a single 
   message, rather than allowing each attack event to trigger a 
   separate message, which might result in a flood of messages, 
   essentially becoming a denial-of-service attack against the 
   monitoring system or the network. 
    
   The mechanisms for reporting security attacks should be flexible 
   enough to meet the needs of MPLS/GMPLS service providers, 
   MPLS/GMPLS customers, and regulatory agencies, if applicable.  The 
   specific reports will depend on the capabilities of the devices, 
   the security monitoring system, the type of VPN, and the service 
   level agreements between the provider and customer. 
 
7. Service Provider General Security Requirements 
    
   In this section, we discuss the security requirements that the 
   provider may have in order to secure its MPLS/GMPLS network 
   infrastructure, including LDP and RSVP-TE specific requirements. 
    
   The MPLS/GMPLS service provider requirements defined here are the 
   requirements for the MPLS/GMPLS core in the reference model.  The 
   core network can be implemented with different types of network 
   technologies, and each core network may use different technologies 
   to provide the various services to users with different levels of 
   offered security. Therefore, a MPLS/GMPLS service provider may 
   fulfill any number of the security requirements listed in this 
   section. This document does not state that a MPLS/GMPLS network 
   must fulfill all of these requirements to be secure.   
    
   These requirements are focused on: 1) how to protect the MPLS/GMPLS 
   core from various attacks outside the core including network users, 
   both accidentally and maliciously, 2) how to protect the end users. 
     
   7.1. Protection within the Core Network 
    
7.1.1.  Control Plane Protection - General 
    
   - Protocol authentication within the core:  
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      32 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   The network infrastructure must support mechanisms for 
   authentication of the control plane. In MPLS/GMPLS core is used, 
   LDP sessions may be authenticated by use TCP MD5, in addition, IGP 
   and BGP authentication should also be considered. For a core 
   providing Layer 2 services, PE to PE authentication may also be 
   used via IPsec. 
    
   With the cost of authentication coming down rapidly, the 
   application of control plane authentication may not increase the 
   cost of implementation for providers significantly, and will help 
   to improve the security of the core. If the core is dedicated to 
   MPLS/GMPLS enabled services and without any interconnects to third 
   parties then this may reduce the requirement for authentication of 
   the core control plane. 
    
 
   - Elements protection 
    
   Here we discuss means to hide the provider's infrastructure nodes.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS provider may make the infrastructure routers (P and PE 
   routers) unreachable from outside users and unauthorized internal 
   users. For example, separate address space may be used for the 
   infrastructure loopbacks.  
    
   Normal TTL propagation may be altered to make the backbone look 
   like one hop from the outside, but caution needs to be taken for 
   loop prevention. This prevents the backbone addresses from being 
   exposed through trace route; however this must also be assessed 
   against operational requirements for end to end fault tracing.  
    
   An Internet backbone core may be re-engineered to make Internet 
   routing an edge function, for example, using MPLS label switching 
   for all traffic within the core and possibly make the Internet a 
   VPN within the PPVPN core itself. This helps to detach Internet 
   access from PPVPN services. 
    
   Separating control plane, data plane, and management plane 
   functionality in terms of hardware and software may be implemented 
   on the PE devices to improve security. This may help to limit the 
   problems when attacked in one particular area, and may allow each 
   plane to implement additional security measurement separately. 
    
   PEs are often more vulnerable to attack than P routers, since PEs 
   cannot be made unreachable to outside users by their very nature. 
   Access to core trunk resources can be controlled on a per user 
   basis by the application of inbound rate-limiting/shaping, this can 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      33 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   be further enhanced on a per Class of Service basis (see section 
   8.2.3)  
 
   In the PE, using separate routing processes for different services, 
   for example, Internet and PPVPN service may help to improve the 
   PPVPN security and better protect VPN customers. Furthermore, if 
   the resources, such as CPU and Memory, may be further separated 
   based on applications, or even individual VPNs, it may help to 
   provide improved security and reliability to individual VPN 
   customers. 
    
7.1.2.  Control plane protection with RSVP-TE 
    
   - RSVP Security Tools 
    
   Isolation of the trusted domain is an important security mechanism 
   with respect to RSVP, to ensure that an untrusted element cannot 
   access a router of the trusted domain.  Though isolation is limited 
   by the need to allow ASBR-ASBR communication for inter-AS LSPs.  
   Isolation mechanisms might be bypassed by Router Alert IP packets. 
   - A solution would consists in disabling the RSVP router alert mode 
   and dropping all IP packets with the router alert option, or also 
   to drop on an interface all incoming IP packets with port 46, which 
   requires an access-list at the IP port level) or spoofed IP packets 
   if anti-spoofing is not activated. 
    
   RSVP security can be strengthened by deactivating RSVP on 
   interfaces with neighbors who are not authorized to use RSVP, to 
   protect against adjacent CE-PE attacks.  However, this does not 
   really protect against DoS attacks, and does not protect against 
   attacks on non-adjacent routers.  It has been demonstrated that 
   substantial CPU resources are consumed simply by processing 
   received RSVP packets, even if the RSVP process is deactivated for 
   the specific interface on which the RSVP message is received.  
    
   RSVP neighbor filtering at the protocol level, to restrict the set 
   of neighbors that can send RSVP messages to a given router, 
   protects against non-adjacent attacks.  However, this does not 
   protect against DoS attacks, and does not effectively protect 
   against spoofing of the source address of RSVP packets, if the 
   filter relies on the neighbor's address within the RSVP message.   
    
   RSVP neighbor filtering at the data plane level (access list to 
   accept IP packet with port 46, only for specific neighbors). This 
   requires Router Alert mode to be deactivated. This does not protect 
   against spoofing. 
    
   - Authentication for RSVP messages 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      34 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
    
   One of the most powerful tools for protection against RSVP-based 
   attacks is the use of authentication for RSVP messages, based on a 
   secure message hash using a key shared by RSVP neighbors.  This 
   protects against LSP creation attacks, at the expense of consuming 
   significant CPU resources for digest computation.  In addition, if 
   the neighboring RSVP speaker is compromised, it could be used to 
   launch attacks using authenticated RSVP messages. 
    
   Another valuable tool is RSVP message pacing, to limit the number 
   of RSVP messages sent to a given neighbor during a given period.  
   This allows blocking DoS attack propagation. 
    
   In order to ensure continued effective operation of the MPLS router 
   even in the case of an attack which is able to bypass packet 
   filtering mechanisms such as Access Control Lists in the data 
   plane, it is important that routers have some mechanisms to limit 
   the impact of the attack.  There should be a mechanism to rate 
   limit the amount of control plane traffic addressed to the router, 
   per interface.  This should be configurable on a per-protocol 
   basis, (and, ideally, on a per sender basis) to avoid an attacked 
   protocol, or a given sender blocking all communications.  This 
   requires the ability to filter and limit the rate of incoming 
   messages of particular protocols, such as RSVP (filtering at the IP 
   port level), and particular senders).  In addition, there should be 
   a mechanism to limit CPU and memory capacity allocated to RSVP, so 
   as to protect other control plane elements.  In order to limit the 
   memory allocation, it will probably be necessary to limit the 
   number of LSPs which can be set up. 
    
   - limit the impact of an attack on control plane resources 
    
   In order to ensure continued effective operation of the MPLS router 
   even in the case of an attack which is able to bypass packet 
   filtering mechanisms such as Access Control Lists in the data 
   plane, it is important that routers have some mechanisms to limit 
   the impact of the attack.  There should be a mechanism to rate 
   limit the amount of control plane traffic addressed to the router, 
   per interface.  This should be configurable on a per-protocol 
   basis, (and, ideally, on a per sender basis) to avoid an attacked 
   protocol, or a given sender blocking all communications.  This 
   requires the ability to filter and limit the rate of incoming 
   messages of particular protocols, such as RSVP (filtering at the IP 
   port level, and particular senders).  In addition, there should be 
   a mechanism to limit CPU and memory capacity allocated to RSVP, so 
   as to protect other control plane elements.  In order to limit the 
   memory allocation, it will probably be necessary to limit the 
   number of LSPs which can be set up. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      35 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
 
7.1.3.  Control plane protection with LDP 
 
   The approaches to protect MPLS routers against LDP-based attacks 
   are very similar to those for RSVP, including isolation, protocol 
   deactivation on specific interfaces, filtering of LDP neighbors at 
   the protocol level, filtering of LDP neighbors at the data plane 
   level (access list that filter the TCP & UDP LDP ports), 
   authentication with message digest, rate limiting of LDP messages 
   per protocol per sender and limiting all resources which might be 
   allocated to LDP-related tasks. 
    
       
7.1.4.  Data Plane Protection 
    
   IPsec technologies can provide - encryption of secure provider or 
   user data. 
    
   In today's MPLS/GMPLS, ATM, or Frame Relay networks, encryption is 
   not provided as a basic feature. Mechanisms described in section 5 
   can be used to secure the MPLS data plane to secure the data 
   carried over MPLS core.  
    
    
   7.2. Protection on the User Access Link 
 
   Peer / Neighbor protocol authentication may be used to enhance 
   security. For example, BGP MD5 authentication may be used to 
   enhance security on PE-CE links using eBGP. In the case of Inter-
   provider connection, authentication / encryption mechanisms between 
   ASes, such as IPsec, may be used. 
    
   WAN link address space separation for different services (e.g. VPN 
   and non-VPN) may be implemented to improve security in order to 
   protect each service if multiple services are provided on the same 
   PE platform. 
    
   Firewall / Filtering: access control mechanisms can be used to 
   filter out any packets destined for the service provider's 
   infrastructure prefix or eliminate routes identified as 
   illegitimate routes. 
    
   Rate limiting may be applied to the user interface/logical 
   interfaces against DDOS bandwidth attack. This is very helpful when 
   the PE device is supporting both multi-services, especially when 
   supporting VPN and Internet Services on the same physical 
   interfaces through different logical interfaces. 
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      36 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
7.2.1.  Link Authentication 
    
   Authentication mechanisms can be employed to validate site access 
   to the network via fixed or logical (e.g. L2TP, IPsec) connections. 
   Where the user wishes to hold the 'secret' associated to acceptance 
   of the access and site into the VPN, then provider solutions 
   require the flexibility for either direct authentication by the PE 
   itself or interaction with a customer authentication server. 
   Mechanisms are required in the latter case to ensure that the 
   interaction between the PE and the customer authentication server 
   is controlled e.g. limiting it simply to an exchange in relation to 
   the authentication phase and with other attributes e.g. RADIUS 
   optionally being filtered. 
    
7.2.2.  Access Routing 
    
   Mechanisms may be used to provide control at a routing protocol 
   level e.g. RIP, OSPF, BGP between the CE and PE. Per neighbor and 
   per VPN routing policies may be established to enhance security and 
   reduce the impact of a malicious or non-malicious attack on the PE, 
   in particular the following mechanisms should be considered: 
    - Limiting the number of prefixes that may be advertised on 
       a per access basis into the PE. Appropriate action may be 
       taken should a limit be exceeded e.g. the PE shutting 
       down the peer session to the CE  
    - Applying route dampening at the PE on received routing 
       updates 
    - Definition of a per VPN prefix limit after which 
       additional prefixes will not be added to the VPN routing 
       table. 
    
   In the case of Inter-provider connection, access protection, link 
   authentication, and routing policies as described above may be 
   applied. Both inbound and outbound firewall/filtering mechanism 
   between ASes may be applied. Proper security procedures must be 
   implemented in Inter-provider VPN interconnection to protect the 
   providers' network infrastructure and their customer VPNs. This may 
   be custom designed for each Inter-Provider VPN peering connection, 
   and must be agreed by both providers. 
 
7.2.3.  Access QoS 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS providers offering QoS enabled services require 
   mechanisms to ensure that individual accesses are validated against 
   their subscribed QOS profile and as such gain access to core 
   resources that match their service profile.  Mechanisms such as per 
   Class of service rate limiting/traffic shaping on ingress to the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core are one option in providing this level of control.  
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      37 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   Such mechanisms may require the per Class of Service profile to be 
   enforced either by marking, remarking or discard of traffic outside 
   of profile. 
    
7.2.4.  Customer service monitoring tools  
    
   End users requiring visibility of the specific statistics on the 
   core e.g. routing table, interface status, QoS statistics, impose 
   requirements for mechanisms at the PE to both validate the incoming 
   user and limit the views available to that particular user.  
   Mechanisms should also be considered to ensure that such access 
   cannot be used a means of a DOS attack (either malicious or 
   accidental) on the PE itself. This could be accomplished through 
   either separation of these resources within the PE itself or via 
   the capability to rate-limit on a per physical/logical connection 
   basis such traffic. 
 
    
   7.3. General Requirements for MPLS/GMPLS Providers 
    
   The MPLS/GMPLS providers must support the users' security 
   requirements as listed in Section 7. Depending on the technologies 
   used, these requirements may include: 
 
   - User control plane separation - routing isolation 
   - Protection against intrusion, DOS attacks and spoofing 
   - Access Authentication 
   - Techniques highlighted through this document identify 
      methodologies for the protection of resources and 
      MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure.  
    
   Equipment hardware/software bugs leading to breaches in security 
   are not within the scope of this document. 
 
 
8. Inter-provider Security Requirements 
 
   This section discusses security capabilities that are important at 
   the MPLS/GMPLS Inter-provider connections, and at devices 
   (including ASBR routers) which support the Inter-provider 
   connections. The security capabilities stated in this section 
   should be considered as complementary to security considerations 
   addressed in the individual protocol specifications and/or security 
   frameworks. 
    
   Security vulnerabilities and exposures may be propagated across 
   multiple networks because of security vulnerabilities arising in 
   one peer's network. Threats to security originate from accidental, 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      38 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   administrative and intentional sources. Intentional threats include 
   events such as spoofing and Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. 
   The level and nature of threats, as well as security and 
   availability requirements, may vary over time and from network to 
   network. This section therefore discusses capabilities that need to 
   be available in equipment deployed for support of the MPLS-ICI. 
   Whether any particular capability is used in any one specific 
   instance of the ICI is up to the service providers managing the 
   provider edge equipment offering/using the ICI services.  
    
   8.1. Control Plane Protection 
    
   This section discusses capabilities for control plane protection, 
   including protection of routing, signaling, and OAM capabilities.   
 
8.1.1.  Authentication of Signaling Sessions 
 
   Authentication of signaling sessions (i.e., BGP, LDP and RSVP-TE) 
   and routing sessions (e.g., BGP) as well as OAM sessions across 
   domain boundaries. Equipment must be able to support exchange of 
   all protocol messages over a single IPsec tunnel, with NULL 
   encryption and authentication, between the peering ASBRs. Support 
   for TCP MD5 authentication for LDP and BGP and for RSVP-TE 
   authentication must also be provided. 
 
   Mechanisms to authenticate and validate a dynamic setup request 
   MUST be available. For instance, if dynamic signaling of a TE-LSP 
   or PW is crossing a domain boundary, there must be a way to detect 
   whether the LSP source is who he claims to be and that he is 
   allowed to connect to the destination. 
    
   MD5 authentication support for all TCP-based protocols within the 
   scope of the MPLS-ICI (i.e., LDP signaling, and BGP routing) and 
   MD5 authentication for the RSVP-TE Integrity Object MUST be 
   provided to interoperate with current practices. 
   Equipment SHOULD be able to support exchange of all signaling and 
   routing (LDP, RSVP-TE, and BGP) protocol messages over a single 
   IPSec in tunnel or transport mode with authentication but with NULL 
   encryption, between the peering ASBRs. IPSec, if supported, must be 
   supported with HMAC-MD-5 and optionally SHA-1.  It is expected that 
   authentication algorithms will evolve over time and support can be 
   updated as needed. 
    
   OAM Operations across the MPLS-ICI could also be the source of 
   security threats on the provider infrastructure as well as the 
   service offered over the MPLS-ICI. A large volume of OAM messages 
   could overwhelm the processing capabilities of an ASBR if the ASBR 
   is not probably protected. Maliciously-generated OAM messages could 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      39 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   also be used to bring down an otherwise healthy service (e.g., MPLS 
   Pseudo Wire), and therefore effecting service security. MPLS-ping 
   does not support authentication today and that support should be 
   subject for future considerations. Bidirectional Forwarding 
   Detection (BFD) however, does have support for carrying an 
   authentication object. It also supports Time-To-Live (TTL) 
   processing as anti-replay measure. Implementations conformant to 
   this MPLS-ICI should support BFD authentication using MD-5 and must 
   support the procedures for TTL processing.  
    
8.1.2.  Protection against DoS attacks in the Control Plane 
 
   Ability to prevent signaling and routing DOS attacks on the control 
   plane per interface and provider. Such prevention may be provided 
   by rate-limiting signaling and routing messages that can be sent by 
   a peer provider according to a traffic profile and by guarding 
   against malformed packets. 
    
   Equipment MUST provide the ability to filter signaling, routing, 
   and OAM packets destined for the device, and MUST provide the 
   ability to rate limit such packets. Packet filters SHOULD be 
   capable of being separately applied per interface, and SHOULD have 
   minimal or no performance impact. For example, this allows an 
   operator to filter or rate-limit signaling, routing, and OAM 
   messages that can be sent by a peer provider and limit such traffic 
   to a traffic profile.  
    
   In the presence of a control plane DoS attack against an ASBR, the 
   router SHOULD guarantee sufficient resources to allow network 
   operators to execute network management commands to take corrective 
   action, such as turning on additional filters or disconnecting an 
   interface which is under attack. DoS attacks on the control plane 
   SHOULD NOT adversely affect data plane performance.  
   Equipment which supports BGP MUST support the ability to limit the 
   number of BGP routes received from any particular peer. 
   Furthermore, in the case of IPVPN, a router MUST be able to limit 
   the number of routes learned from a BGP peer per IPVPN. In the case 
   that a device has multiple BGP peers, it SHOULD be possible for the 
   limit to vary between peers.  
    
8.1.3.  Protection against Malformed Packets 
 
   Equipment SHOULD be robust in the presence of malformed protocol 
   packets. For example, malformed routing, signaling, and OAM packets 
   should be treated in accordance to the relevant protocol 
   specification.  
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      40 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
8.1.4.  Ability to Enable/Disable Specific Protocols 
 
   Ability to drop any signaling or routing protocol messages when 
   these messages are to be processed by the ASBR but the 
   corresponding protocol is not enabled on that interface.  
    
   Equipment must allow an administrator to enable or disable a 
   protocol (default protocol is disabled unless administratively 
   enable) on an interface basis. 
   Equipment MUST be able to drop any signaling or routing protocol 
   messages when these messages are to be processed by the ASBR but 
   the corresponding protocol is not enabled on that interface. This 
   dropping SHOULD NOT adversely affect data plane or control plane 
   performance.  
    
8.1.5.  Protection Against Incorrect Cross Connection 
 
   Capability of detecting and locating faults in an LSP cross-connect 
   MUST be provided. Such faults cause security violations as they 
   result in directing traffic to the wrong destinations. This 
   capability may rely on OAM functions. 
    
   Equipment MUST support MPLS LSP Ping [RFC4379]. This MAY be used to 
   verify end to end connectivity for the LSP (e.g., PW, TE Tunnel, 
   VPN LSP, etc), and to verify PE to PE connectivity for L3 VPN 
   services.  
    
   When routing information is advertised from one domain to the 
   other, there MUST be mechanisms that enable operators to guard 
   against situations that result in traffic hijacking, black-holing, 
   resource stealing (e.g., number of routes), etc. For instance, in 
   the IPVPN case, an operator must be able to block routes based on 
   associated route target attributes. In addition, mechanisms must 
   exist to verify whether a route advertised by a peer for a given 
   VPN is actually a valid route and whether the VPN has a site 
   attached or reachable through that domain. 
 
   Equipment (ASBRs and RRs) which supports operation of BGP MUST 
   allow a means to restrict which Route Target attributes are sent to 
   and accepted from a BGP peer across an ICI. Equipment (ASBRs, RRs) 
   SHOULD also be able to inform the peer regarding which Route Target 
   attributes it will accept from the peer.  This is due to the fact 
   that a peer which sends an incorrect Route Target can result in 
   incorrect cross-connection of VPNs. Also, sending inappropriate 
   route targets to a peer may disclose confidential information. 
   Further Security Consideration for inter-provider BGP/MPLS IPVPN 
   operations are discussed in the IPVPN Annex.  
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      41 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
8.1.6.  Protection Against Spoofed Updates and Route 
Advertisements 
 
   Equipment MUST support signaling and routing. 
   Equipment MUST support route filtering of routes received via a BGP 
   peer sessions by applying policies that include one or more the 
   following: AS path, BGP next hop, standard community and/or 
   extended community. 
    
8.1.7.  Protection of Confidential Information 
 
   Ability to identify and prohibit messages that can reveal 
   confidential information about network operation (e.g., performance 
   OAM messages, MPLS-ping messages). Service Providers must have the 
   flexibility of handling these messages at the ASBR.  
    
   Equipment SHOULD provide the ability to identify and prohibit 
   messages that can reveal confidential information about network 
   operation (e.g., performance OAM messages, LSP Traceroute 
   messages). Service Providers must have the flexibility of handling 
   these messages at the ASBR. For example, equipment supporting LSP 
   Traceroute MAY limit which addresses replies can be sent to.  
   Note: This capability should be used with care. For example, if a 
   service provider chooses to prohibit the exchange of LSP PING 
   messages at the ICI, it may make it more difficult to debug 
   incorrect cross-connection of LSPs or other problems.  
   A provider may decide to progress these messages if they are 
   incoming from a trusted provider and are targeted to specific 
   agreed-on addresses. Another provider may decide to traffic police, 
   reject or apply policies to these messages. Solutions must enable 
   providers to control the information that is relayed to another 
   provider about the path that an LSP takes. For example, in RSVP-TE 
   record route object or MPLS-ping trace, a provider must be able to 
   control the information contained in corresponding messages when 
   sent to another provider. 
    
8.1.8.  Protection Against over-provisioned number of RSVP-TE 
LSPs and bandwidth reservation 
    
   In addition to the control plane protection mechanisms listed in 
   the previous section on Control plane protection with RSVP-TE, the 
   ASBR needs mechanisms to both limit the number of LSPs that can be 
   set up by other domains and to limit the amount of bandwidth that 
   can be reserved. A provider's ASBR may deny the LSPs set up request 
   or the bandwidth reservation request sent by another provider's the 
   limits are reached. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      42 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   8.2. Data Plane Protection 
    
8.2.1.  Protection against DoS in the Data Plane 
    This is provided earlier in this document. 
 
8.2.2.  Protection against Label Spoofing 
 
   Verification that a label received across an interconnect was 
   actually assigned to the provider across the interconnect. If the 
   label was not assigned to the provider, the packet MUST be dropped. 
    
   Equipment MUST be able to verify that a label received across an 
   interconnect was actually assigned to an LSP arriving from the 
   provider across that interconnect. If the label was not assigned to 
   an LSP which arrives at this router from the correct neighboring 
   provider, the packet MUST be dropped.  This verification can be 
   applied to the top label only. The top label is the received top 
   label and every label that is exposed by label popping to be used 
   for forwarding decisions.  
    
   Equipment MUST provide the capability of dropping MPLS-labeled 
   packets if all labels in the stack are not processed.  This 
   provides carriers the capability of guaranteeing that every label 
   that enters its domain from another carrier was actually assigned 
   to that carrier.  
 
   The following requirements are not directly reflected in this 
   document but must be used as guidance for addressing further work. 
    
   Solutions MUST NOT force operators to reveal reachability 
   information to routers within their domains. <note, it is believed 
   that this requirement is met via other requirements specified in 
   this section plus the normal operation of IP routing, which does 
   not reveal individual hosts. 
    
   Mechanisms to authenticate and validate a dynamic setup request 
   MUST be available. For instance, if dynamic signaling of a TE-LSP 
   or PW is crossing a domain boundary, there must be a way to detect 
   whether the LSP source is who he claims to be and that he is 
   allowed to connect to the destination. 
    
8.2.3.  Protection using ingress traffic policing and enforcement 
    
   In the following diagram, we use a simple diagram to illustrate a 
   potential security issue on the data plane issue across the MPLS 
   interconnect: 
    
   SP2 - ASBR2 - labeled path - ASBR1 - P1 - SP1's PSN - P2 - PE1 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      43 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   |         |                   |                          | 
   |<  AS2  >|<MPLS interconnect>|<             AS1              >| 
    
   Traffic flow direction is from SP2 to SP1 
    
   Usually, the transit label used by ASBR2 is allocated by ASBR1 
   which in turn advertises to ASB2 (downstream unsolicited or on-
   demand) and this label is used for a service context (VPN label, PW 
   VC label, etc.) and this LSP is normally terminated at a forwarding 
   table belonging to the service instance on PE (PE1) in SP1. 
    
   In the example above, ASBR1 would not know if the label of an 
   incoming packet from ASBR2 over the interconnect is VPN label or 
   PSN label for AS1. So it is possible (though rare) that ASBR2 can 
   be tempered such that the incoming label could match a PSN label 
   (e.g., LDP) in AS1 - then this LSP would end up on the global plane 
   of an infrastructure router (P or PE1) - this could invite a 
   unidirectional attack on that P or PE1 the LSP terminates. 
 
   To mitigate this threat, we SHOULD be able to do a forwarding path 
   look-up for the label on an incoming packet from a interconnect in 
   a LFIB space that is only intended for its own service context or 
   provide a mechanism on the data plane that would ensure the 
   incoming labels are what ASBR1 has allocated and advertised. 
    
   Similar concept has been proposed in "Requirements for Multi-
   Segment Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3)" [PW-REQ]. 
    
    
    
9. Security Considerations 
 
    
   Security considerations constitute the sole subject of this memo 
   and hence are discussed throughout.  Here we recap what has been 
   presented and explain at a very high level the role of each type of 
   consideration in an overall secure MPLS/GMPLS system. 
    
   The document describes a number of potential security threats.  
   Some of these threats have already been observed occurring in 
   running networks; others are largely theoretical at this time.  DOS 
   attacks and intrusion  
    
   Attacks from the Internet against service provider infrastructure 
   have been seen to occur.  DOS "attacks" (typically not malicious) 
   have also been seen in which CE equipment overwhelms PE equipment 
   with high quantities or rates of packet traffic or routing 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      44 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   information.  Operational/provisioning errors are cited by service 
   providers as one of their prime concerns. 
    
   The document describes a variety of defensive techniques that may 
   be used to counter the suspected threats.  All of the techniques 
   presented involve mature and widely implemented technologies that 
   are practical to implement. 
    
   The document describes the importance of detecting, monitoring, and 
   reporting attacks, both successful and unsuccessful.  These 
   activities are essential for "understanding one's enemy", 
   mobilizing new defenses, and obtaining metrics about how secure the 
   MPLS/GMPLS network is.  As such they are vital components of any 
   complete PPVPN security system. 
    
   The document evaluates MPLS/GMPLS security requirements from a 
   customer perspective as well as from a service provider 
   perspective.  These sections re-evaluate the identified threats 
   from the perspectives of the various stakeholders and are meant to 
   assist equipment vendors and service providers, who must ultimately 
   decide what threats to protect against in any given equipment or 
   service offering. 
    
    
10.     IANA Considerations 
   TBD. 
    
    
11.     Normative References 
    
   [RFC3031] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, R. Callon, "Multiprotocol Label 
   Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001. 
    
   [RFC3945] E. Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004. 
 
   [RFC3036] Andersson, et al., "LDP Specification", January 2001. 
    
   [RFC3209] Awduche, et al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
   Tunnels", December 2001. 
    
   [RFC4301] S. Kent, K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
   Protocol," December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4302] S. Kent, "IP Authentication Header," December 2005. 
    


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      45 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   [RFC4305] D. Eastlake 3rd, "Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation 
   Requirements for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and 
   Authentication Header (AH)", December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4306] C. Kaufman, "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) 
   Protocol",December 2005.  
    
   [RFC4346] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security 
   (TLS) Protocol, Version 1.1," April 2006.  
 
   [RFC4379] K. Kompella and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", February 2006. 
    
   [RFC4447] Martini, et al., "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance Using 
   the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP)", April 2006. 
 
   [STD62] "Simple Network Management Protocol, Version 3," RFCs 3411-
   3418, December 2002. 
    
   [STD-8] J. Postel and J. Reynolds, "TELNET Protocol Specification", 
   STD 8, May 1983. 
    
 
12.     Informational References 
 
    
   [AES-CCM] Housley, R., "Using AES CCM Mode With IPsec ESP", draft-
   ietf-ipsec-ciph-aes-ccm-05.txt, work in progress, November 2003.  
    
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [Beard] D. Beard and Y. Yang, "Known Threats to Routing Protocols," 
   draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt, Oct. 2002. (Note, this is 
   now approved as RFC, no number yet, http://www.ietf.org/internet-
   drafts/draft-ietf-rpsec-routing-threats-06.txt. 
    
   [RFC2104] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-Hashing 
   for Message Authentication," February 1997. 
    
   [RFC2411] R. Thayer, N. Doraswamy, R. Glenn,  "IP Security Document 
   Roadmap," November 1998. 
    
   [RFC3174] D. Eastlake, 3rd, and P. Jones, "US Secure Hash Algorithm 
   1 (SHA1)," September 2001. 
    


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      46 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   [RFC3985] S. Bryant and P. Pate, "Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-
   Edge (PWE3) Architecture", March 2005. 
    
   [RFC4111] L. Fang, "Security Framework of Provider Provisioned 
   VPN", RFC 4111, July 2005. 
    
   [RFC3631] S. Bellovin, C. Kaufman, J. Schiller, "Security 
   Mechanisms for the Internet," December 2003. 
    
   [RFC4110]  R. Callon and M. Suzuki, "A Framework for Layer 3 
   Provider-Provisioned Virtual Private Networks (PPVPNs), July 2005. 
    
   [MFA MPLS ICI] N. Bitar, "MPLS InterCarrier Interconnect Technical 
   Specification", MFA2006.109.01, August 2006. 
    
   [opsec efforts] C. Lonvick and D. Spak, "Security Best Practices 
   Efforts and Documents", draft-ietf-opsec-efforts-05.txt, December 
   2006. 
    
   [PW-REQ] N. Bitar, M. Bocci, L. Martini, "Requirements for Multi-
   Segment Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge", draft-ietf-pwe3-ms-pw-
   requirements-04.txt. 
 
    
 
13.     Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough, MA 01719 
   USA 
    
   EMail: lufang@cisco.com 
    
   Michael Behringer 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Village d'Entreprises Green Side 
   400, Avenue Roumanille, Batiment T 3 
   06410 Biot, Sophia Antipolis 
   FRANCE 
    
   Email: mbehring@cisco.com 
    
   Ross Callon 
   Juniper Networks 
   10 Technology Park Drive 
   Westford, MA 01886 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      47 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   USA 
    
   Email: rcallon@juniper.net 
    
   Jean-Louis Le Roux 
   France Telecom   
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin   
   22307 Lannion Cedex   
   FRANCE  
    
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com  
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   British Telecom 
   2160 E. Grand Ave. El Segundo, CA 90025 
   USA 
    
   Email: raymond.zhang@bt.com 
    
   Paul Knight 
   Nortel 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica, MA 01821 
    
   EMail: paul.knight@nortel.com 
 
   Yaakov (Jonathan) Stein 
   RAD Data Communications 
   24 Raoul Wallenberg St., Bldg C 
   Tel Aviv  69719 
   ISRAEL 
    
   Email: yaakov_s@rad.com  
    
 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      48 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   February 2007 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
Disclaimer 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
14.     Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
    
 
    







     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      49 
    
