


Megaco                                                         B. Rosen 
Internet Draft                                                  Marconi 
draft-rosen-megaco-namepatterns-00.txt                   November, 2000 
Category: Informational                                                 
 
 
                    Name Pattern Package for Megaco 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   To construct meaningful audits of terminations while controlling the 
   amount of data sent in response to the audits, it would be very 
   helpful if the MGC understood the way terminations were named in the 
   MG.  This package provides a method for obtaining the naming pattern 
   for terminations in an MG.   
    
    
    
2. Package Description 
    
   2.1 Naming Pattern Package  
        
      PackageID: nampat (0x00xx)  
      Version: 1  
      Extends: root  
        
      Description: This package defines Gateway wide termination naming  
      pattern.  
        
   2.1.1 Properties  
        
        
  
Rosen              Informational û Expires May 2001                  1 
                   Name Pattern Package for Megaco          Oct. 2000 
 
 
      Type: Double  
        
      Possible values: 1 and up  
        
      Defined in: TerminationState  
        
        
      Pattern 
      ---------------  
         PropertyId: Pattern (0x0010) 
               Name pattern of a set of terminations in the gateway.   
               Used to discover the names of terminations that  
               can be audited.  Includes ephemeral terminations.   
               MGs SHOULD use one pattern for each type of  
               termination (same packages implemented), but no  
               two Patterns can have the same value.   
         Type: String 
         Possible Value:  
               In Text Encoding 
                 A string of up to 64 characters using the following  
                 characters: 
                       a-z,A-Z,0-9, and "/" - the actual character  
                           in the name 
                       * - any set of characters 
                       ?a - any single character 
                       ?0 - any digit 
                       ?a - any alpha 
                       [n,n,..,n] - alternatives, one of the  
                           alternatives listed, n can be a substring  
                           of alphas or digits 
                       [n-n] - range, any number in the range,  
                           n can be a number or an alpha, for example  
                            [00-27] or [a-e] 
                   Note, mixing of alternatives or ranges is allowed,  
                     as in: [0,3-5,8] 
                In Binary Encoding 
                  An octet string with 
                        Bytes 0-3 Variable Mask û ones where the Id 
                           pattern varies 
                        Bytes 4-7 Fixed Value û the value for the Id  
                           where the Variable Mask bit is 0 
         Characteristics: Read-only 
         Defined in: TerminationState  
    
    
      MaxPatterns 
      ---------------  
         PropertyId: MaxPatterns (0x0011) 
         The number of patterns in the gateway 
         Type: Integer 
         Possible Value: any integer 
         Characteristics: Read-only 
         Defined in: TerminationState  
  
Rosen             Informational û Expires May, 2001                 2 
                   Name Pattern Package for Megaco          Oct. 2000 
 
 
    
      PatternNum 
      ---------------  
         PropertyId: PatternNum (0x0012) 
         Which pattern to read, zero based.  Set by the MGC to  
               read a specific pattern in Pattern 
         Type: Integer 
         Possible Value: any integer less than MaxPatterns 
         Defined in: TerminationState  
    
   2.1.2 Events  
        
      None  
        
   2.1.3 Signals  
        
      None  
        
   2.1.4 Statistics  
        
      None  
        
   2.1.5 Procedures  
        
      None 
    
5. References 
 
   1  Cuervo, Greene, Huitema, Rayhan, Rosen and Segers ôMegaco 
      Protocol version 0.8ö, RFC 2885, August, 2000 
    
    
    
6. Author's Addresses 
    
   Brian Rosen 
   Marconi 
   1000 FORE Drive 
   Warrendale, PA 15086 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1 (724) 742-6826 
   Email: brian.rosen@marconi.com 
    









  
Rosen             Informational û Expires May, 2001                 3 
                   Name Pattern Package for Megaco          Oct. 2000 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
    
    



































  
Rosen             Informational û Expires May, 2001                 4 