





Internet Engineering Task Force                            Peter Parnes
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     CDT-LTU/Marratech AB
draft-parnes-rtp-sdes-00.txt                          November 18, 1998
                                                     Expires: May, 1999


                 Proposal for additional RTP-SDES types



                          Status of this Memo

       This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
     and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
     working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."

     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
     Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
     munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or
     ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

     Distribution of this document is unlimited.

Abstract

     The Real-time Transfer Protocol, RTP (RFC1889 and currently under
     revision) includes basic support for conveying some predefined
     membership information types within a session using its control
     protocol (RTCP). This document describes a proposal for extending
     these membership types with additional membership information for
     user nickname, personal information web page reference, personal
     image reference and currently active media in session.











Peter Parnes                                                    [Page 1]




INTERNET-DRAFT                  RTP-SDES                   November 1998


1. Introduction

   The Real-time Transport Protocol, RTP [1] includes basic support for
   conveying some predefined membership information types within a
   session using its control protocol, RTCP. It currently supports
   distribution of information about a user's name, location, email,
   phone-number, temporary notes, tool name and private information.
   These different information types are distributed in so called source
   description RTCP packets, SDES packets.

   During the development of a number of RTP based applications it has
   been found that there is a need for further extending this list of
   supported information types with four additional SDES types namely:
   user nickname, personal information web page reference, personal
   image reference and currently active media. This document describes
   these additional SDES types.


2. The SDES Nickname Field

   Proposed SDES field name: Nickname
   Proposed SDES field number: 10

   Includes a nickname of the presented user. Used by applications that
   require a shorter name like e.g. textual chat-tools or remote
   pointers in a distributed whiteboard.

   It have been argued that the user-name already conveyed in the SDES
   CNAME could be used but experience shows that this is not a very good
   option, as within many organizations users are not allowed to select
   their own user names.

   Example: Peppar


3. The SDES Homepage Field

   Proposed SDES field name: Homepage
   Proposed SDES field number: 11

   Includes an URL to a web page of the presented user. Personal web
   pages are very common on the Internet today and most users have one.
   During live conferences it would be valuable if members of a session
   could get more information than propagated using existing SDES items
   about another member.

   It should be pointed out to application developers that this URL
   should NOT be automatically retrieved when a new member joins a



Peter Parnes                                                    [Page 2]




INTERNET-DRAFT                  RTP-SDES                   November 1998


   session as that would create request "storm" at the corresponding web
   server. Instead, pages should only be retrieved based on direct
   user-action. If an automated process for retrieving member
   information is used then the application should wait a random time
   period before issuing the request for the web page.

   Example: http://www.cdt.luth.se/~peppar/


4. The SDES Personal_image Field

   Proposed SDES field name: Personal_image
   Proposed SDES field number: 12

   Includes an URL to an image of the corresponding user. The image
   should be encoded using the JPEG standard as that is supported by
   most platforms today.  GIF is not recommended as that is a standard
   that requires licensing fees. PNG could be recommended in the future
   when it becomes more widely spread.

   The same retrieval considerations as for Homepage field above (see
   Sect. 3) should be considered here as well.

   Example: http://www.cdt.luth.se/~peppar/bilder/peppar.jpg


5. The SDES Active_media Field

   Proposed SDES field name: Active_media
   Proposed SDES field number: 13

   Includes an informal textual representation of which other media a
   user currently has active in a session. This would allow user A to
   get information about which other media in a session user B is
   currently listening to without the need for user A to actually join
   the multicast group that corresponds to the other media. (It is taken
   for granted that different media are sent on different multicast
   groups as specified in RFC1889 to allow users to only receive the
   media they want.)

   Example of information sent to an audio RTP-group: video chat
   whiteboard


6. Final Notes and Conclusion

   For all the new SDES fields presented in this document the current
   format and syntax of SDES fields as presented in [1] should be



Peter Parnes                                                    [Page 3]




INTERNET-DRAFT                  RTP-SDES                   November 1998


   reused. Also, no further changes to the timing considerations of [1]
   should not be done in respect to the changes presented in this
   document.

   These four additional RTCP SDES fields would allow application
   developers to create a richer membership interface to the user than
   before. It would also allow for better interaction between users in a
   session.


9. Author's Address

        Peter Parnes
        Centre for Distance-spanning Technology/Dept. of Computer Science
        Lulea University of Technology
        S-971 87 Lulea, Sweden
        Tel: +46 920 72421
        Fax: +46 920 72191
        E-Mail: peppar@cdt.luth.se
        WWW: <URL:http://www.cdt.luth.se/~peppar/>


10. References

      [1] Schulzrinne/Casner/Frederic/Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport
          Protocol for Real-Time Applications", RFC 1889, January 1996

























Peter Parnes                                                    [Page 4]
