
Internet Engineering Task Force                         S. HomChaudhuri 
Internet Draft                                             M. Foschiano 
Category: Informational                                   Cisco Systems 
Expires: September 2008                                      March 2008 
    
    
                      Cisco Systems' Private VLANs:   
             Scalable Security in a Multi-Client Environment 
                     draft-sanjib-private-vlan-09.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a mechanism to achieve device isolation 
   through the application of special Layer 2 forwarding constraints. 
   Such mechanism allows end devices to share the same IP subnet while 
   being Layer 2 isolated, which in turn allows network designers to 
   employ larger subnets and so reduce the address management overhead. 
    
  
 
 
    
    




































HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 2] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.   Introduction................................................4 
      1.1 Security Concerns with Sharing a VLAN.....................4 
      1.2 The Traditional Solution and its Related Problems.........5 
   2.   Private VLANs Architecture..................................5 
      2.1 VLAN Pairings and Their Port-related Characteristics......9 
   3.   Extending Private VLANs across Switches....................10 
   4.   A More Flexible IP Addressing Scheme.......................11 
   5.   Routing Considerations.....................................12 
   Security Considerations.........................................12 
   IANA Considerations.............................................12 
   Changes from the Previous Version...............................13 
   Acknowledgements................................................13 
   Normative References............................................13 
   Informative References..........................................13 
   Authors' Addresses..............................................14 
   IPR Notice......................................................14 
   Full Copyright Notice...........................................15 
    
    




























HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 3] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
    
   In an Ethernet switch a VLAN is a broadcast domain, in which hosts 
   can establish direct communication with one another at Layer 2.  If 
   untrusted devices are introduced into a VLAN, security issues may 
   arise because trusted and untrusted devices end up sharing the same 
   broadcast domain. 
    
   The traditional solution to this kind of problem is to assign a 
   separate VLAN to each user concerned about Layer 2 security issues. 
   However, the IEEE 802.1Q standard [802.1Q] specifies that the VLAN 
   ID field in an Ethernet frame is 12 bits wide.  That allows for a 
   theoretical maximum of 4094 VLANs in an Ethernet network (VLAN 
   numbers 0 and 4095 are reserved).  If the network administrator 
   assigns one VLAN per user, then that equates to a maximum of 4094 
   users that can be supported.  The private VLANs technology described 
   in this memo addresses this scalability problem by offering more 
   granular and more flexible Layer 2 segregation, as explained in the 
   following sections. 
 
1.1  Security Concerns with Sharing a VLAN 
    
   Companies who have Internet presence can either host their servers 
   in their own premises or, alternatively, they can locate their 
   servers at the Internet Service Provider's premises.  A typical ISP 
   would have a server farm that offers web hosting functionality for a 
   number of customers.  Co-locating the servers in a server farm 
   offers ease of management but at the same time may raise security 
   concerns. 
    
   Let us assume that the ISP puts all the servers in one big VLAN. 
   Servers residing in the same VLAN can listen to Layer 2 broadcasts 
   from other servers.  Once a server learns the MAC address associated 
   to the IP address of another computer in the same VLAN, it can 
   establish direct Layer 2 communication with that device without 
   having to go through a Layer 3 gateway/firewall.  If for example an 
   attacker gets access to one of the servers, he or she can use that 
   compromised host to launch an attack on other servers in the server 
   farm.  To protect themselves from malicious attacks, ISP customers 
   want their machines to be isolated from other machines in the same 
   server farm. 
    
   The security concerns become even more apparent in metropolitan area 
   networks.  Metropolitan Service Providers may want to provide Layer 
   2 Ethernet access to homes, rental communities, businesses, etc.  In 
   this scenario, the subscriber next door could very well be a 
   malicious network user. 
    
    
HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 4] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   It is therefore very important to offer Layer 2 traffic isolation 
   among customers.  Customer A would not want his Layer 2 frames being 
   broadcast to customer B, who happens to be in the same VLAN.  Also, 
   customer A would not want customer B to bypass a router or a 
   firewall and establish direct Layer 2 communication with him/her. 
 
1.2  The Traditional Solution and its Related Problems 
 
   The traditional solution would be to assign a separate VLAN to each 
   customer.  That way, each user would be assured of Layer 2 isolation 
   from devices belonging to other users. 
    
   However, with the VLAN-per-customer model if for instance an ISP 
   wanted to offer web-hosting services to, say, 4000 customers it 
   would consume 4000 VLANs.  Theoretically, the maximum number of 
   VLANs that an 802.1Q-compliant networking device can support is 4094.  
   In reality, many devices support a much lesser number of active 
   VLANs.  Even if all devices supported all 4094 VLANs, there would 
   still be a scalability problem when the 4095th customer signed up. 
    
   A second problem with assigning a separate VLAN per customer is 
   management of IP addresses.  Since each VLAN requires a separate 
   subnet, there can be potential wastage of IP addresses in each 
   subnet.  This issue has been described by RFC 3069 [RFC3069] and 
   will not be discussed in detail in this document. 
 
2.  Private VLANs Architecture 
 
   The private VLANs architecture is similar but more elaborate than 
   the aggregated VLAN model proposed in RFC 3069.  The concepts of 
   'super VLAN' and 'sub VLAN' used in that RFC are functionally 
   similar to the concepts of 'primary VLAN' and 'secondary VLAN' used 
   in this document. 
    
   On the other hand, the private VLANs technology differs from the 
   mechanism described in [RFC4562] because instead of using a MAC-
   address-based 'forced forwarding' scheme it uses a VLAN-based one. 
    
   A regular VLAN is a single broadcast domain.  The private VLAN 
   technology partitions a larger VLAN broadcast domain into smaller 
   sub-domains.  So far two kinds of special sub-domains specific to 
   the private VLAN technology have been defined: an 'isolated' sub-
   domain and a 'community' sub-domain.  Each sub-domain is defined by 
   assigning a proper designation to a group of switch ports. 
    
 
 
 
 
HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 5] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   Within a private VLAN domain three separate port designations exist. 
   Each port designation has its own unique set of rules which regulate 
   a connected endpoint's ability to communicate with other connected 
   endpoints within the same private VLAN domain.  The three port 
   designations are: promiscuous, isolated, and community. 
    
   An endpoint connected to a promiscuous port has the ability to 
   communicate with any endpoint within the private VLAN.  Multiple 
   promiscuous ports may be defined within a single private VLAN domain.  
   In most networks, Layer 3 default gateways or network management 
   stations are commonly connected to promiscuous ports. 
    
   Isolated ports are typically used for those endpoints that only 
   require access to a limited number of outgoing interfaces on a 
   private-VLAN-enabled device.  An endpoint connected to an isolated 
   port will only possess the ability to communicate with those 
   endpoints connected to promiscuous ports.  Endpoints connected to 
   adjacent isolated ports cannot communicate with one another.  For 
   example, within a web hosting environment, isolated ports can be 
   used to connect hosts that require access only to default gateways. 
    
   A community port is a port that is part of a private VLAN community, 
   which is a grouping of ports connected to devices belonging to the 
   same entity (for example, a group of hosts of the same ISP customer 
   or a pool of servers in a data center). Within a community, 
   endpoints can communicate with one another and can also communicate 
   with any configured promiscuous port.  Endpoints belonging to one 
   community cannot instead communicate with endpoints belonging to a 
   different community or with endpoints connected to isolated ports. 
    
   The aforementioned three port designations directly correspond to 
   three different VLAN types (primary, isolated and community VLAN 
   types) with well-defined port-related characteristics, which are 
   described in detail in section 2.1 below. 
    
   Figure 1 below illustrates the private VLAN model from a switch port 
   classification perspective. 
    
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
    
    
HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 6] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
                                     ----------- 
                                     |    R    | 
                                     ----------- 
                                          | 
                                          | 
                                          | 
                 ---------------------------------------- 
                 |                        p1            | 
                 |                                      | 
            =====| t1                                   | 
                 |                switch                | 
                 |                                      | 
                 |                                      | 
                 |i1         i2          c1          c2 | 
                 ---------------------------------------- 
                  |          |           |           | 
                  |          |           |           | 
                  |          |           |           | 
                  A          B           C           D 
    
    
                 A, B - Isolated devices 
                 C, D - Community devices 
                 R - Router (or other L4-L7 device) 
                 i1, i2 - Isolated switch ports 
                 c1, c2 - Community switch ports 
                 p1 - Promiscuous switch port 
                 t1 - Inter-switch link port (a VLAN-aware port) 
    
    
    
                 Fig 1. Private VLAN classification of switch ports 
                 -------------------------------------------------- 
    
    
   With reference to Figure 1 each of the port types is described below. 
    
   Isolated ports: An isolated port, e.g., i1 or i2, cannot talk to any 
   other port in the private VLAN domain except for promiscuous ports 
   (e.g., p1).  If a customer device needs to have access only to a 
   gateway router, then it should be attached to an isolated port. 
    
   Community ports: A community port, e.g., c1 or c2, is part of a 
   group of ports.  The ports within a community can have Layer 2 
   communications with one another and can also talk to any promiscuous 
   port.  If an ISP customer has, say, 2 devices that he/she wants to 
   be isolated from other customers' devices but to be able to 
   communicate among themselves, then community ports should be used. 
    
HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 7] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   Promiscuous ports: As the name suggests, a promiscuous port (p1) can 
   talk to all other types of ports.  A promiscuous port can talk to 
   isolated ports as well as community ports and vice versa.  Layer 3 
   gateways, DHCP servers and other 'trusted' devices that need to 
   communicate with the customer endpoints are typically connected via 
   promiscuous ports. 
    
   Please note that isolated, community and promiscuous ports can be 
   either access ports or hybrid/trunk ports (according to the 
   terminology presented in Annex D of the IEEE 802.1Q specification up 
   to its 2004 revision). 
    
   The table below summarizes the communication privileges between the 
   different private VLAN port types. 
    
    
   Table 1. 
    
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   |             | isolat-| promis-| commu-| commu-| interswitch | 
   |             | ted    | cuous  | nity1 | nity2 | link port   | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   | isolated    | deny   | permit | deny  | deny  | permit      | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   | promiscuous | permit | permit | permit| permit| permit      | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   | community1  | deny   | permit | permit| deny  | permit      | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   | community2  | deny   | permit | deny  | permit| permit      | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
   | interswitch |        |        |       |       |             | 
   | link port   | deny(*)| permit | permit| permit| permit      | 
   --------------------------------------------------------------- 
    
    
   (*) Please note that this asymmetric behavior is for traffic 
   traversing inter-switch link ports over an isolated VLAN only. 
   Traffic from an inter-switch link port to an isolated port will be 
   denied if it is in the isolated VLAN.  Traffic from an inter-switch 
   link port to an isolated port will be permitted if it is in the 
   primary VLAN (see below for the different VLAN characteristics). 
    
   N.B.: An interswitch link port is simply a regular port that 
   connects two switches (and that happens to carry two or more VLANs). 
    




HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 8] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
2.1  VLAN Pairings and Their Port-related Characteristics 
    
   In practice, the Layer-2 communication constraints described in the 
   table above can be enforced by creating sub-domains within the same 
   VLAN domain.  However, a sub-domain within a VLAN domain cannot be 
   easily implemented with only one VLAN ID.  Instead, a mechanism of 
   pairing of VLAN IDs can be used to achieve this notion.  
   Specifically, sub-domains can be represented by pairs of VLAN 
   numbers: 
    
    
     <Vp,Vs>   Vp is the primary VLAN ID               ------ 
               Vs is the secondary VLAN ID             | Vp | 
                                                       ------ 
               where Vs can be:                       /      \ 
                  - Vi (an isolated VLAN)            /        \ 
                  - Vc (a community VLAN)           /          \ 
                                                 ------       ------ 
                                                 | Vi |       | Vc | 
                                                 ------       ------ 
                                                 <Vp,Vi>      <Vp,Vc> 
    
    
        Fig 2. A private VLAN domain can be implemented with one  
               or more VLAN ID pairs 
        --------------------------------------------------------- 
    
   A private VLAN domain is built with at least one pair of VLAN IDs: 
   one (and only one) primary VLAN ID (Vp) plus one or more secondary 
   VLAN IDs (Vs).  Secondary VLANs can be of two types: isolated VLANs 
   (Vi) or community VLANs (Vc). 
    
   A primary VLAN is the unique and common VLAN identifier of the whole 
   Private VLAN domain and of all its VLAN ID pairs. 
    
   An isolated VLAN is a secondary VLAN whose distinctive 
   characteristic is that all hosts connected to its ports are isolated 
   at Layer 2.  Therefore, its primary quality is that it allows a 
   design based on Private VLANs to use a total of only two VLAN 
   identifiers (i.e., a single Private VLAN pairing) to provide port 
   isolation and serve any number of end users (vs. a traditional 
   design in which one separate plain VLAN ID would be assigned to each 
   port). 
    
   A community VLAN is a secondary VLAN that is associated to a group 
   of ports that connects to a certain "community" of end devices with 
   mutual trust relationships. 
    

HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                       [Page 9] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   While only one isolated VLAN is allowed in a private VLAN domain, 
   there can be multiple distinct community VLANs. 
    
   Please note that this VLAN pairing scheme simply requires that all 
   traffic transported within primary and secondary VLANs be tagged 
   according to the IEEE 802.1Q standard (see for example [802.1Q] 
   section B.1.3), with at most a single standard VLAN tag.  No special 
   double-tagging is necessary due to the 1:1 correspondence between a 
   secondary VLAN and its associated primary VLAN. 
    
   (Also note that this document makes use of the "traditional" VLAN 
   terminology whereas the IEEE 802.1ag standard [802.1ag] amends key 
   sections of IEEE 802.1Q-2005 to make the distinction between "VLANs" 
   and "VLAN IDs" so that every "VLAN" can be assigned one or more VLAN 
   IDs, similarly to the pairing scheme described in this document.) 
    
   The ports in a private VLAN domain derive their special 
   characteristics (as described in section 2) from the VLAN pairing(s) 
   they are configured with.  In particular, a promiscuous port is a 
   port that can communicate with all other Private VLAN port types via 
   the primary VLAN and any associated secondary VLAN, whereas isolated 
   or community ports can communicate over their respective secondary 
   VLANs only. 
 
   For example, with reference to Figure 1, a router R connected to the 
   promiscuous port can have Layer 2 communication with a device A 
   connected to an isolated port and also with a device C connected to 
   a community port.  Devices C and D can also have Layer 2 
   communication between themselves, since they are part of the same 
   community VLAN.  However, devices A and B cannot communicate at 
   Layer 2 due to the special port segregation property of the isolated 
   VLAN.  Also, devices A and C cannot communicate at Layer 2 since 
   they belong to different secondary VLANs. 
    
   The impact of these enforced forwarding restrictions is two-fold. 
   Firstly, service providers can assign multiple customers to the same 
   isolated VLAN, thereby conserving VLAN IDs.  Secondly, end users can 
   be assured that their Layer 2 traffic cannot be sniffed by other end 
   users sharing the same isolated VLAN or connected to a different 
   secondary VLAN. 
    
3.  Extending Private VLANs across Switches 
    
   Some switch vendors have attempted to provide a port isolation 
   feature within a VLAN by implementing special logic at the port 
   level.  However, when implemented at the port level, the isolation 
   behavior is restricted to a single switch. 
    

HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 10] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   When a VLAN spans multiple switches, there is no standard mechanism 
   to propagate port-level isolation information to other switches and, 
   consequently, the isolation behavior fails in other switches. 
    
   In this document, the proposal is to implement the port isolation 
   information implicitly at the VLAN level.  A particular VLAN ID can 
   be configured to be the isolated VLAN.  All switches in the network 
   would give special "isolated VLAN" treatment to frames tagged with 
   this particular VLAN ID.  Thereby, the isolated VLAN behavior can be 
   maintained consistently across all switches in a Layer 2 network. 
    
   In general, isolated, community and primary VLANs can all span 
   multiple switches, just like regular VLANs.  Inter-switch link ports 
   need not be aware of the special VLAN type and will carry frames 
   tagged with these VLANs just like they do any other frames. 
    
   One of the objectives of the private VLAN architecture is to ensure 
   that traffic from an isolated port in one switch does not reach 
   another isolated or community port in a different switch even after 
   traversing an inter-switch link.  By implicitly embedding the 
   isolation information at the VLAN level and by transporting it along 
   with the packet, it is possible to maintain a consistent behavior 
   throughout the network.  Therefore, the mechanism discussed in 
   section 2, which will restrict Layer 2 communication between two 
   isolated ports in the same switch, will also restrict Layer 2 
   communication between two isolated ports in two different switches. 
    
4.  A More Flexible IP Addressing Scheme 
    
   The common practice of deploying multiple VLANs in a network for 
   security reasons and of allocating a subnet to each VLAN has led to 
   a certain number of inefficiencies in network designs, such as the 
   suboptimal utilization of the IP addressing space (as exemplified  
   in the introduction of RFC 3069 [RFC3069]).  Moreover, each subnet 
   requires addresses to be set aside for internetworking purposes (a 
   subnetwork address, a directed broadcast address, default gateway 
   address(es), etc.).  So a high number of used VLANs traditionally 
   translates into a significant number of special addresses to be 
   consumed. 
    
   On the other hand, in a private VLAN domain all members can share a 
   common address space which is part of a single subnet associated to 
   the primary VLAN.  An end device can be assigned an IP address 
   statically or by using a DHCP server connected to a promiscuous port. 
   Since IP addresses are no longer allocated on a smaller subnet basis 
   but are assigned from a larger address pool shared by all members in 
   the private VLAN domain, address allocation becomes much more 
   efficient: fewer addresses are consumed for internetworking purposes 

HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 11] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
   while most of the address space is allotted to end devices, leaving 
   ample flexibility in the way available addresses are (re-)assigned. 
 
5.  Routing Considerations 
    
   The entire private VLAN architecture confines secondary VLANs within 
   the 2nd layer of the OSI model.  With reference to Figure 2, the 
   secondary VLANs are internal to a private VLAN domain.  Layer 3 
   entities are not directly aware of their existence: to them it 
   appears as if all the end devices are part of the primary VLAN. 
    
   With reference to Figure 1, the isolation behavior between devices A 
   and B is at the Layer 2 level only.  Devices A and B can still 
   communicate at the layer 3 level via the router R.  Since A and B 
   are part of the same subnet, the router assumes that they should be 
   able to talk directly to each other.  That however is prevented by 
   the isolated VLAN's specific behavior.  So, in order to enable A and 
   B to communicate via the router, a proxy-ARP-like functionality 
   needs to be supported on the router interface. 
    
Security Considerations 
    
   In a heterogeneous Layer 2 network that is built with switches from 
   multiple vendors, the private VLANs feature should be supported and 
   configured on all the switches.  If a switch S in that network does 
   not support this feature, then there may be undesired forwarding of 
   packets including permanent flooding of Layer 2 unicast frames.  
   That is because switch S is not aware of the association between 
   primary and secondary VLANs and consequently cannot apply the 
   segregation rules and constraints characteristic of the private VLAN 
   architecture (an example of one such constraint is explained in 
   [802.1Q] section B.1.3).  This impact is limited to traffic within 
   the private VLAN domain and will not affect the regular Layer 2 
   forwarding behavior on other VLANs. 
    
   If the private VLANs feature is properly deployed, it can be used to 
   segregate at Layer 2 individual users or groups of users from each 
   other: this segregation allows a network designer to more 
   effectively constrain Layer 2 forwarding so as to, for instance, 
   block or contain unwanted inter-device communication like port scans 
   or ARP poisoning attacks. 
    
IANA Considerations 
    
   This document has no actions for IANA. 
    
    
    

HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 12] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
Changes from the Previous Version 
    
   This version incorporates edits derived from additional review 
   comments, including a shorter abstract, a format change of the 
   references, mention of the new 802.1ag terminology, rewording of the 
   VLAN definitions and a significant number of other improvements. 
 
Acknowledgements 
    
   Many people have contributed to the Private VLANs architecture.  We 
   would particularly like to thank, in alphabetical order, Senthil 
   Arunachalam, Jason Chen, Tom Edsall, Michael Fine, Herman Hou, 
   Milind Kulkarni, Kannan Kothandaraman, Prasanna Parthasarathy, Heng-
   Hsin Liao, Tom Nosella, Ramesh Santhanakrishnan, Mukundan Sudarsan, 
   Charley Wen and Zhong Xu for their significant contributions. 
 
Normative References 
    
   [802.1Q]   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, "IEEE 
              Std 802.1Q 2005 Edition, Virtual Bridged Local Area 
              Networks", IEEE Standard 802.1Q, 2005 Edition, May 2006 
    
   [802.1ag]  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, "IEEE 
              Std 802.1ag 2007 Edition, Connectivity Fault Management", 
              IEEE Standard 802.1ag, 2007 Edition, December 2007 
 
Informative References 
    
   [RFC3069]  McPherson, D. and B. Dykes, "VLAN Aggregation for 
              Efficient IP Address Allocation", RFC 3069, February 2001 
    
   [RFC4562]  Melsen, T and Blake S., "MAC-Forced Forwarding: A Method 
              for Subscriber Separation on an Ethernet Access Network", 
              RFC 4562, June 2006 
    
    
    












HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 13] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Marco Foschiano 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Via Torri Bianche 7, Vimercate, MI, 20059, Italy 
   Email address: foschia@cisco.com 
    
   Sanjib HomChaudhuri 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA, 95134, USA 
   Email address: sanjib@cisco.com 
    
    
IPR Notice 
    
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed 
   in regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document. For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf- 
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    






HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 14] 
 
 
                            Private VLANs              September 2008 
 
 
Full Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
    
Acknowledgement 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire in September 2008. 
 






















HomChaudhuri, Foschiano                                      [Page 15] 
 
 
