Internet Architecture Board                                    J. Gustin
Internet Draft                                                 A. Goyens
Document: draft-gustin-goyens-urn-id-01.txt                   S.W.I.F.T.
                                                            January 2002


        A URN Namespace for SWIFT's financial standardization

 Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 30, 2002.



 Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that
   is engineered by S.W.I.F.T. s.c.r.l. for usage within messages
   standardized by SWIFT.

 Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

1. Introduction

   SWIFT is an industry owned co-operative serving as a message
   standardization body, supplying secure messaging services and
   interface software to over 7,000 financial institutions in 192
   countries.

   The goal of this name space is to ensure the stability and
   uniqueness of the names of various items that are used within the
   messages exchanged between financial institutions. S.W.I.F.T. is
   one of the principal standardization bodies for financial messages
   and services. This standardization process identifies the structure
   and meaning of messages exchanged for various financial services
   offered by financial institutions. It is essential that names of
   items (such as the XML schema describing the message itself) can be
   used to identify the resource even years after the message has been
   exchanged.


Internet Architecture Board                                     [Page 1]
draft-swift-urn-id.txt      S.W.I.F.T. URN Namespace       December 2001

   The same resource may exist in multiple physical locations, and
   thus multiple URL's but only a single URN.


2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "swift" requested.

   Registration Information:

      Version 1
      Date: 2001-08-01

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      S.W.I.F.T. s.c.r.l.
          Avenue Adele 1
          B-1310 La Hulpe
          Belgium

   Declaration of syntactic structures:

      The structure of the Namespace Specific String is a flat space
      <URN chars> [1] which have no knowable structure outside of the
      context of the SWIFT community internal resolver. Future changes
      to the assignment methods may allow others to assign sub-spaces
      of the flat namespace but again, this knowledge is only valid
      internally and should never be inferred or relied upon
      externally.

   Relevant Ancillary Documentation:

      None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      Identifiers are assigned by SWIFT URN Registration that
      guarantees uniqueness. This is simply achieved by keeping track
      of already assigned names and comparing all new proposed names to
      the database ones. If the name already exists a new one has to be
      proposed.

   Identifiers Persistence considerations:

      The assignment process guarantees that names are not reassigned.
          In any case swift URNs are guaranteed to remain valid for 15
          years.

   Process of identifiers assignment:

      Names are granted via SWIFT proprietary registration procedures.


Internet Architecture Board                                     [Page 2]
draft-swift-urn-id.txt      S.W.I.F.T. URN Namespace       December 2001

   Process for identifier resolution:

      swift URNs are resolved via URN resolvers run under SWIFT
          responsibility.

   Rules for lexical equivalence:

      No special consideration.

   Conformance with URN syntax:

      No special consideration.

   Validation Mechanism:

      None specified.

   Scope:

      This namespace is reserved to the global financial community.

3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.  They are
   listed for pedagogical reasons only.

      urn:swift:xsd:epp$mi.i-2.0
      urn:swift:type:fin$103


4. Security Considerations

   Since the URNs in this namespace are opaque there are no additional
   security considerations other than those normally associated with
   the use and resolution of URNs in general.

   It is noted however that attempting to resolve a swift URN through a
   resolver other than the one provided by SWIFT is error
   prone. In any case it is not considered authoritative.

References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.
   [2]  Daigle, R., Van Gulik, D., Ianella, R., Faltstrom, P.,
        "URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms", RFC 2611, June 1999

Author's Address

   Jean-Marc Gustin
   S.W.I.F.T. s.c.r.l.
   Avenue Adele, 1
   B1310 La Hulpe
   Belgium
   EMail: jean-marc.gustin@swift.com

Internet Architecture Board                                     [Page 3]
draft-swift-urn-id.txt      S.W.I.F.T. URN Namespace       December 2001

   Andre Goyens
   S.W.I.F.T. s.c.r.l.
   Avenue Adele, 1
   B1310 La Hulpe
   Belgium
   EMail: andre.goyens@swift.com

   URI:   http://www.swift.com















