



COINRG                                                           I. Fink
Internet-Draft                                                 K. Wehrle
Intended status: Informational                    RWTH Aachen University
Expires: September 12, 2021                               March 11, 2021


        Enhancing Security and Privacy with In-Network Computing
                      draft-fink-coin-sec-priv-02

Abstract

   With the growing interconnection of devices, cyber security and data
   protection are of increasing importance.  This is especially the case
   regarding cyber-physical systems due to their close entanglement with
   the physical world.  Misbehavior and information leakage can lead to
   financial and physical damage and endanger human lives and well-
   being.  Thus, hard security and privacy requirements are necessary to
   be met.  Furthermore, a thorough investigation of incidents is
   essential for ultimate protection.  Computing in the Network (COIN)
   allows the processing of traffic and data directly in the network and
   at line-rate.  Thus, COIN presents a promising solution for
   efficiently providing security and privacy mechanisms as well as
   event analysis.  This document discusses select mechanisms to
   demonstrate how COIN concepts can be applied to counter existing
   shortcomings of cyber security and data privacy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 12, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Protection Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Encryption and Integrity Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Authorization and Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  Behavioral and Enterprise Policies  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  In-Network Vulnerability Patches  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.5.  Anonymization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Intrusion and Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  Intrusion Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Dead Man's Switch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Incident Investigation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   With the ongoing digitalization, previously isolated devices and
   systems are increasingly connected to the Internet, concerning all
   aspects of life.  In particular, in the context of Cyber-Physical
   Systems (CPS) and the (Industrial) Internet of Things, machines and
   infrastructure are equipped with additional sensors and CPUs to allow
   for automatization and higher processing efficiency.  The
   entanglement of the sensors with the physical world leads to high
   sensitivity of the transmitted and collected data.

   Consequently, digitalization expands the attack surface and the
   possible impacts of cyber attacks, increasing the importance of
   proper protection mechanisms.

   Devices in CPS are often resource-constrained and do not offer the
   possibility to implement elaborate security mechanisms.  Furthermore,
   legacy devices and communication protocols are often still used in
   industrial networks but were not designed to face the security and



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   privacy challenges the new interconnection brings.  Thus,
   communication and access are often unprotected.  Upgrading legacy
   devices with protection mechanisms is an effortful and expensive
   procedure.  A promising approach for retrofitting security is the
   deployment of suitable mechanisms within the network.  To date, this
   is mainly realized using middle-boxes, leading to overhead and the
   need for additional hardware.

   One general and widespread security component is Intrusion Detection
   Systems (IDS) to detect and, ideally, prevent undesired events in a
   network.  However, IDS are usually implemented in software, again
   running on middle boxes or edge devices in the same network.  Thus,
   their reaction time is limited as well as their information gain,
   which is usually addressed by deploying additional IDS components.

   Last, the after-treatment of incidents in networks is critical to
   detect exploited vulnerabilities and prevent future attacks.  Network
   forensics serves to retrace and comprehend the origin and course of
   malicious events.  However, to provide high performance, the
   underlying monitoring of network traffic requires dedicated
   networking devices, leading to high costs in traditional networks.

   One common problem is that software solutions often require the
   deployment of additional hardware and lead to performance overhead,
   which is especially unfavorable in the context of time-sensitive
   applications, e.g., in industry.  Existing high-performance
   solutions, e.g., running on traditional networking devices, require
   dedicated and costly hardware.

   Computing in the Network (COIN) covers these shortfalls by using
   programmable networking devices to conduct dynamic and custom
   processing of network packets at line-rate.  Thus, security-related
   functions and packet inspection can be implemented and applied
   centrally in the network, e.g., at a programmable switch.

   This draft explores the opportunities of COIN for improving security
   and privacy as follows: we first describe feasible mechanisms for
   preventing attacks and intrusion in the first place.  Then, we
   present which mechanisms we can implement with COIN for detecting
   intrusion and undesired behavior when it has already taken place.
   Last, we explore how COIN can improve network forensics for analyzing
   and following up incidents, preventing future attacks.

2.  Protection Mechanisms

   The common ground for providing security and data privacy is to
   protect against unauthorized access.  That protection is primarily
   provided by deploying the basic security mechanisms encryption,



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   integrity checking, authentication, and authorization.  Those are
   especially often missing in resource-constrained environments.
   [RFC7744] thoroughly discusses the need for authentication and
   authorization in resource-restrained environments.  [RFC8576]
   presents security and privacy risks and challenges specific to the
   IoT.  In the following, we describe how COIN can help to retrofit
   suitable mechanisms.

2.1.  Encryption and Integrity Checks

   Encryption is critical to preserve confidentiality when transmitting
   data.  Integrity checks prevent undetected manipulation, which can
   remain unnoticed even despite encryption, e.g., in case of flipped
   bits.  Due to resource-constraints, many devices in CPS do not
   provide encryption or calculation of check-sums.

   Complex cryptography is not supported by current programmable
   switches either.  However, this might change in the future, which
   would allow retrofitting encryption and integrity checks at
   networking devices.  Concretely, using COIN with suitable hardware,
   data could be encrypted and supplemented with a check-sum directly at
   the first networking device passed by the respective data packet.
   The packet is then forwarded through the network or Internet to its
   designated destination.  Decryption and integrity checks can be
   executed at the last networking device before the destination.
   Alternatively, this can be implemented at the destination if
   supported by the respective device.  This approach does not require
   deployment or forwarding to additional middle-boxes.  Thus, no
   additional attack surface or processing overhead is introduced, which
   is essential for time-sensitive processes as often at hand in the
   industry.

   Overall, COIN has the potential to help maintain confidentiality and
   integrity efficiently, and thus the availability of resource-
   constrained or legacy devices.  Questions to clarify are if and at
   which costs hardware for enabling cryptographic calculations could
   and should be embedded in future generations of programmable
   networking devices.

2.2.  Authorization and Authentication

   Authorization and authentication mechanisms are needed to avoid
   unauthorized access to devices and their manipulation in the first
   place.  With COIN, networking devices can flexibly decide whether to
   forward packets, thus enforce authorization and authentication
   checks.





Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   One possibility for authorization is to conduct a handshake between
   the sender and networking device before starting the communication
   with the industrial device.  If not feasible in the networking
   hardware, the respective calculations can be conducted in the control
   plane.  In the case of success, the sender is added to a list of
   authorized communication partners.  The decision is then enforced by
   the networking device.  Since authorization is only needed when
   starting or refreshing a connection, the necessity and overhead for
   consulting the control plane are limited.

   The sender can append a secret token for authentication to packets
   directed to a specific device.  The last networking device in line
   can extract the token, authenticate the sender, and forward the
   packet in case of success or drop it otherwise.  One possibility to
   avoid eavesdropping the token is the use of hash chains.  Secure
   reinitialization can again be done using the control plane, which
   usually has the resources for conducting encrypted communication.

   In the case of unsuccessful authorization or authentication,
   networking devices can inform the network administrator about
   possible intrusion of the system.

   Undesired traffic can emerge even from authorized and authenticated
   devices.  A solution is to add policy-based access control, on which
   we elaborate in the next subsection.

2.3.  Behavioral and Enterprise Policies

   Control processes can include communication between various parties.
   Even despite authorization and authentication mechanisms, undesired
   behavior can occur.  For instance, malicious third-party software
   might be installed at the approved device.  Regarding communication
   between two legacy devices, authentication might not be possible at
   all.  An effective way to exclude malicious behavior nevertheless is
   policy-based access control.

   [RFC8520] proposes the Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD), a
   standard for defining the communication behavior of IoT devices,
   which use specific communication patterns.  The definition is
   primarily based on domain names, ports, and protocols (e.g., TCP and
   UDP).  Further characteristics as the TLS usage
   [I-D.draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-04] or the required bandwidth of a
   device [I-D.draft-lear-opsawg-mud-bw-profile-01] can help to define
   connections more narrowly.

   By defining the typical behavior, we can exclude deviating
   communication, including undesired behavior.  Likewise to IoT
   devices, industrial devices usually serve a specific purpose.  Thus,



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   the application of MUD or similar policies is possible in industrial
   scenarios as well.

   The problem that remains to date is the efficient enforcement of such
   policies through fine-granular and flexible traffic filtering.  While
   middle-boxes increase costs and processing overhead, primary SDN
   approaches as OpenFlow allow only filtering based on match-action
   rules regarding fixed protocol header fields.  Evaluation of traffic
   statistics for, e.g., limiting the bandwidth, requires consultation
   of the remote controller.  This leads to latency overheads, which are
   not acceptable in time-sensitive scenarios.

   In contrast, the COIN paradigm allows flexible filtering even
   concerning the content of packets and connection metadata.
   Furthermore, traffic filtering can be executed by programmable
   networking devices at line-rate.

   Going one step further, not only network communication behavior of
   devices can be defined in policies.  As [KANG] shows, COIN can be
   used to consider additional (contextual) parameters, e.g., the time
   of day or activity of other devices in the network.  Furthermore,
   companies can define advanced policies to, e.g., authorize specific
   users or subnets.

   While the presented policies aim to restrict communication to its
   designated purpose, we can use access control to explicitly address
   individual devices' security vulnerabilities as described next.

2.4.  In-Network Vulnerability Patches

   Resource-constrained devices are typically hard to update.  Thus,
   device vulnerabilities often cannot be fixed after deployment.  As a
   remedy and special case of policies, rules can be defined to describe
   known attacks' signatures.  By enforcing these rules at programmable
   networking devices, e.g., by dropping matching traffic, COIN offers
   an efficient way to avoid exploitation of device vulnerabilities.
   Further advantages are the potentially easy and extensive roll-out of
   such "in-network patches" in the form of (automatic) software updates
   of the networking device.

   Future research is needed to evaluate the potential and benefits of
   in-network patches compared to traditional security measures, e.g.,
   firewalls, and provide proof of concepts using existing devices and
   vulnerabilities.

   Besides presented security mechanisms, data protection mechanisms are
   required to preserve business secrets and the privacy of individuals.




Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   We show in the following subsection how COIN can contribute to data
   anonymization.

2.5.  Anonymization

   Due to its interconnection with the physical world, the generation of
   sensitive data is inherent to CPS.  Smart infrastructure leads to the
   collection of sensitive user data.  In industrial networks,
   information about confidential processes is gathered.  Such data is
   increasingly shared with other entities to increase production
   efficiency or enable automatic processing.

   Despite the benefits of data exchange, manufacturers and individuals,
   might not want to share sensitive information.  Again, deployment of
   privacy mechanisms is usually not possible at resource-constrained or
   legacy devices.  COIN has the potential to flexibly apply privacy
   mechanisms at line-rate.

   Data can be pseudonymized at networking devices by, e.g., extracting
   and replacing specific values.  Furthermore, elaborate anonymization
   techniques can be implemented in the network by sensibly decreasing
   the data accuracy.  For example, concepts like k-Anonymity can be
   applied by aggregating the values of multiple packets before
   forwarding the result.  Noise addition can be implemented by adding a
   random number to values.  Similarly, the state-of-the-art technique
   differential privacy can be implemented by adding noise to responses
   to statistical requests.

   Even though the COIN paradigm shows the potential to deploy described
   privacy mechanisms within the network, research is needed to clarify
   the proposed concepts' feasibility.

3.  Intrusion and Anomaly Detection

   Ideally, attacks are prevented from the outset.  However, in the case
   of incidents, fast detection is critical for limiting damage.
   Deployment of sensors, e.g., in industrial control systems, can help
   to monitor the system state and detect anomalies.  This can be used
   in combination with COIN to detect intrusion and to provide advanced
   safety measures, as described in the following.

3.1.  Intrusion Detection

   Data of sensors or monitored communication behavior can be compared
   against expected patterns to detect intrusion.  Even if intrusion
   prevention is deployed and connections are allowed when taken
   individually, subtle attacks might still be possible.  For example, a
   series of values might be out of line if put into context even though



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   the individual values are unobtrusive.  Anomaly detection can be used
   to detect such abnormalities and notify the network administrator for
   further assessment.

   While anomaly detection is usually outsourced to middle-boxes or
   external servers, COIN provides the possibility to detect anomalies
   at-line rate, e.g., by maintaining statistics about traffic flows.
   This decreases costs and latency, which is valuable for a prompt
   reaction.  Another advantage is that one central networking device
   can monitor traffic from multiple devices.  In contrast, multiple
   distributed middle boxes are usually needed to achieve the same
   information gain.

   Besides intrusion, anomalies can also imply safety risks.  In the
   following, we pick up the potential of COIN to support safety.

3.2.  Dead Man's Switch

   [I-D.draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-00] addresses the potential of COIN
   for improving industrial safety.  Detection of an anomaly in the
   sensor data or operational flow can be used to automatically trigger
   an emergency shutdown of a system or single system components if the
   data indicates an actual hazard.  Apart from that, other safety
   measures like warning systems or isolation of areas can be
   implemented.  While we do not aim at replacing traditional dead man's
   switches, we see the potential of COIN to accelerate the detection of
   failures.  Thus, COIN can valuably complement existing safety
   measures.

4.  Incident Investigation

   After detecting an incident, it is essential to conduct Network
   Forensics to investigate the origin and spreading of the related
   activity.  The results of this analysis can be used to allow for
   consistent recovery, to adapt protection mechanisms, and prevent
   similar events in the future.  For enabling potential investigation,
   traffic records are constantly collected for each flow in a network,
   which requires dedicated hardware in large networks.  Furthermore, it
   might be preferable to exclude traffic, e.g., from specific subnets,
   from the analysis.  Dynamic and fine-granular traffic filtering is
   not possible with traditional networking devices, leading to storage
   and processing overhead.

   With COIN, networking devices can be programmed to create flow
   records without significant overhead when forwarding a packet.
   Furthermore, record generation can be done more flexibly, e.g., by
   applying fine-granular traffic filtering.  Also, header fields of
   particular interest can be efficiently extracted.  Therefore, COIN



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   can considerably decrease the load and increase the efficiency of
   network forensics.  This leads, in turn, to a better understanding of
   attacks and security.

5.  Security Considerations

   When implementing security and privacy measures in networking
   devices, their security and failure resistance is critical.  Related
   research questions to clarify in the future are stated in
   [I-D.draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02].

6.  IANA Considerations

   N/A

7.  Conclusion

   COIN has the potential to improve and retrofit security and privacy,
   especially with regard to resource-restrained and legacy devices.

   First, COIN can provide intrusion prevention mechanisms like
   authentication and efficient enforcement of (context-based) policies.
   Easily deployable in-network patches of device vulnerabilities could
   further improve security.  Encryption and integrity checks are
   limited by the current hardware but might be realizable in the
   future.

   Second, COIN allows examining packet contents at networking devices,
   which can help implement fast and comprehensive anomaly and intrusion
   detection.

   Last, COIN can contribute to an efficient and targeted incident
   analysis.

   Investigation of the feasibility of the presented mechanisms is
   subject to future research.

8.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-04]
              Reddy, T., Wing, D., and B. Anderson, "Manufacturer Usage
              Description (MUD) (D)TLS Profiles for IoT Devices", draft-
              ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-04 (work in progress), January 2021.

   [I-D.draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-00]
              Kunze, I., Wehrle, K., Trossen, D., and M. Montpetit, "Use
              Cases for In-Network Computing", draft-irtf-coinrg-use-
              cases-00 (work in progress), February 2021.



Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   [I-D.draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02]
              Kutscher, D., Karkkainen, T., and J. Ott, "Directions for
              Computing in the Network", draft-kutscher-coinrg-dir-02
              (work in progress), July 2020.

   [I-D.draft-lear-opsawg-mud-bw-profile-01]
              Lear, E. and O. Friel, "Bandwidth Profiling Extensions for
              MUD", draft-lear-opsawg-mud-bw-profile-01 (work in
              progress), July 2019.

   [KANG]     Kang, Q., Morrison, A., Tang, Y., Chen, A., and X. Luo,
              "Programmable In-Network Security for Context-aware BYOD
              Policies", In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Security
              Symposium (USENIX Security 20), August 2020,
              <https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/
              presentation/kang>.

   [RFC7744]  Seitz, L., Ed., Gerdes, S., Ed., Selander, G., Mani, M.,
              and S. Kumar, "Use Cases for Authentication and
              Authorization in Constrained Environments", RFC 7744,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7744, January 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7744>.

   [RFC8520]  Lear, E., Droms, R., and D. Romascanu, "Manufacturer Usage
              Description Specification", RFC 8520,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8520, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8520>.

   [RFC8576]  Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "Internet of
              Things (IoT) Security: State of the Art and Challenges",
              RFC 8576, DOI 10.17487/RFC8576, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8576>.

Authors' Addresses

   Ina Berenice Fink
   RWTH Aachen University
   Ahornstr. 55
   Aachen  D-52062
   Germany

   Phone: +49-241-80-21419
   Email: fink@comsys.rwth-aachen.de








Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Enhancing Security and Privacy           March 2021


   Klaus Wehrle
   RWTH Aachen University
   Ahornstr. 55
   Aachen  D-52062
   Germany

   Phone: +49-241-80-21401
   Email: wehrle@comsys.rwth-aachen.de











































Fink & Wehrle          Expires September 12, 2021              [Page 11]
