ETT-R&D Publications                                             E. Terrell
IT Professional, Author / Researcher                           May 09, 2002
Internet Draft                                            
Category: Informational
Document: draft-terrell-gwebs-vs-ieps-00.txt
Expires November 09, 2002    






                   Global Wide Emergency Broadcast System
                              {GWEBS vs. IEPS} 
          The Comparison with Internet Emergency Preference Scheme
            






Status of this Memo


    This document is an Internet-Draft, and is in full conformance
    with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts
    are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
    (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
    groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents
    at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". The list
    of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
    at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Conventions

    Please note, the font size for the Tables are smaller than the
    expected 12 pts. However, if you are using the most current
    Web Browser, the View Section of the Title bar provides you
    with the option to either increase or decrease the font size for
    comfort level of viewing. That is, provided that this is the
    HTML or PDF version. 


E Terrell                                                             [Page 1]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                                November 09, 2002






                          TABLE  OF  CONTENTS






    Abstract




    Prologue   : Introducing the Fundamental Requirements 




    Chapter   I: Universal Protocols; The Standardization for Announcing and
                 Communicating Alerts: GWEBS vs. IEPS




    Chapter  II: 'The Second Wave of the Internet; The Globalnet', Mandates a
                 Hierarchical Structure having Multiple Backbone Connections




    Chapter III: Security Considerations





    References    



  








E Terrell                                                             [Page 2]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                                November 09, 2002






Abstract
    
    
    This paper Discusses several points Lacking in the presentation of the
    IEPS Specification, and Condemns others as unwarranted mandates, which
    defines the Internet and its use as a Vehicle for WAR. The Alternative,
    'GWEBS', develops is a more realistic foundation that supports saving
    lives (Addressing the Concerns of all People in General, Regardless)
    during the Occurrence of some Catastrophic Event, which is the mandate it
    maintains regarding the Implementation of a Uniform Universal Protocol
    that is the foundation for the 'Global Wide Emergency Broadcast System'
    that is used to Protect the lives and Livelihoods of all the Inhabitants
    of Our Planet. Furthermore, this paper also addresses a more fundamental
    concern that requires the involvement of the UN (United Nations), which
    would mandate the Implementation of a World Wide Global Internet Backbone
    for every Country. The Development of such World Wide Global
    Infrastructure (A Global System to be sure) would guarantee uniform Access
    for All People, and would establish the necessary Foundation,
    infrastructure, as would be required for any Global Wide Emergency
    Broadcast System (GWEBS) to work. 
    
    In other words, this paper supports the belief that Information, and the
    exchange or the sharing related thereto, is just as important as the
    Sustenance Consumed, which indeed, is the Vital Necessity used to sustain
    Life itself.  















    "This work is Dedicated to my first and only child, 'Yahnay', who is;
     the Mover of Dreams, the Maker of Reality, and the 'Princess of the
     New Universe'. (E.T.)" 


 


E Terrell                                                            [Page 3]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






Prologue : Introducing the Fundamental Requirements


    'The future, which we can not actually predict, seems to suggest; "The
    Collective Unification of Humanity." And Requires, if not Mandates, the
    Elimination of Barriers Denoting Mankind's Distinctions: e.g. 'Religion',
    'Cultural Behaviorisms', 'the Economic Requirements to support Life',
    'the Adjectives Defining the Insane Jealousy for the want of the
    Attributes Belonging to Another', and the 'Diversity in the Language(s)
    used for Communication'." Needless to say, there is only one alternative
    representing this grim Reality, which excludes any possibility for the
    existence of a Grander Scheme of Choice, and that would be to either
    accept change, or suffer the Enviable Fate of Extinction. This road,
    which might seem an unlikely Reality, is indeed a Sculpture of Stone,
    that is Carved and Re-Carved every awaking day that someone has, or
    develops, a New Technological Idea. And which moreover, ascertains an
    undeniable creditability from the analogy depicting the 'Momentum of the
    Stone Rolling Down Hill', which represents the Constant Activity, the
    Cycles of Life and Death, in an ever Changing Universe. And while these
    comments might evoke a Debate, which would be well beyond the objectives
    outlined herein. I am confident that we would all agree, the Internet is
    indeed 'A Stone Carving', whose present foundation bridges the 'Gap'
    between the many Distinctions denoting Mankind's Diversity. And while I
    would be hard pressed to label the creation of the Internet as a work of
    Art. It is without question, a technological Idea, who∆s foundational
    beginnings arose from the objectives of WAR ... Hence, the Stone Carving
    that has been Re-Carved.
 
    And Perhaps, the People of the World are not civilized (Enough), in any
    sociological respect, which would allow the Standardization of some
    Globally acceptable description for the Communication of an Alert /
    Warning depicting an Emergency. However, if ever there is a hope for the
    mutual exchange of Ideas, the realization of the existence of a Global
    Community, or the Survival of Mankind in General. Then the only approach
    to having such a stabilization, and the elimination of the Primitive
    Mindsets, is through the Stability brought about by the implementation of
    Global Standards. This would clearly represent the beginnings of the long
    Journey; A Time Table monitoring the completion of the foundation, which
    established the Direction fostering the Unification of Mankind. And while
    I can not provide an easy road, nor offer any Magical Solutions, I can
    make a contribution to the beginning...(e.t., 2002)'


    
    



E Terrell                                                            [Page 4]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






Chapter I: Universal Protocols; The Standardization for Announcing and
           Communicating Emergency Alerts: GWEBS vs. IEPS


    Nevertheless, to build upon and strengthen the current foundation for
    the Internet, this chapter expounds upon a Proposal, which is a Universal
    Protocol, whose underlining foundation support the survival of all
    Humanity (the deliberation derived from a former work from which this
    presentation is said to emerge [2]). Furthermore, while there was a
    mention of several Technological Innovations, which encompass the
    development and discovery of the IPtX Specification, none were explicitly
    stated as being Universal. To be sure, as noted in the 3 examples given
    below, while there is no actual announcement of the need for their
    Universal Specification. It should be understood, in order for these ideas
    to work, and maintain the significance of the survival of those directly
    impacted as a result, their implementation would have to be Universal. 



        1. Real Time Monitoring of the 'Black Boxes' used by the Airlines to
           Monitor Voice Communications, and Aircraft System Functions.


        2. LNAV: Land Navigation Control System, Devices located on the
           ground, which would provide Navigation Control and Geographical
           Location Information, to free up Satellite Transmissions that could
           be used for: Guidance and Flight Control of Airplanes during
           Emergencies; To provide Communications in Remote areas where
           Cabling is not possible; Airlines Blackbox Monitoring; And to
           provide an Overall Back-up, for the 'Global Wide Emergency
           Broadcast System' (or GWEBS).


        3. The Location of a Cellular Emergency Phone call, could be done
           using the MAC Address of the Cellular Phone in a Triangulation
           established with 2 or more LNAV (implanted) System Units (Devices).
           This procedure would also work using the MAC Address of the
           Cellular Phone, GPS, and 2 or more Microwave Communications (Which
           are used in Cellular Phone communications) Antennas. (The Good News
           is that, as soon as anyone Dials '911', the entire process would be
           triggered automatically.)
           






E Terrell                                                            [Page 5]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002




    Notwithstanding the philosophical beliefs, which introduced this chapter,
    and the desire to focus upon the enhancement of this Technological Idea
    Pool. However, since there has been others, whose work focuses upon the
    development of An Emergency Broadcast System, which was one of the
    Technological Ideas derived in the foundational work from which this
    presentation was derived[2]. I shall focus upon those issues, which were
    cited in "IEPS Requirement Statement" [11] to ascribe a comparison
    contrasting the foundational development, whose resulting bases, it
    sincerely hoped, will help to derive the specification as would be
    required for the development of a Universal Protocol for a
    'Global Wide Emergency Broadcast System' (or GWEBS).   



    Where by, the highlights from the "IEPS Requirement Statement" [11] paper
    are as follows:


"IEPS Requirement Statement":


        1. Introduction:  Some countries have deployed a telecommunications
                          access service to expedite emergency services...
                          there is interest in creating a similar service in
                          the Internet.


        2. GETS - Government Emergency Telecommunications Service: 

          A.  Specified Telephone number and presenting a Credit-Card
              type of Authentication

          B.  Call is Completed on Preferential Basis; GETS having priority

          C.  If fundamental telephone services are compromised, services
              contracted under GETS are restored first.



        3. GETS calls receive priority treatment over normal calls through:

          A.  Trunk Queuing, Trunk Subgrouping, or Trunk Reservation

          B.  Exemption from Management Controls used to reduce network
              Congestion





E Terrell                                                            [Page 6]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002




          C.  ANSI T1.631-1993; High Probability of Completion Standard

              1. National Security and Emergency Preparedness

              2. Priority signaling

              3. Alternate carrier routing


        4. Internet Emergency Preference Scheme  (IEPS)

          A.  Secure IEPS identification allows authentication with ISP

          B.  Preferred Access to Voice on IP and data services

          C. Internet access is compromised, IEPS are restored first

          D.  Standard Hardware Config used by emergency personnel may
              be used with any IEPS network



        5. Fundamental Internet Access Service provided under IEPS is not
           necessarily different from other Internet access service


        6. During Times of Emergency, the Contracted Services are available
           to IEPS-authenticated personnel: if they are available to anyone,
           and that the ISP treats provision of those services as of greater
           immediate importance than provision of those services to other
           customers


        7. Any IEPS-Contracted ISP, equipment is configured before
           deployment


        8. Services Contemplated in the IEPS: VoIP, Shared real-time
           whiteboard, Instant messaging, dbase as the Japanese "I am
           Alive", email, ftp, www, and dbase calendaring system


        9. Issues in the IEPS; Services a candidate for outsourcing


       10. Point of Confusion; issue of "priority", mismatched
           language and concepts, deployment of services, IEPS are
           targeted for deployment over the Internet and ISPs


E Terrell                                                            [Page 7]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






       11. Security; Protecting IEPS from Childish Meanderings; the New
                     Front of Electronic warfare



    Perhaps, the greatest failing of the 'IEPS' Specification, is that,
    it is Dependent, which means its Security and reliability can always be
    Compromised, even from within a Selectively Chosen ISP. Furthermore,
    it is a Grave Mistake to consider WAR an Emergency, when the Actually
    of WAR, is in fact, the Whimsical Nature of Some Politician, because they
    lost face during the game involving Needless Posturing. That is, if some
    Politician wants WAR, tell them to Fight, because the Internet is the
    'Peaceful Emergence of the Global Community', and not age old Arena of
    Death, fostered by the some Insane Ambition comprising Greed and Desire
    to Control the People, which is the essence of the Political Ideology. 




'GWEBS'; the 'Global Wide Emergency Broadcast System':




    'GWEBS', the 'Global Wide Emergency Broadcast System', mandates the
    requirement for not only for a Universal Protocol, but the implementation
    of the necessary Backbone Infrastructure that would be required to
    establish such a World Wide System. However, to institute the World Wide
    Standard for the Broadcasting of an Emergency Communication, the
    Definitions comprising an Alert, the Task Force providing Assistance, and
    the General Rules comprising the overall function of such a System must
    first be outlined:


The Basic GWEBS Requirement comprising the Who, What, Where, and Why:



        1. Earthquakes
 

        2. Volcanic Eruptions


        3. Tornadoes, Monsoons, Hurricanes: The Weather Conditions Affecting
                                            the Overall Life


E Terrell                                                            [Page 8]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






        4. Tidal-Waves, or Tsunami: Dealing with the Concerns of the Island
                                    Dwellers, are the Issues Concerning
                                    Everyone


        5. Meteors Crashing on the Earth: Describing Unimaginable Catastrophes




        6. Solar Flares: Disturbances Affecting Electrical, and Satellite
                         Communications
 

        7. Connecting, Contacting, and Contracting Emergency Response Teams:
           The Hierarchical Division for the Respondents


        8. Defining the Authority: Who should have Access, and the Rules to
                                   Authenticate Authorized Personnel



        9. Notification and Transmission of Emergencies;
           Basic and Catastrophic: Dealing with the Public Concerns for the
                                   Individual's Emergency, and the Emergencies
                                   affecting Large Populations


       10. Overall System Requirements: Defining the Hardware and Software
                                        Specifications


       11. System Security: The inherent Integrity that the System Overall
                            Maintains
 












E Terrell                                                            [Page 9]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






7. Connecting, Contacting, and Contracting Emergency Response Teams: The
   Hierarchical Division for the Respondents
    
   This is a Relative function, because of the Responsibility assigned to
   the various Emergency Response Teams. In other words, the function of the
   Emergency Response Teams needs to be defined by some person in Authority;
   such as the Home Land Security Advisor.



8. Defining the Authority: Who should have Access, and the Rules to
   Authenticate Authorized Personnel

   This is a Relative function, because of the Responsibility assigned to
   the various Emergency Response Teams. In other words, the function of the
   Emergency Response Teams needs to be defined by some person in Authority;
   such as the Home Land Security Advisor. However, Authorized Personnel could
   be Authenticated using Temperature Regulated Thumb Print, User ID, and
   Password.


9. Notification and Transmission of Emergencies; Basic and Catastrophic:
   Dealing with the Public Concerns for the Individual's Emergency, and the
   Emergencies affecting Large Populations

   Here once again, this is a Relative function, which needs to be defined
   by some person in Authority; such as the Home Land Security Advisor.
   However, the GWEBS System should Monitor all Emergency Transmissions.
   



















E Terrell                                                           [Page 10]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002





10. Overall System Requirements (Referencing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6):


    Hardware Specification Requires All of Stations to be permanently
    assigned: 

        1. Emergency Broadcast Stations; Sun Computer having standard
           configuration 

        2. One Super Computer Server Monitoring Entire Network


        3. Clustered Sun Servers (4 or More) located in every IP Area Code
           Address Location Connected to the Super Computer Server and the
           Emergency Broadcast Stations 


    Software Specification:


        1. Operating Systems; Either Sun Solaris, FreeBSD, or Redhat Linux


        2. Special GWEBS Application having a GUI Interface

           A.  GWEBS Software Application Specifications:

               1. Listing all Possible Emergencies

               2. Methods for Entering New Emergencies with Descriptions

               3. Connecting, Contacting, and Contracting Emergency Response
                  Teams: emails, paging, Digital Phone, Cellar Phone, Video
                  Conferencing, Video Phoning

               4. Integrated Emergency Broadcast Transmission Application:
                  using the '001-254:000-254:000.000.000.000/XXXX:XX'.
                  (That would Delay, Cancel, or Void all other Transmissions
                  to announce either a System Wide, Zone Wide, IP Area Code
                  Wide, Network Wide, and Individual Emergency Broadcast
                  Notification. But can only interrupt transmission of an
                  emergency, which is reporting an emergency to any one of
                  the Emergency Agencies Connected to the GWEBS System. No
                  lines of communication can be exempt, because a Broadcast
                  stating: This is an Emergency Broadcast Alert; Press Pound
                  to here Emergency, or Pound Key to Record Announcement for
                  later Play back, and for Computer Terminals, only the
                  Message would be Displayed with information telling
                  Recipient what to do.) (See Table 7, Internet Protocol t2
                  Address Space [1])
 E Terrell                                                           [Page 11]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002
              





              5. Types of Response Listings: Earthquakes, Volcanic Eruptions,
                 Tsunami, etc   

              6. Response Teams Contact Listing: FEMA, Police, FBI, Medical,
                 Fire, Search and Rescue, National Emergency Response Teams,
                 etc

              7. Contact Response Teams Departments Listings: National
                 Emergency Office, Governmental Contacts (Local, State,
                 Federal, and Military) Fire, Medical, and Police Departments


              8. Contact Response Teams Supervisors Listings: db of Personnel


              9. Visual Display having Satellite Tracking and Visual
                 Reporting Capabilities


             10. Customized Oracle dBase having Automatic System Daily Backup
                 to a DVD Jukebox Recorder via Centralized Supercomputer
                 Controller (Or a Pluggable IBM Crystal Laser Read/Writer
                 when available) which would Record all interactive Actions
                 with the GWEBS Application (that is modified with an
                 Enhanced version of Cisco's discovery Protocol, which would
                 Record the Location, Identify User, and Announcement to All
                 Stations of the Notification of an Emergency Broadcast
                 Transmission by any station connected to the GWEBS System.
                 The Additional function would be a Status Check to be
                 performed on all Stations, on a Timed Bases, which would
                 also Notify Emergency Equipment Repair Response Teams in the
                 event of a Hardware or Software Problem to be replaced or
                 Repaired, and the incorporation of a System Wide Protocol
                 lock controlled by Routers, Switches, and Hubs, allowing
                 only Transmission and Reception from Systems Connected to
                 the GWEBS System; Hidden Router Transmission).


            B. Emergency Transfer of System's Area of Responsibility to
                Nearest IP Area Code Emergency Broadcast Station when any
                Emergency Broadcast Station is Inoperable (Similar in
                function to Token Technology)        





E Terrell                                                           [Page 12]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002







11. System Security: The inherent Integrity that the System Maintains Overall



   First and foremost, admitting that there is No such thing as a Completely
   Secure System, we can then discuss Security Safe Guards. 

        1. The IPtX Specification outlines a Backbone Hierarchy, requiring the
           Location of Primary Routers, which does imply the ability to Trace
           the exact Location of any Transmitting Signal. In other words, the
           Topology required would be similar to the used in the current
           Telephony Design.


        2. GWEBS Requires: Specialized Operating System (IOS) for all
           Routers, Switches, and Hubs, that would be specifically Designed
           to Hide the Routing and Switching Functions of the IP Addressing
           Protocol itself (Hidden Background Routing and Switching)


        3. Enhanced version of the Cisco's Discovery Protocol Specification:
           Similar to the FBI's Carnivore Application and Check Point Firewall.
           Where by, any unauthorized attempt to access or deliver a
           Communication masquerading as an Emergency Broadcasting Station,
           would first obtain Location of Intruder, or Masquerader, while
           displaying a Blue Flash Splash Warning Notification Screen to the
           Offender's Computer Monitor, and then Dispatch Federal Policing
           Agency to Arrest said Offender. However, upon second Attempt of
           such unauthorized activity would result in a Red Flash Splash
           Screen that would be permanently Displayed on the Computer's
           Monitor, and would electronically the Disablement of the Intruder's
           Systems BIOS permanently, and the Dispatching of the Federal
           Policing Agency to Arrest Offender.














E Terrell                                                           [Page 13]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002







 + GWEBS  vs.  IEPS + :


    Clearly both Systems are vulnerable from a Security, and while each system
    would have access to the Internet the GWEBS System maintains a Security
    Control that makes this system less likely to be the victim of Security
    Attacks. Moreover, with the requirements specified in GWEBS System built
    in, it use of the Internet would be less likely. In addition to the
    requirement of having an IP Address Assigned by IANA, GWEBS outbound
    Transmissions are also Assigned by IANA, but these IP Addresses can not be
    used by anyone else. And while in the GWEBS System there is a preference
    for Direct Backbone connection, it is not an absolute necessity, but it
    does provide an added Security feature that IEPS does not provide. Overall,
    the GWEBS System is clearly the better System that would provide a more
    secure connection, better integrity in performance, greater control, and
    more reliable it terms of meeting the specified goals when compared to the
    IEPS Requirement specification.
 
    Nevertheless, if the United Nations were to become involved in the
    construction of an Internet Backbone (Infrastructure) World Wide, this
    would truly become a Globalnet Community, because as it stands, only about
    30 % of the World Population has access to the Internet. Even still,
    the exchange of Knowledge would prove to be a worth while investment,
    because in most of the Countries that lack a Backbone Infrastructure the
    cost of construction would be a minimum, and Self-Help is indeed
    priceless. This view is considered even more valid when considering that
    all of the basic telecommunications operations, or facilities, can use the
    Internet as a thoroughfare via Coax cabling ;e.g. Telephony, Television,
    Internet, Distance Learning, Medical Emergencies, Police, Fire, etc...
    And then, this would free up some of the Satellite Resources, for usage
    that could be reserved for Remote Areas, in which burying a Cable 75 to
    100 feet below the surface would not be practical, or for Emergency
    Back-up of cabled Systems, and special functions, like Real Time Blackbox
    Monitoring of Airplane System and Voice Recorders. 
  
    In other words, the IPtX Specification is the perfect platform for the
    GWEBS System, and the GWEBS System overall, is the better Emergency
    Broadcast System for the People of the World. Because for the first time
    in the History of Mankind, the concerns of The One, are Now, Everyone's
    Concerns. 







E Terrell                                                           [Page 14]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002






Chapter II: 'The Second Wave of the Internet; The Globalnet', Mandates a
            Hierarchical Structure having Multiple Backbone Connections


    Mandating a Hierarchical Structure for the Globalnet, having Multiple
    Backbone Connections, is the only way sure to reduce the Router's table
    Size, and to successfully introduce Global Standards, such as 'GWEBS'.
    Because the present Backbone Structure for the Internet depicts an
    Aggregated Mess of wiring, in which the current Cabling Schematic focuses
    upon 5 to 9 primary points that are used to connect the Networks in North
    America to the Backbone.  Nevertheless, it this structure, of the lack of,
    which is the primary reason, or cause, for the existence of the large
    Routing Tables. It has been suggested, as a means for the elimination of
    the Flooding the Router's Tables, to use, or Piggyback ISP, and
    Multi-Homing Router Configuration. And while both suggestions might work,
    they can serve only a very limited life span, resulting in another
    Band-Aid fix. In fact, even with a greater number of active Network
    IP Addresses, this is a Organizational Problem, that will not vanish
    Until the Internet's Backbone is Organized, having a greater number of
    Connections, which would reduce the size of the Router's Table because
    there would be less Routes to maintain.  

    The resolution, as would be concluded from the implementation of the IPtX
    Specification, specifically IPt2 Specification, would require at least
    '1' Backbone Connection for every IP Area Code Address, '1' emergency
    Satellite (Back-Up) Connection for each IP Area Code Address, and at
    least '1' Emergency (Back-Up) Connection to every IP Area Code Address
    location Bordering an IP Area Code Address Assignment. This structure would
    lessen the burden, thus reduce the size of the Router's Table, because
    only a minimum number of next 'hop' entries would be required to transmit
    a Communications anywhere in the World. In other words, the requirement
    for the IP Area Code Router's Table, should never exceed; a list of 2
    additional IP Area Code Routers (Not counting the Emergency Connections),
    because it maintains a Direct Connection to the Backbone, and the listing
    of the location of the '5' Primary Network Routers, which would handle
    Routing within the IP Area Code IP Address. And since there is only '5'
    Address Classes, this would amount to a Router having a Maximum Table
    Size of only 8 Routes. Furthermore, if the Operation, or Job
    Classification, of the Routers were more clearly defined, in compliance
    with Definitions provided by Table 1, the Interior, or Intra-Domain
    Router's Tables would also be reduced in size.              







E Terrell                                                           [Page 15]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002





                             TABLE 1

                 Router Function Classification:
             Hierarchical Structure of the Globalnet
              having Multiple Backbone Connections

1. Global Router: A "OuterCom' router having the dual routing path
   capability defined by the Zone IP and IP Area Code Block IP 
   Addresses (CIODR-FEA). Which is programmed to discern the 
   differences in data types, capable encryption and decryption of 
   data, and would route the data by either stripping the Prefix Code 
   or transmitting the data to the next router governing the 
   destination.

2. Internetwork Router: A "OuterCom" router having the dual routing 
   path capability defined by the IP Area Code Block IP Address and the
   First 16 Bits defined the Subnet Identifier of the 32 Bit IP Address
   Block (CIODR-FEA). Which can also be programmed to discern the 
   Differences in data types, capable of routing encrypted and 
   decrypted data, and would route the data by either stripping its 
   associated Prefix Code or would be By-Passed for direct routed 
   transmissions.

3. Network Router: A "BridgeCom" router having the dual routing path
   capability defined by the First 16 Bits of the 32 Bit Block IP 
   Address and Routing by Octets defined by the Subnet Identifier of 
   the 32 Bit IP Address Block (CIODR-FEA). Which can be programmed to
   discern the differences in data types, capable of routing encrypted
   and decrypted data, and would route the data by using its defined 
   functions or transmitting the data to the next router governing 
   intended destination (CIODR-BEA).

4. DIRECT-PPTP: An InterCom / OuterCom Transmission, which can be Routed
   with IP Address intact to establish a direct Secure Peer to Peer
   Conference on a OuterCom, or InterCom Communication.

5. CIODR-FEA: A Classless Inter/Outer Domain Routing Technique, which
   routes using, First or Second 8 Bits, of Front End of the 48 Bit
   Address Blocks comprising the Zone IP, IP Area Code, and the First 2
   Octets of the 32 Bit Address Block. (FEA = Front End Address)

6. CIODR-BEA: A Classless Inter/Outer Domain Routing Technique, which
   routes using the Back End of the 32 Bit Address Block, that comprise
   the last 2 Octets. (BEA = Back End Address)

7. Inter-Domain Router: A "InterCom" Router is the first link outside
   of a Private Network Domain.


E Terrell                                                           [Page 16]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002





8. Intra-Domain Router: A "InterCom" router that is use within a Private
   Network Domain, and it is used to Route either InterCom or OuterCom
   communications.




    In other words, Creating a Hierarchical Structure for the Backbone, and
    the Sub-Connections (Down to, But not including Network Domains)
    comprising the Globalnet Transmission Stream, would result in a definite
    performance boost and a reduction in the size of the Router's Table. But,
    this would only represent the first step in the overall increase of the
    Efficiency Rating of the Internet. However, providing a greater number of
    individual backbone connections, (where these connections would actually
    represent groups of Network Domains; Counted in the hundred of thousands)
    and requiring a greater specificity regarding the functional purpose, or
    designation defining the Roles of the Routers, would result in a
    substantial decrease in the size of the Router's Table, and a substantial
    increase the overall efficiency of the Internet itself.
    
    Hence, any reduction in the Size of the Router's Table requires more
    than just additional Backbone Connections, and using Routers having a
    specified routing function. It requires, in addition, a Re-Thinking of
    the Organizational Structure of the Internet, which would result in the
    building, or configuration of a Hierarchical Structure representing the
    Nesting of the Sub-Connections connecting to the thoroughfare of the
    Backbone. Furthermore, while these considerations may not be an absolute
    necessity now. If however, the Entire World, with each country and a
    sizable portion of its respective population were connected to the
    Globalnet, then the suggestions presented would become a mandatory
    requirement for the Internet (Now, the Globalnet) to function. (See the
    Index of Table 7; [1]) Nevertheless, while the IPv4 or the IPv6
    specifications, does not inherently provide an accurate picture of this
    Reality, or any feasible method(s) to Mathematically Network the Entire
    World, which would allow the visualization of the Problems concerning the
    Routing Tables and the Backbone Connections. The Addressing Schematic for
    the IPt2 specification however, maintains a Mathematical Simplicity, which
    allows not only a depiction actually showing the Network for the Entire
    World, (by Continent, Country, and Population; Down to the Individual),
    but inherently provides a foundation that makes any Analysis nothing more
    than a visual inspection of relationships. And it is from this
    perspective nevertheless, that anyone would conclude, the only possible
    IP Addressing System that would be more powerful than the 'IPtX
    Specification', would be 'IP Telepathy', or 'Thought Communications'. 





E Terrell                                                           [Page 17]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002





Chapter IV: Security Considerations


   The Security Consideration(s) are novel, in that they pertain to, or
   consist in the development of a Specialized Operating System (IOS) for all
   Routers, Switches, and Hubs, that would be specifically designed to Hide
   the Routing and Switching Functions of the IP Addressing Protocol itself
   (Hidden Background Routing and Switching), which are the Communications
   (All Functions Related Thereto) that are required by GWEBS. This would
   result in a specification similar to the current specification maintained
   by IANA, which blocks the used of certain IP Address from being used by
   either the Router or the Routing Protocols.
   
   The implementation of an additional function in the enhanced version of
   the Cisco's Discovery Protocol Specification, which would be Similar to
   the FBI's Carnivore Application and Check Point Firewall. Where by, any
   unauthorized attempt to access or deliver a Communication masquerading
   as a Emergency Broadcasting Station, would first obtain Location of
   Intruder, or Masquerader, while displaying a Blue Flash Splash Warning
   Notification Screen to the Offender's Computer Monitor, and then Dispatch
   Federal Policing Agency to Arrest said Offender. However, upon second
   Attempt of such unauthorized activity would result in a Red Flash Splash
   Screen that would be permanently Displayed on the Computer's Monitor, and
   would electronically the Disablement of the Intruder's Systems BIOS
   permanently, and the Dispatching of the Federal Policing Agency to Arrest
   Offender.























E Terrell                                                           [Page 18]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002




References
 

1.  E. Terrell (ETT-R&D Publications, April 2002) "INTERNET PROTOCOL
    t1 and t2 ADDRESS SPACE" 'daft-terrell-internet-protocol-
    t1-t2-ad-sp-06.txt'. (work in progress)

2.  E. Terrell (ETT-R&D Publications, June 13, 2002) "Logical Analysis
    of the Binary Representation and the IP Specifications for the
    IPv7 and IPv8 Addressing Systems" 'draft-terrell-logic-analy-bin-ip
    -spec-ipv7-ipv8-10.txt'. (work in progress) 

3.  E. Terrell (ETT-R&D Publications, February 2002) "The Mathematics of
    Quantification, and the New Paradigm, which Re-Defines Binary
    Mathematics" 'draft-terrell-math-quant-new-para-redefi-bin-math-03.txt'.
    (work in progress) 

4.  E. Terrell (ETT-R&D Publications, March 2002) "The Reality of the
    Schematic Design of the IPt1 and IPt2 Protocol Specifications: 'It is
    Just the Computer's Telephone Number"
    'draft-terrell-schem-desgn-ipt1-ipt2-cmput-tel-numb-01.txt'.
    (work in progress) 

5.  E. Terrell (ETT-R&D Publications, August 2001) "The Simple Proof
    Supporting the Findings from the Logical Analysis of the Binary System
    Which disposes the Logical Dispute fostered by Modern Interpretation
    for Counting in Binary Notation"
    'draft-terrell-simple-proof-support-logic-analy-bin-02.txt'.
    (work in progress)  

6.  F. Baker (Cisco Systems, November 14, 2001) "IEPS Requirement
    Statement" 'draft-baker-ieps-requirements-00.txt' (work in progress) 

7.  Authors: Scott Bradner, and Allison Mankin; RFC1550 "IP: Next
    Generation (IPng) White Paper Solicitation". 

8.  Authors: E. Rescorla, and B. Korver (respectively, RTFM, Inc., and Xythos
    Software; October 2002) draft-rescorla-sec-cons-05.txt; "Guidelines for
    Writing RFC Text on Security Considerations" (work in progress).


9.  Authors: Chern Nam Yap, Matthias Kraner, and Srba Cvetkovic (respectively,
    Seamoby Forum, Predictive AG, and Logica System; Jan 2002)
    draft-cnyap-iip-04.txt; "Itinerant Internet Protocol" (work in progress).

10. Schulzrinne (Columbia U., July 2002) "Universal Emergency Address for
    SIP-based Internet Telephony" 'draft-schulzrinne-sipping-sos-01.txt'
    (work in progress)
     

E Terrell                                                           [Page 19]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002


      


Author 

Eugene Terrell 
24409 Soto Road  Apt. 7 
Hayward, CA.  94544-1438 
Voice: 510-537-2390 
E-Mail: eterrell00@netzero.net



"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (5/09/02). All Rights Reserved.

         This document and translations of it may be copied and
         furnished to others, and derivative works that comment
         on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation
         may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole
         or in part, without restriction of any kind; except when such
         works are sold without the consent of the Author and are not
         freely distributed, and provided that the above copyright
         notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies
         and derivative works. Furthermore, this document itself may
         not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
         notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
         organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
         Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
         defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
         as required to translate it into languages other than English.

         The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
         not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
         assigns, except that the Author is not bound by any of the
         provisions set forth herein, or outline by this Copyright.

         This document and the information contained herein is provided
         on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
         ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
         IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE
         OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
         IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
         PARTICULAR PURPOSE."



     





E Terrell                                                           [Page 20]

GWEBS vs. IEPS                                               November 09, 2002
