

Network Working Group                                         IAB + IESG
Internet Draft                                                March 1995
expires in six months

                   IPv6 Address Allocation Management
              draft-iab-iesg-ipv6-address-allocation-00.txt
                           Expires: 15-Sep-95

Status of this Memo

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material, or to cite them other than as a "working draft"
   or "work in progress".

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the internet-drafts Shadow
   Directories on:

      ftp.is.co.za    (Africa)
      nic.nordu.net   (Europe)
      munnari.oz.au   (Pacific Rim)
      ds.internic.net (US East Coast)
      ftp.isi.edu     (US West Coast)

Abstract

   The IPv6 address space will be managed by the IANA for the good of
   the Internet community, with advice from the IAB and the IESG, by
   delegation to the regional registries.

















IAB + IESG                 expires in six months                  [Page 1]
DRAFT              IPv6 Address Allocation Management         March 1995



Statement

The IPv6 address space must be managed for the good of the Internet
community.  Good management requires at least a small element of
central authority over the delegation and allocation of the address
space.

The Internet community recognizes the Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA) as the appropriate entity to have the responsibility
for the management of the IPv6 address space.

The IANA will rely on the advice of the Internet Architecture Board
(IAB) and the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) in the
management of the IPv6 address space.

The IANA will delegate to regional (and other) registries the task of
making specific address allocations to network service providers and
other subregional registries.  Individuals and organizations may
obtain address allocations directly from the appropriate regional (or
other) registry, or from their service provider.

Any revenues (such as transaction fees) received with respect to the
IPv6 address space should be used only for expenses related to
registry activities, and not to subsidize any other activities.
There will be no charges for the address space itself, only fees to
recover the registry costs.

Any situation in the management of the IPv6 address space that leads
to monopoly control or predatory practices must be avoided.

The IANA will develop a plan for the initial IPv6 address allocation,
including a provision for the automatic allocation of IPv6 addresses
to holders of IPv4 addresses.


Contact Information:

   IAB + IESG
   EMail: <iab@isi.edu> + <iesg@cnri.reston.va.us>


Expires:

   15-Sep-95









IAB + IESG                 expires in six months                  [Page 2]

