





Network Working Group
Internet Draft                                              G. Paterno'
Document: draft-gpaterno-wireless-pppoe-01.txt                   Editor
Expires: March 2003                                      September 2002


               Using PPPoE to authenticate Wireless LANs


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.   Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.   It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT","SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].

Abstract

   This document targets at a first glance private users, but also small
   Wireless Internet Service Providers who aim to provide access to
   their users through Wireless LANs technologies, such as IEEE 802.11.
   Through this paper, the author explores the advantages of using the
   Point-To-Point Protocol over Ethernet to provide access to the
   internetwork and gives suggestions on how to deploy the
   infrastucture.






G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


Table of Contents

   1. Current Wireless LAN Scenario...............................2
   2. Existing Wireless LANs authentication methodologies.........2
   3. Proposed Solution: PPPoE....................................3
   Copyright and disclaimer.......................................4
   References.....................................................5
   Acknowledgments................................................5
   Author's Addresses.............................................5

1. Current Wireless LAN Scenario

   The current popular standard for Wireless LAN is IEEE 802.11, which
   is widely adopted by the device manufacturers. In brief, the protocol
   emulates an ethernet network and most of today's access points act as
   bridge between an existant Local Area Network, for example the
   corporate LAN, and the wireless network. Furthermore, the protocol
   itself includes a security feature, named Wireless Encryption
   Protocol (WEP), which should provide encryption to the connection,
   thus privacy.

   Unfortunatly, it has been demonstrated that WEP can be broken by a
   potential malicious user that might gain access to the network
   without supplying any credential.

   Furthermore, the use of DHCP or other LAN technologies might
   represent a disadvantage for the service providers that are unable to
   identify a specific user, for example for accounting or logging
   purposes.

   The protocol 801.11 tries to fill the gap suggesting the use of MAC
   addresses to identify uniquely the users. The use of MAC addresses
   introduces another issue on manageability: if a user changes the
   wireless adapter, for example a broken one, he/she should contact the
   ISP and provides the new MAC address and the old one to be
   deconfigured.

2. Existing Wireless LANs authentication methodologies

   Recently, the IEEE 802.1X standard, also called EAP, has been
   proposed to solve the wireless LAN problems. The protocol has been
   designed to provide user authentication for both wireless and wired
   LAN, giving any ISPs and corporates the opportunity to provide their
   users with personalised services such as grouping in specific Virtual
   LANs.

   Although IEEE 802.1X provides flexibility and extended LANs support,
   it however requires expensive hardware to be deployed.  As of today,



G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


   most of the Wireless Access Points and low-cost hub/switches do not
   support EAP.

   Most of private users and small ISPs won't be able to afford such
   equipments, nevertheless they are in need of security and of being
   able to identify the users that are accessing their resources: some
   malicious users today are gaining access to home users' equipment
   through WLANs in order to attack remote sites and being anonymous.

3. Proposed solution: PPPoE

   With the introduction of cable and ADSL technologies, ISPs has
   adopted a methodology for resolving such a problem for the broadband
   world.

   The above technologies, in usual configurations, are able to emulate
   an ethernet network. Although the DHCP is an easy to deploy for a
   Service Provider and to configure from an user perspective, it does
   not provide a way to authenticate the user, thus impossible for
   accounting or authorization.

   The community solved this need with the introduction of the Point-To-
   Point over Ethernet protocol (PPPoe), described in RFC 2516.  Through
   the adoption of this protocol, access control, billing and several
   type of services can be done on a per-user, rather than a per-site or
   cell basis.

   The 802.11 tecnology, in a similar way to the aforementioned
   broadband technologies, is able to emulate the ethernet network.  The
   advantage is clear: through applying the PPPoE technology to the
   wireless LANs, private users that wishes to share their WLAN and
   small Wireless Internet Service Providers might bring authentication,
   authorisation, accounting cheaply and easily to the wireless users.

   A practical example of using this technology is to provide, for
   example, fixed IP addresses to roaming wireless user: wherever the
   the user is located, he/she can have his/her IP address and the class
   of services.

   Furthermore, the use of PPP will bring another layer to potential
   malicious users, that should break both the WEP and the PPP layer.
   It is envisaged that password should not be exchanged through the PAP
   authentication methodology, but a challenged protocol such as CHAP
   should be used instead.

   From a traditional ISP/WISP prespective, it is not a real benefit
   using PPPoE rather than using IEEE 802.1X: a big disadvantage of
   using PPPoE is the PPP frame overhead and the MTU size problem.



G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


   However, an aspect has to be considered when using IEEE 802.1X: EAP
   requires the ISP/corporate to distribuite X.509 certificates to end-
   users, which might be quite expensive if a valid Certification
   Authority is used and, furthermore, they are hard to distribute if
   organisations have several thousands of customers.

   From a private user and small ISPs such a PPPoE limitation is not an
   issue, if compared to the cost of deploying both hardware and EAP
   compliant software to the client. The advantage is that, with simple
   hardware, they are able to protect their LANs and to identify
   uniquely the user. Moreover, most of today's operating systems ships
   with a PPPoE client, which results in a low cost technology
   deployement.

   Furthermore, Access Point manufacturer can easily embed a PPPoE
   server to their products and provide configuration to the users
   through an easy web interface.

   While deploying the PPPoE technology, the author suggests to use the
   CHAP or better authentication protocol in conjuction with the
   Microsoft Point-To-Point Encryption Protocol (RFC3078) and WEP: this
   should ensure enough privacy and thus reduce risks.  In this chapter,
   we mentioned the PPPoE limitation about MTU: it is recommended that
   the MTU size should be set to 1492.

Copyright and disclaimer

   Copyright (C) Giuseppe Paterno' (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the author of this document or
   other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the author or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and Giuseppe Paterno' DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS



G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

References

   [1] RFC 2516, "A Method for Transmitting PPP Over Ethernet (PPPoE)"
   [2] Roaring Penguin PPPoE implementation
   [3] RAS PPPoE protocol implementation, by Robert Schlabbach

Acknowledgments

   The author of this document wish to thanks Silvio Danesi and Daniele
   Todde for providing the technical infrastructure, Luca Sciortino for
   his moral support.

Author's addresses

   Giuseppe Paterno'
   Via Copernico, 63
   20094 Corsico (MI)
   Italy
   Email: gpaterno@gpaterno.com




























G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 5]

