On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 1]


Internet Engineering Task Force                                SPIRITS WG
Internet Draft                   
draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt           
February 2003
Expires: August 2003                                 Alec Brusilovsky
                                                     Artcare

          On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters
                 draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt 

   Status of this Memo 
   
  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
   
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
    
  Force (IETF),  its  areas,  and  its  working groups.  Note that other
   groups  
  may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet 
  -Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and  may
   be  
  updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is 
  inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite  
  them other than as "work in progress."  
   
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
   
  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
   
   
Abstract 
   
   This   document  describes  IS-41  mobility-related  parameters  (WIN
   information  and  its  encoding)  which  the  SPIRITS  protocol   can
   transport  from  the PSTN (wireline, as well as wireless) into the IP
   network.  The SPIRITS protocol is a protocol through which  PSTN  can
   request  actions  (services)  to  be carried out in the IP network in
   response to events occurring within the PSTN/IN (wireline, as well as 
   wireless).   This  draft  outlines,   what   IS-41   mobility-ralated
   parameters  are  of  immediate  interest  to SPIRITS, how they may be
   extracted and encoded for use within the SPIRITS domain.    IS-41  is
   used  as  an example protocol to clarify the SPIRITS message encoding
   process.  This Internet-Draft has been written  in  response  to  the
   SPIRITS WG  chairs'  call  for SPIRITS Protocol proposals.  It may be
   viewed as being a direct contribution to the Informational RFC on the 
   SPIRITS protocol parameters.    Section  1  of  this  document  gives
   background  of  wireless  cellular  communication networks, including
   Core Networks,  Section  2  gives  a  backgrouder  for  the  Wireless


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 2]


   Intelligent  Network  (WIN).  Sections  3  and  4 briefly explain WIN
   Functional and Physical  entities.    Section  5  provides  WIN  BCSM
   Description.  Section  6  gives  ASN.1  Notation for the selected WIN
   Parameters.  Sections  7,  8,  9,  10  and  11  respectively  provide
   Acknowledgements,  References,  Author's  Address,  Acronyms and Full
   Copyright Statement, as required.  Addendum 1 contains figures.  
   
1. Introduction 
   
   1.1 Brief history of cellular wireless technology 
   The history of existing  cellular  wireless  systems  can  be  easily
   broken down into generations: 
   
   1.1.1 First Generation - 1G: 
   
   -  Advanced  Mobile  Phone  Service (AMPS) - Still used in the US and
   many parts of the world; US trials 1978; deployed in Japan  (1979)  &
   US  (1983)  Carrier  frequency:  800  MHz  band  û  two  20 MHz bands
   Standard: TIA-553 
   
   - Nordic Mobile Telephony (NMT) - Sweden, Norway,  Demark  &  Finland
   Launched  1981; now largely retired Carrier frequency: 450 MHz; later
   at 900 MHz (NMT900) 
   
   - Total Access Communications System (TACS) - some  TACS-900  systems
   still in use in Europe British design; similar to AMPS; deployed 1985 
   
   1.1.2 Second Generation û 2G (and 2.5G as well): Digital systems that 
   leverage   technology   to   increase  capacity  and  utilize  speech
   compression; digital signal processing.  In addition, 2G systems take 
   advantage and extend traditional  wireline  IN  concepts  to  improve
   fraud prevention and add new services.  
   
   There are a wide diversity of 2G systems: 
   
   -  IS-54/  IS-136  North  American  TDMA; PDC (Japan) Speech coded as
   digital  bit  stream  -  compression  plus  error   protection   bits
   (aggressive  compression limits voice quality) Time division multiple
   access (TDMA) - 3  calls  per  radio  channel  using  repeating  time
   slices.   Deployed  in  1993  (PDC  1994),  developed  through 1980s;
   bakeoff in 1987; it is IS-54 / IS-136 standard in the  US  (TIA)  ATT
   Wireless  &  Cingular use IS-136 today and plan to migrate to GSM and
   then to W-CDMA PDC dominant cellular system  in  Japan  today  -  NTT
   DoCoMo has largest PDC network 
   
   -  iDEN    Used by Nextel (Motorola proprietary technology), utilises
   time  division  multiple  access  technology   and   based   on   GSM
   architecture  Carrier  frequency:  800 MHz Private Mobile Radio (PMR)
   spectrum  IDEN's  specialised  networking  protocol   supports   fast
   ôPush-to-Talkö - digital replacement for old PMR services.  
   


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 3]


   - Dect - Digital European Cordless Telephony - Based on time division 
   multiple access  technology.  Focused on business use, i.e., wireless
   PBX, very small cells; prone to in building  RF  propagation  issues.
   Relatively  wide  bandwidth  (32  Kbps channels) - high quality voice
   and/or ISDN data.  
   
   - PHS - Personal Handiphone Service is similar performance  (32  Kbps
   channels)  to  DECT and is deployed across Japanese cities (with high
   pop.  density).  4 channel base station uses one ISDN BRI  line  base
   stations on  top  of  phone  booths.    PHS  is  legacy in Japan; New
   deployments spotted recently in China.  
   
   - IS-95 CDMA (CDMAOne) Code Division  Multiple  Access  -  all  users
   share same  frequency  band.    Qualcomm demoed CDMAOne in 1989 Magor
   improvements: better capacity & simplified planning First  deployment
   in  Hong Kong late 1994 Deployed by Verizon Wireless and SprintPCS in
   the US TIA standard IS-95 (ANSI-95) in 1993 Carrier frequency:  IS-95 
   deployed in the 800 MHz cellular band,  J-STD-08 variant deployed  in
   1900  MHz  in the US ôPCSö band IS-95A provides data rates up to 14.4
   kbps IS-95B provides rates up to 64 kbps (2.5G) All CDMAOne  variants
   designed for TIA IS-41 core networks (ANSI 41) 
   
   -  GSM  "Groupe  Special Mobile", later changed to "Global System for
   Mobile" - joint European effort beginning  in  1982  and  focused  on
   seamless roaming  across  Europe.   First GSM Services launched 1991.
   Utilizes time division multiple access (8 users per  200KHz)  Carrier
   frequency: 900 MHz band, later extended to 1800MHz and added 1900 MHz 
   (US  PCS  bands)  GSM  is  dominant  world standard today due to well
   defined interfaces and great availability of equipment.  
   
   1.2 Core  Network  technology  Two  types  of  widely  deployed  core
   networkarchitecture exist today: 
   
   - GSM-MAP  -  is  used  by  GSM operators.  ôMobile Application Partö
   defines extra (SS7-based)  signaling  for  mobility,  authentication,
   prepaid charging,  etc.    -  ANSI-41  MAP  -- used with AMPS, TDMA &
   CDMAOne. TIA (ANSI) standard for ôcellular  radio  telecommunications
   inter-system operationö.    Both GSM MAP and ANSI-41 are based on SS7
   ISUP and specific SS7  Application  Parts  and  are  responsible  for
   mobility,   call-handling   and   network   services,  such  as  O&M,
   authentication, supplementary services SMS, etc.  
   
   1.3 WIN Concepts 
   The Wireless Intelligent Network (WIN) concepts have  been  developed
   based  on  the rapid emergence of cellular networks over the past two
   decades [2].  The basic requirement of a mobile network is to provide 
   its users with the ability to initiate and receive  calls  regardless
   of their  location.    From  the  service  provider perspective, such
   capabilities  also  allowed  the  use  of  IN  not  only  to  provide
   point-to-point  telephony,  but  also to incorporate capabilities for
   rapid introduction of new services and customization of such services 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 4]


   according to the subscriber needs.  The WIN architecture  provides  a
   framework  for  interruption  of  call  processing  at  triggers, and
   querying databases to determine the treatment of the call,  depending
   on  the  provisions  made by the subscriber and the service provider.
   The   WIN  architecture  is  structured  so  that  the  triggers  and
   signaling  can  be made independent of specific services, so that the
   services can be constructed using external service logic.    The  WIN
   emphasizes  open  interfaces,  so  that  the end user can roam across
   service provider networks that may have been integrated by  different
   equipment  providers  but  interoperate  to  provide  transparency of
   service capabilities.   These  capabilities  are  determined  by  the
   special agreements  between  the  service  providers.   This level of
   interoperability and transparency has led to significant  efforts  in
   the  standardization of INs for wireless systems, and are embodied in
   the IS-41  set  of  standards  published  by  the  Telecommunications
   Industry Association (TIA).  
   
   
   The Wireless network reference model (Figure 1) is described in [2].  
   
   The   Mobile   Station,   Base   Station,  Mobile  Switching  Center,
   Authentication Center, Home  Location  Register  (HLR),  and  Visitor
   Location  Register  (VLR) (see Fig. 1.3) are conventional elements of
   the cellular wireless access networks.  
   
   A Mobile Station is the interface equipment  used  to  terminate  the
   radio path  at the user side.  It is the Mobile Station that provides
   a user with  the  capabilities  to  access  network  services.    The
   authentication  information related to a particular Mobile Station is
   managed by an Authentication Center.  
   
   The Mobile Switching Center is a Service Switching  Point  (SSP)  for
   wireless  networks,  and  it is the point in the network that detects
   the IN triggers.  The Mobile Switching Center  also  constitutes  the
   interface  for  user  traffic  between the wireless network and other
   public switched networks,  as  well  as  to  other  Mobile  Switching
   Centers.  
   
   A  subscriberÆs  identity  is  assigned  to  an  HLR, which keeps the
   subscriberÆs (and his or her Mobile Station) information and provides 
   service control and  mobility  management  for  one  or  more  Mobile
   Switching Centers on behalf of the subscriber.  An HLR may be located 
   within  the  Mobile Switching Center (Standalone HLR); it may also be
   located within a Service Control Point.  
   
   A VLR is used by a Mobile Switching Center  to  retrieve  information
   for handling  calls  to  (or  from)  a visiting user.  A VLR provides
   mobility management for one  or  more  Mobile  Switching  Centers  on
   behalf of  a  subscriber in visited networks.  Similarly to an HLR, a
   VLR may be located within the Mobile Switching Center.  
   


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 5]


2. IN and WIN, WIN services 
   
   The Wireless Intelligent Network (WIN) is a  network  which  supports
   the  use  of  intelligent  network  capabilities  to provide seamless
   terminal services, personal mobility services  and  advanced  network
   services in the mobile environment.  Intelligent network capabilities 
   are  all  those  functional  capabilities  which support creation and
   execution of service logic programs which reside outside of switching 
   equipment, but work in collaboration  with  the  switching  equipment
   based upon  a  common definition of call models and protocols.  These
   service logic  programs  may  utilize  data  resources  and  physical
   resources which also reside outside of the switching equipment.  
   
   Terminal  mobility  services  are  services created using intelligent
   network capabilities to serve customers with mobile terminals.  A set 
   of these services will be associated with each mobile terminal  based
   on the capabilities of the terminal and subscription selections.  
   
   Some  prerequisites  of providing these services are the abilities to
   identify and  authenticate  the  terminal  and  to  provide  seamless
   operations capabilities between wireless and wireline networks.  
   
   Personal  mobility  services  are  services created using intelligent
   network capabilities to serve customers who are mobile.    A  set  of
   these  services  will  be  associated  with  each  customer  based on
   personal subscription selections.  The customer may utilize a variety 
   of mobile  and  fixed  terminals  at  different  locations.      Some
   prerequisites  of  providing  these  services are the abilities to: ò
   identify and  authenticate  the  person  (subscriber)  who  has  been
   provisioned   for   the   service   ò   provide  seamless  operations
   capabilities among the wireless,  fixed  and  other  networks  (e.g.,
   broadband,  internet,  data  networks)  ò  provide  a  unique  set of
   services to the subscriber based on the subscriberÆs access point  to
   the WIN service 
   
   2.1  Advanced  network  service has the functionality to identify the
   capability of the serving network, to provide service  based  on  the
   network  and  terminal  capability,  and  to provide seamless service
   mobility between  wireless  and  wireline  networks.      The   basic
   difference  between  terminal  mobility  service,  personal  mobility
   service and advanced  network  service  is  as  follows:  ò  Terminal
   mobility   services:   services  based  on  the  terminal  capability
   irrespective of the terminal user.   ò  Personal  mobility  services:
   services   based   on   personal   needs  or  business  entity  needs
   irrespective of terminals or networks.  ò Advanced network  services:
   customized  services  which  can  be provided ubiquitously in home or
   roaming networks (wireless or wireline).  
   
   2.2 Service management functionality is used to provision and  manage
   the  service  control  functionality, the service data functionality,
   and the specialized resource functionality in the network.    Service


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 6]


   creation functionality   is   used   to  create  services.    Service
   management and service creation functionality  may  use  standardized
   interfaces.  However, the ability of a service subscriber to interact 
   directly with subscriber-specific service management information will 
   not be excluded or constrained for WIN.  
   
   2.3  The  functions required to support the desired wireless services
   include: 
   ò end user access to call and service processing 
   ò service invocation and control 
   ò end user interaction with service control 
   ò service management 
   The scope of each of these functions is described below.  
   
   2.3.1 End User Access End user access to call and service  processing
   will  be  provided  via  the  following  access  arrangements: ò line
   interfaces that are provided by radio access systems 
   ò traditional trunk and SS7 interfaces 
   ò other types of network access arrangements such as roamer ports 
   
   2.3.2 Service Invocation and Control Call and service processing  for
   WIN  builds upon the call processing infrastructure of existing MSCs.
   It does so  by  using  a  generic  model  of  existing  call  control
   functionality  to  process basic two-party calls, then adding service
   switching functionality to invoke and manage WIN service logic.  Once 
   invoked, WIN service logic is executed under the control  of  service
   control    functionality    in    conjunction   with   service   data
   functionality.  With this distributed approach to  call  and  service
   processing,  the existing call control functionality retains ultimate
   responsibility for the integrity of calls, as well as for the control 
   of call processing resources.  
   
   The following call and service processing constraints apply for  WIN:
   a)  Call  control  and  service  switching  functionality are tightly
   coupled in the MSC, thus the relationship between SSF and CCF is  not
   standardized.  
   b)  A  call is either between two or more end users that are external
   to the network and addressable via a directory number or  combination
   of  directory  number and bearer capability, or a call is between one
   or more end users and the network itself.  
   c) A call may be initiated by an end user, or by an  SCF  within  the
   network on  behalf of an end user.  To supplement a call, WIN service
   logic may either be invoked by an end user served by a WIN MSC, or by 
   the network on behalf of an end user.  
   d) A call may span multiple MSCs. As such, each MSC only controls the 
   portion of the call in that  MSC.  Call  processing  is  functionally
   separated between MSCs. WIN service logic invoked on WIN MSCs in such 
   an inter-MSC call are managed independently by each WIN MSC.  
   e)  MSCs  can  be  viewed as having two functionally separate sets of
   call processing logic that coordinate call processing  activities  to
   create and   maintain  a  basic  two-party  call.    This  functional


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 7]


   separation is provided between the originating portion  of  the  call
   and the  terminating portion of the call.  This functional separation
   should be maintained in a WIN MSC to allow WIN service logic  invoked
   on the originating portion of the call (i.e. on behalf of the calling 
   party)  to  be managed independently of WIN s ervice logic invoked on
   the terminating portion of the call (i.e. on  behalf  of  the  called
   party).  
   f)  It  is  desirable  to  allow multiple WIN-supported service logic
   instances to be simultaneously active for a given end user.    It  is
   also  recognized that non-WIN service logic will continue to exist in
   the network.  As such, service feature logic instances mechanisms for 
   WIN should: 
   û determine which  service  logic  to  invoke  for  a  given  service
   request.   This mechanism should select the appropriate WIN-supported
   service logic or  non-WIN-supported  service  logic,  and  block  the
   invocation  of  any  other  service logic for that particular service
   request; 
   û manage WIN- and non-WIN-supported service logic instances which are 
   simultaneously active (this may require limiting  the  service  logic
   instances which are active); 
   û  ensure  that  simultaneously  active  WIN-supported  service logic
   instances adhere to single-ended, single  point  of  control  service
   processing.  
   g)  The distributed approach and added complexity of call and service
   processing for  WIN  requires  mechanisms  for  fault  detection  and
   recovery,  allowing  graceful  termination  of  calls and appropriate
   treatments for end users.  
   
   2.3.3 End User Interaction End user interaction with the  network  to
   send  and  receive  information  is provided by service switching and
   call control resources, augmented by specialized  resources.    These
   specialized    resources    are   controlled   by   service   control
   functionality, and are connected to end users via  call  control  and
   service switching functionality.  
   
   2.3.4  Service Management Service management functionality is used to
   provision and manage the service control functionality, service  data
   functionality, and specialized resource functionality in the network, 
   outside of  the context of call and service processing.  Standardized
   interfaces for this functionality  are  outside  the  scope  of  WIN.
   However,  the  ability  of  a service subscriber to interact directly
   with subscriber-specific service management information will  not  be
   excluded or constrained for WIN.  
   
3. WIN Functional Entities 
   
   The WIN functional entities provide the following functionality: 
   
   3.1  Authentication Control Function (ACF) The Authentication Control
   Function (ACF) provides the service logic and service  data  function
   to  provide  authentication,  voice  privacy  and  signaling  message


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 8]


   encryption functions.  The ACF: 
   a) interacts with the SCF, LRFH, LRFV, RACF and other ACF  functional
   entities for the authentication of mobile stations.  
   b)   maintains   the   authentication   parameters   for  the  MS  c)
   authenticates the MS access.  
   d) computes the voice privacy mask and signaling  message  encryption
   key for MS origination and page response accesses.  
   e) updates the MSÆs authentication parameters.  
   f)  provides  trigger  mechanisms  to  access  WIN service logic (for
   further study).  
   
   3.2 Call Control Function  (CCF)  The  Call  Control  Function  (CCF)
   provides call and service processing and control.  The CCF: 
   a)  establishes,  manipulates  and  releases  call  and connection as
   requested by  the  MACF,  RACF,  RCF  and  by  other  CCF  functional
   entities; 
   b)  provides  the  capability  to associate and relate RCF functional
   entities, and other CCF functional entities that are  involved  in  a
   particular  call  and/or  connection instance (that may be due to SSF
   requests); 
   c) manages the  relationship  between  RCF  functional  entities  and
   between  other  CCF  functional  entities  involved  in  a call (e.g.
   supervises the overall perspective of the  call  and  connection)  d)
   interacts with the MACF and RACF to establish an information exchange 
   path (e.g., call delivery, short message delivery) to an MS; 
   e)  provides  trigger  mechanisms  to access WIN functionality (e.g.,
   passes events to the SSF).  
   
   3.3  Location  Registration  Functions  (LRFH,  LRFV)  The   Location
   Registration  Function  (LRF)  provides the service logic and service
   data function to manage the  mobility  aspects  for  wireless  users.
   There are two complementary LRF FEs: LRFH and LRFV.  The LRFH: 
   a)  interacts with the LRFV and MACF1 functional entities to maintain
   the location and active/inactive status for mobile stations;  
   b) maintains the subscriber  profile  (e.g.,  switch-based  features,
   triggers)  and  interacts with the LRFV functional entity to transfer
   and update the subscriber profile; 
   c) interacts with the LRFV functional entity  to  provide  a  routing
   address for establishment of an information exchange path (e.g., call 
   delivery, short message delivery); 
   d)   interacts   with   the   ACF   functional   entity   to  provide
   authentication, voice privacy and signaling  message  encryption  for
   mobile stations; 
   e)  maintains  mobile  station  access information (e.g., SMS pending
   flag).  
   f) provides trigger mechanisms to access WIN service logic at an SCF 
   
   The LRFV: 
   a) interacts with the LRFH and MACF functional entities  to  maintain
   the location and active/inactive status for mobile stations; 
   b)  stores  the  subscriber  profile  (e.g.,  switch-based  features,


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 9]


   triggers) and  interacts  with  the  LRFH  and  the  MACF  functional
   entities to transfer and update the subscriber profile; 
   c)  interacts  with  the  LRFH  and  the  MACF functional entities to
   provide  a  routing  address  for  establishment  of  an  information
   exchange path (e.g., call delivery, short message delivery); 
   d)   interacts   with   the   ACF   functional   entity   to  provide
   authentication, voice privacy and signaling  message  encryption  for
   mobile stations; 
   e)  at  the request of the LRFH functional entity, interacts with the
   MACF  functional  entity  to  provide  mobile  station   notification
   information; 
   f) provides trigger mechanisms to access WIN service logic at an SCF; 
   
   3.4  Mobile Station Access Control Function (MACF) The Mobile Station
   Access Control Function (MACF) stores subscriber data and dynamically 
   associates system resources with a particular set  of  call  instance
   data.  The MACF: 
   a)  interacts  with  the  LRFH1, LRFV and RACF functional entities to
   maintain the location and active/inactive status for mobile stations; 
   b)  stores  the  subscriber  profile  (e.g.,  switch-based  features,
   triggers) and interacts with the SSF/CCF and with the LRFV functional 
   entities to transfer and update the subscriber profile; 
   c)   provides  subscriber  profile  information  (e.g.,  switch-based
   services, triggers) and authorization information to the CCF and RACF 
   functional entities; 
   d) maintains the mobile station access information (e.g., SMS pending 
   flag); 
   e) interacts with the RACF and LRFV functional entities to provide  a
   routing  address  for  establishment  of an information exchange path
   (e.g., call delivery, short message delivery) to an MS  f)  interacts
   with  the RACF functional entity to establish an information exchange
   path (e.g., call delivery, short message delivery) to an MS; 
   g) interacts with the RACF functional entity to verify  the  presence
   of the mobile station; 
   h)  at  the request of the LRFV functional entity, interacts with the
   RACF  functional  entity  to  provide  mobile  station   notification
   information; 
   i)  interacts  with  the LRFV functional entity to provide the paging
   strategy to the RACF functional entity to verify the presence of  the
   mobile station; 
   j) provides trigger mechanisms to access WIN service logic; 
   
   3.5  Radio  Access  Control  Function (RACF) The Radio Access Control
   Function  (RACF)  provides  the  service  logic  and   service   data
   functionality specifically related to the radio link.  The RACF: 
   a)  interacts  with  the  CCF,  ACF,  MACF,  RCF  and with other RACF
   functional entities in the processing of call, non-call,  or  service
   related functions;  
   b)  interacts  with  the  CCF  and  MACF  to establish an information
   exchange path (e.g., call delivery, short message delivery) to an MS; 
   c) interacts with the ACF to authenticate the MS access; 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 10]


   d)  interacts  with  the  MACF  to  provide  a  routing  address  for
   establishment  of  an information exchange path (e.g., call delivery,
   short message delivery); 
   e) manages the RCF functions for associated RCFs; 
   f) provides radio access control  functions  such  as  assignment  of
   radio resources; 
   g)  interacts  with the associated RCF and with other RACF functional
   entities   to   coordinate   handoff   activities,   including    the
   determination   of   target   RCFs,   handoff  decision  and  handoff
   completion;  
   h) interacts with other RACF functional entities  to  process  border
   cell operations; 
   i)  contains  service  logic functionality to handle service requests
   that are specific to radio bearer requirements; 
   j) executes mobile station paging; 
   
   3.6 Radio Control Function (RCF) The  Radio  Control  Function  (RCF)
   provides the radio port and radio port control.  The RCF: 
   a)   establishes,   manipulates   and   releases  call/connection  as
   ôrequestedö by the RACF, CCF, and RTF; 
   b) provides radio  functions  including  carrier  generation,  signal
   amplification,  selective  filtering,  modulation  and  demodulation,
   radio channel assignment and supervision; 
   c) provides interconnection between  the  radio  and  network  bearer
   connections; 
   
   3.7  Radio  Terminal Function (RTF) The Radio Terminal Function (RTF)
   provides access for wireless users.  It is the interface between  the
   wireless user and network call control functions.  The RTF: 
   a)  provides for user access, interacting with the user to establish,
   maintain, modify and release as  required,  a  call  or  instance  of
   service; 
   b)  interacts  with  the  Radio  Control Function (RCF) using service
   requests (e.g., setup, transfer, hold, etc.) for  the  establishment,
   manipulation and release of a call or instance of service; 
   c)  receives indications relating to the call or service from the RCF
   and relays them to the user as required; 
   d) maintains call and service state information as perceived by  this
   functional entity; 
   
   3.8 Service Control Function (SCF) The Service Control Function (SCF) 
   commands call control functions in the processing of WIN provided and 
   custom service  requests.  The SCF may interact with other functional
   entities to access additional logic or to obtain information (service 
   or user data) required to process a call and service logic  instance.
   The SCF: 
   a)  interfaces  and  interacts  with  service switching function/call
   control function; 
   b) contains the logic and processing capability  required  to  handle
   WIN provided service attempts; 
   c)  interfaces  and  interacts  with  other  SCFs  for  secured  data


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 11]


   acquisition  and  manipulation,  distributed  service   control   and
   unsolicited service notifications, if necessary; 
   d)  interfaces  and  interacts  with  SDFs  for  data acquisition and
   manipulation of data; 
   e) interfaces and interacts with SRFs; 
   
   3.9 Service Creation Entity  Function  (SCEF)  The  Service  Creation
   Entity  Function  (SCEF)  provides  the  capability for the creation,
   verification, and testing of WIN services.  The output  of  the  SCEF
   includes service logic and service data templates.  
   
   3.10  Service  Data  Function  (SDF)  The Service Data Function (SDF)
   contains customer and network data for real-time access by the SCF in 
   the execution of WIN-provided  services.    The  SDF  interfaces  and
   interacts with  SCFs  as  required.    The SDF contains data relating
   directly to the provision or operation of WIN-provided services, thus 
   it does not necessarily encompass data provided by a third party such 
   as credit information, but may provide access to the data.  
   
   3.11 Service Management Access Function (SMAF) The Service Management 
   Access Function  (SMAF)  provides  the  human  interface  to  service
   management functions.  
   
   3.12   Service  Management  Function  (SMF)  The  Service  Management
   Function (SMF) provides overall service management functionality  for
   the network.    The SMF may interact with any or all of the other FEs
   to perform service provisioning, monitoring, testing, and  subscriber
   data management functions.  
   
   3.13  Service Switching Function (SSF) The Service Switching Function
   (SSF) is associated with the CCF and provides the  set  of  functions
   required  for  interaction  between  the  CCF  and  a service control
   function (SCF). The SSF: 
   a) extends the logic of the CCF to  include  recognition  of  service
   control triggers and to interact with the SCF; 
   b) manages signaling between the CCF and the SCF; 
   c)  modifies call and connection processing functions (in the CCF) as
   required to process requests for WIN provided service usage under the 
   control of the SCF; 
   
   3.14 Specialized Resource Function  (SRF)  The  Specialized  Resource
   Function  (SRF)  provides  the specialized resources required for the
   execution  of   WIN-provided   services   (e.g.,   digit   receivers,
   announcements, conference bridges, etc.).  The SRF: 
   a) interfaces and interacts with SCF and SSF (and with the CCF); 
   b)  may  contain the logic and processing capability to receive, send
   and convert information received from users; 
   c) may contain functionality similar to  the  CCF  to  manage  bearer
   connections to the specialized resources; 
   
4. Network Physical Entities 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 12]


   
   Intelligent  Peripheral  (IP)  The  IP  is  an  entity  that performs
   specialized  resource  functions  such  as   playing   announcements,
   collecting   digits,   performing  speech-to-text  or  text-to-speech
   conversion, recording and storing voice messages, facsimile services, 
   data services, etc.  
   
   Service Control Point (SCP) The SCP is  an  entity  that  acts  as  a
   real-time  database  and  transaction  processing  system  to provide
   service control and service data functionality.  
   
   Service Node (SN) The SN is an entity that provides service  control,
   service  data,  specialized  resources  and call control functions to
   support bearer related services.  
   
5. WIN BCSM Description 
   
   The BCSM described here is based on the overall BCSM in Section 4  of
   Q.1224  [17,  18],  refined  as  applicable  for WIN. It reflects the
   functional  separation  between  the  originating   and   terminating
   portions of calls as illustrated in Figures X and X (To be done later 
   -A.B.). These figures show an originating half BCSM and a terminating 
   half  BCSM, each of which is managed by a functionally separate Basic
   Call Model in the SSF/CCF. The description is  a  starting  point  to
   identify the aspects of the BCSM that are 
 visible to   WIN  service  logic  instances.    In  order  to  maintain
   uniqueness of DP names between the originating and  terminating  half
   BCSMs, ôOö and ôTö is prefixed to certain originating and terminating 
   DP names,  respectively.    Certain  PICs  correspond to switch-based
   service feature functionality, and thus are not ubiquitous among  all
   switching systems.    They  are  denoted  ôoptionalö  to  reflect the
   current understanding.  
   
   The BCSMs described in this section show normal call flow progression 
   and the more commonly encountered exception conditions.  For ease  of
   reference,  the  DPs  associated  with the transition implied by each
   entry and exit event for each PIC  are  listed  along  with  the  PIC
   descriptions.  
   
   5.1  Originating BCSM The originating half of the BCSM corresponds to
   that portion of the BCSM associated with the originating party.   The
   descriptions for each of the PICs in the originating half of the BCSM 
   are described below: 
   
   5.1.1 O_Null 
   Entry Event: 
   û Disconnect and clearing of a previous call.  (DPs: O_Disconnect and 
   O_Abandon).  
   û  Default  handling  of  exceptions by SSF/CCF completed (Transition
   from O_Exception PIC).  
   Functions: 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 13]


   û Clear any resources allocated to the  originating  party  (no  call
   exists,  no  call  reference  exists,  no radio channel allocated for
   call, etc.).  
   Exit Event: 
   û Indication of  a  desire  to  place  an  outgoing  call  (e.g.,  an
   indication  is received from the RACF of an origination attempt by an
   MS user).  
   (DP: Origination_Attempt).  
   û Other indication from an originating party of a desire to  place  a
   call (e.g., ISDNUP IAM message).  (DP: Origination_Attempt).  
   û The following exception exit event is applicable to the O_Null PIC. 
   For this PIC, if the call encounters this exception during O_Null PIC 
   processing,  the  exception  event is not visible because there is no
   corresponding DP.  
   i) The O_Abandon occurs when the calling party disconnects.  
   
   5.1.2 Authorize_Origination_Attempt 
   Entry Event: 
   û An indication is available that the  originating  MS  needs  to  be
   authorized (DP: Origination_Attempt).  
   Functions: 
   û  Collects  the  information  required  to authorize the call for MS
   origination.  
   û The originating MS rights are checked using  the  MS  identity  and
   service profile.  
   The  right  of  the MS to place the call with given properties (e.g.,
   bearer capability, subscriber profile restrictions) is verified.  
   û For MS origination, sends an indication to the  RACF  to  select  a
   radio  channel (i.e., select RCF) for MS origination and order the MS
   to use the channel.  If no channel is immediately available, the RACF 
   may invoke Priority Access and Channel Assignment (PACA) to wait  for
   a channel to become available.  
   Exit Event: 
   û Authority/ability   to  place  outgoing  call  verified.    For  MS
   origination, radio channel is available and assigned to the MS.  
   (DP: Origination_Attempt_Authorized).  
   û Authority/ability to originate call is denied.  This event causes a 
   transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   û Failure to select a radio channel for the MS. This event  causes  a
   transition to the 
   O_Exception PIC.  
   û  A disconnection indication is received from the originating party.
   (DP: O_Abandon).  
   
   5.1.3 Collect_Information 
   Entry Event: 
   û Authority/ability  to  place  outgoing  call  verified.    For   MS
   origination, radio channel available and assigned to the MS.  
   Functions: 
   û  Initial  information  package/dialing string (e.g., service codes,
   prefixes, dialed address digits)  being  collected  from  originating


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 14]


   party.   Information  being  examined  according  to  dialing plan to
   determine end of collection.  No further action may be required if an 
   en bloc signaling method is in use (e.g., an incoming SS7 trunk).  
   û Subsequent digit collection according  to  the  subscriber  profile
   (e.g., for PIN collection).  After digit collection is completed, the 
   SSF/CCF  should  be  able to verify that the MS is authorized for the
   outgoing call.  
   Exit Event: 
   û Availability of complete initial information package/dialing string 
   from originating party.  (This event may have already occurred in the 
   case of en bloc signaling, in which case the duration of this PIC  is
   zero).  (DP: Collected_Information).  
   û Originating party abandons call.  (DP: O_Abandon).  
   û  After digit collection is complete, authority to originate call is
   denied.  This event causes a transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   û Information collection  error  has  occurred  (e.g.,  invalid  dial
   string format,  digit  collection  timeout).    This  event  causes a
   transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   Comment: Some digit analysis is required  to  determine  the  end  of
   dialing.  However, it is assumed that this analysis may be modeled as 
   separable  from  the  rest  of  digit  analysis,  which occurs in the
   analyze_Information  PIC.  There  is  no  intention  to  specify   an
   implementation.   However,  an  MSC  should  externally  present  the
   separable views described.  
   The separable views are  provided  by  supporting  distinct  DPs  for
   Collected_Information  and  Analyzed_Information  and  by  populating
   information  flows  accordingly  for  corresponding   TDP   and   EDP
   information flows to the SCF.  
   
   5.1.4 Analyze_Information 
   Entry Event: 
   û Availability of complete initial information package/dialing string 
   from originating party.  (DP: Collected_Information).  
   Functions: 
   û  Information  being analyzed and/or translated according to dialing
   plan to determine routing address and call type (e.g., termination to 
   MS,  local  exchange  call,  transit  exchange  call,   international
   exchange call).  
   Exit Event: 
   û Availability   of   routing   address   and   call   type.     (DP:
   Analyzed_Information).  
   û The invalid information event (e.g., invalid dialed digits).   This
   event causes a transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   û Originating party abandons the call.  (DP: O_Abandon).  
   Comment: Note that routing address does not necessarily mean that the 
   final  physical  route  has been determined (e.g., route list has not
   been searched, hunt groups have not been searched,  directory  number
   has  not yet been translated to a physical port address), though this
   may be the case (e.g., when routing to a special private facility).  
   
   5.1.5 Select_Route 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 15]


   Entry Event: 
   û Availability  of   routing   address   and   call   type.      (DP:
   Analyzed_Information).  
   û Route failure reported from the Send_Call PIC or O_Alerting PIC.  
   Functions: 
   û Routing address and call type being interpreted.  The next route is 
   being selected.    This  may  involve  sequentially searching a route
   list, translating a directory number into a  physical  port  address,
   etc.   The  individual  destination  resource out of a resource group
   (e.g., a multi-line hunt group, a trunk group) is not selected.  
   Exit Event: 
   û Unable to select a route  (e.g.,  unable  to  determine  a  correct
   route, no    more    routes    on    the    route    list).      (DP:
   Route_Select_Failure).  
   û The  route_busy  event  leading  to  the  Analyze_Information  PIC.
   Route_busy is a non-WIN transition which is part of a basic call.  If 
   the  trunk  group  selected  for the call is busy at this switch, the
   SSF/CCF attempts to route the call on the next trunk group  that  has
   been specified   for   the  call.    Call  processing  moves  to  the
   Analyze_Information PIC when routing to a particular intra-network or 
   internetwork carrier has been  tried  and  an  alternate  carrier  is
   allowed.  
   û  Terminating  resource  (group)  to which call should be routed has
   been identified.  This event causes call processing to  move  to  the
   Authorize_Call_Setup PIC.  
   û Originating party abandons the call.  (DP: O_Abandon).  
   
   5.1.6 Authorize_Call_Setup 
   Entry Event: 
   û  Terminating  resource  (group)  to which call should be routed has
   been identified.  
   Functions: 
   û The authority of the calling party to place this particular call is 
   verified.  Exit Event: 
   û Authority of originating party to place this call is denied  (e.g.,
   business  group  restriction mismatch, toll restricted calling line).
   This event causes a transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   û Authority of originating party to  place  this  call  is  verified.
   This event causes call processing to move to the Send_Call PIC.  
   û Originating party abandons the call.  (DP: O_Abandon).  
   
   5.1.7 Send_Call 
   Entry Event: 
   û Authority of originating party to place this call is verified.  
   Functions: 
   û  The  originating  half BCSM sends an indication to the terminating
   half BCSM of the desire to set up a  call  to  the  specified  called
   party.   Continued  processing  of call setup (e.g., ringing, audible
   ring indication) is taking place.  The originating  half  BCSM  waits
   for the indication that the call has been answered by the terminating 
   party.  


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 16]


   Exit Event: 
   û  An  indication is received from the terminating half BCSM that the
   terminating party is busy.  (DP: O_Called_Party_Busy). In addition to 
   terminating party busy events, the following call_rejected conditions 
   are also treated as O_Called_Party_Busy events: 
   i) a termination_denied indication is received from  the  terminating
   half BCSM (Authorize_Termination_Attempt PIC); or, 
   ii)  a call_rejected indication is received from the terminating half
   BCSM (T_Alerting PIC) that does not specify busy.  
   û An indication is received from the terminating half BCSM  that  the
   terminating party does not answer.  (DP: O_No_Answer).  
   û  An  indication is received from the terminating half BCSM that the
   terminating party is being alerted.  (DP: O_Term_Seized).  
   û An indication is received from the terminating half BCSM  that  the
   call is  accepted  and  answered  by  the  terminating  party.   (DP:
   O_Answer DP).  
   û A route_failure event is detected when: 
   i) an indication of a T_Busy event specifying route busy; is received 
   from  the  terminating  half  BCSM,  or  ii)  an  indication   of   a
   call_rejected event specifying route busy (received when the route is 
   found to be busy at a switch other than the local switch) is received 
   from the  terminating half BCSM (T_Alerting PIC).  iii) an indication
   of a presentation_failure event specifying  route  busy  is  received
   from the terminating half BCSM (Present_Call PIC).  
   In  all  these  cases,  the  originating  half  BCSM  returns  to the
   Select_Route PIC. This event is not detected at a DP.  
   Note:   The   route_failure   event   takes   precedence   over   the
   O_Called_Party_Busy and O_No_Answer events.  
   û An indication is received from the RCF of a service feature request 
   by the originating MS. (DP: O_Mid_Call).  
   û  For SS7-supported trunk interface, the authorization_route_failure
   event occurs when the continuity check procedure results in  failure.
   This event causes a transition to the O_Exception PIC.  
   û Originating party abandons the call.  (DP: O_Abandon).  
   
   5.1.8 O_Alerting 
   Entry Event: 
   û  An  indication  is  received  from  terminating half BCSM that the
   terminating party is being alerted.  (DP: O_Term_Seized).  
   Functions: 
   û Continue processing of call setup.  
   û Waiting for indication from the terminating half BCSM that the call 
   has been answered by the terminating party.  
   Exit Event: 
   û A route failure  event  is  detected  when  all  of  the  following
   conditions are met: 
   û  An  indication is received from the terminating half BCSM that the
   terminating party does not answer within  a  specified  time  period.
   (DP: O_No_Answer).  
   û  An  indication is received from the terminating half BCSM that the
   call is accepted  and  answered  by  the  terminating  party.    (DP:


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 17]


   O_Answer).  
   û From this PIC, the O_Called_Party_Busy event occurs either when: 
   i)  an  indication  of  a call_rejected event specifying user busy is
   received from the terminating half BCSM (T_Alerting PIC), or 
   ii) an indication of a call_rejected event not specifying  user  busy
   is  received  from  the  terminating  half BCSM (T_Alerting PIC). For
   example, the terminating party may reject the call.  
   The originating half BCSM moves to the O_Called_Party_Busy DP.  
   û An indication is received from the RCF of a service feature request 
   by the originating MS. (DP: O_Mid_Call).  
   û Originating party abandons the call.  (DP: O_Abandon) 
   
   5.1.9 O_Active 
   Entry Event: 
   û An indication is received from the terminating half BCSM  that  the
   call is  accepted  and  answered  by  the  terminating  party.   (DP:
   O_Answer).  
   Functions: 
   û Connection established between originating and  terminating  party.
   Message accounting/charging  data may be collected.  Call supervision
   is being provided.  
   Exit Event: 
   û An indication is received from the RCF of a service feature request 
   by the originating MS. (DP: O_Mid_Call).  
   û A disconnect indication is received  from  the  originating  party.
   (DP: O_Disconnect).  
   û  A disconnect indication is received from the terminating party via
   the terminating half BCSM. (DP: O_Suspend).  
   û A connection failure occurs.  This event causes a transition to the 
   O_Exception PIC.  
   
   5.1.10 O_Suspended 
   Entry Event: 
   û A disconnect indication is received from the terminating party  via
   the terminating half BCSM. (DP: O_Suspend).  
   Functions: 
   û  The  connection  with  the  originating  party  is  maintained and
   depending on the incoming access  connection,  appropriate  signaling
   takes place.  
   Exit Event: 
   û Connection  to  the  terminating party is resumed.  The originating
   half BCSM returns to the O_Active PIC. (DP: O_Re-answer).  Note: This 
   transition to the O_Active PIC is not applicable for wireless calls.  
   û An indication is received from the RCF of a service feature request 
   by the originating MS. (DP: O_Mid_Call).  
   û A disconnection indication is received from the originating  party.
   (DP: O_Disconnect).  
   û  A disconnection indication is received from the terminating party.
   (DP: O_Disconnect).  
   û An exception event is encountered.  This event causes a  transition
   to the O_Exception PIC.  


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 18]


   û  An  indication  of  expiration  of the timer waiting for re-answer
   request  is  received  from   the   terminating   half   BCSM.   (DP:
   O_Disconnect).  
   û  A  trigger  at  O_Mid_Call  is not initiated during an appropriate
   period.  (DP: O_Disconnect).  
   
   5.1.11 O_Exception 
   Entry Event: 
   û An exception event is encountered as described above for each PIC.  
   Functions: 
   û Default handling of the  exception  condition  is  being  provided.
   This includes general actions necessary to ensure no resources remain 
   inappropriately allocated, such as: 
   i)  If  any  relationships  exist between the SSF and SCF(s), send an
   error information flow to the SCF(s) closing  the  relationships  and
   indicating  that  any outstanding call handling instructions will not
   run to completion.  
   ii) The SSF/CCF should make  use  of  vendor-specific  procedures  to
   ensure release of resources so that radio, trunk, and other resources 
   are made available for new calls.  
   Exit Event: 
   û  Default  handling of the exception condition by SSF/CCF completed.
   (Transition to O_Null PIC) 
   
   5.2 Terminating BCSM The terminating half of the BCSM corresponds  to
   that portion  of the BCSM associated with the terminating party.  The
   description for each of the PICs in the terminating half of the  BCSM
   are described below: 
   
   5.2.1 T_Null 
   Entry Event: 
   û  Disconnect  and  clearing of a previous call (DPs: T_Disconnect or
   T_Abandon) 
   û Default handling of the exception condition by  SSF/CCF  completed.
   (Transition from T_Exception PIC).  
   Functions: 
   û Clear any resources allocated to the terminating MS.  
   Exit Event: 
   û  An  indication  of  incoming call is received from the originating
   half BCSM. (DP: Termination_Attempt).  
   û The following exception exit  event  is  applicable  to  this  PIC:
   T_Abandon.  
   i)  The  T_Abandon occurs when an indication of call disconnection is
   received from the originating  half  BCSM.  If  the  call  encounters
   T_Abandon  during  PIC processing, the exception event is not visible
   because there is no corresponding DP.  
   
   5.2.2 Authorize_Termination_Attempt 
   Entry Event: 
   û Indication of incoming call  received  from  the  originating  half
   BCSM. (DP: Termination_Attempt) 


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 19]


   Functions: 
   û  Authority to route the call to the terminating access (e.g., MS or
   trunk  group)  is  being  verified,  e.g.,   check   business   group
   restrictions,   restricted   incoming   access  to  line,  or  bearer
   capability compatibility.  
   Exit Event: 
   û Termination_Attempt_Authorized event.  This event occurs  when  the
   MSC  has  verified  the  authority  to  terminate  the  call  to  the
   terminating access.  (DP: Termination_Attempt_Authorized).  
   û The Termination Denied event occurs when  the  authority  to  route
   these call  to  the  terminating  user  is  denied.    (This causes a
   transition to the T_Exception PIC).  
   û The T_Abandon event  occurs  when  an  indication  of  clearing  is
   received from the originating half BCSM. (DP: T_Abandon).  
   
   5.2.3 Select_Facility 
   Entry Event: 
   û Termination_Attempt_Authorized  event.   This event occurs when the
   MSC  has  verified  the  authority  to  terminate  the  call  to  the
   terminating access.  (DP: Termination_Attempt_Authorized).  
   û An SS7 failure occurs causing a re-attempt.  The SS7 failure in the 
   Present_Call  PIC  can  be  caused by a timer expiry upon sending the
   first  Circuit  Reservation  Message  (CRM)  or  a  continuity  check
   failure.  
   Functions: 
   û A  particular  network  resource is being selected.  It is possible
   that all resources in the group could be  busy  or  unavailable.    A
   single resource is considered a group of one.  
   û  For  MS termination, the terminating half BCSM sends an indication
   to the RACF  to  select  facilities  (e.g.,  page  the  MS,  MS  page
   response,  trunk  to  cell,  radio channel within cell) for the call.
   The MS is assigned to the radio channel.  
   û The busy/idle status of the terminating access is determined.  
   i) For termination to an MS, the MS is treated as user busy if it  is
   already  involved in an existing call and cannot receive another call
   (e.g., call waiting is not active).  
   ii) For termination to an MS, the MS is treated as network busy if no 
   radio channels are  available  or  a  routing  failure  occurs  while
   attempting to complete the call.  
   iii) For termination to an MS, the MS is treated as unavailable if it 
   is not available for call termination, an indication that the MS does 
   not respond to a page is received from the RACF2, or an indication of 
   a  failure  to  assign the MS to a radio channel is received from the
   RACF.  
   iv) For calls routed out of  this  SSF/CCF,  network-determined  user
   busy is the detection of terminating party busy.  
   v)  For  calls  routed  out of this SSF/CCF, network busy is when all
   trunks within the selected trunk group are busy.  
   For call arrival with TLDN,  if  the  MS  status  is  busy  (user  or
   network)  or  unavailable  and  the subscriber profile indicates call
   redirection on Busy, No Page Response, No Answer or Routing  Failure,


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 20]


   a  RedirectionRequest  INVOKE is sent to the Originating MSC with the
   RedirectionReason  parameter  set  to   indicate   the   reason   for
   redirection.  The response determines the exit event.  
   1.  If  the  MS  is  already  assigned  to  a radio channel, only the
   selection of a trunk to the serving cell may be required.  
   2. The MS is treated as unavailable if it fails  authentication  when
   it responds  to  the  page.  3. The REDREQ will not be sent if office
   provisioning indicates that call redirection  will  be  done  by  the
   Serving MSC.  
   Exit Event: 
   û  Terminating  access  is  not busy, available terminating resources
   available and        facilities        selected.                 (DP:
   Facility_Selected_and_Available).  
   û  For  call arrival with TLDN, the MS status is busy or unavailable,
   and the response to the RedirectionRequest INVOKE indicates  success.
   (DP: T_Abandon).  
   û  A  T_Busy  event  occurs  when  the  terminating access is busy or
   unavailable (as defined above)  and  there  is  no  call  redirection
   (i.e., local termination, TLDN call arrival with call redirection not 
   applicable,  TLDN  call  arrival  with response to RedirectionRequest
   INVOKE indicating failure).  (DP: T_Busy) 
   After detecting T_Busy, if WIN service logic is  not  needed  on  the
   call  and no switch-based features apply, an indication of the T_Busy
   event describing the type of busy (e.g., user or network)  is  passed
   to  the  originating  half  BCSM  (Send_Call  PIC).  If a terminating
   feature acts on the T_Busy event and changes the event [e.g.,  as  in
   the Call Waiting feature], the event is not passed to the originating 
   half BCSM.  
   û  The  T_Abandon  event  occurs  when  an  indication of clearing is
   received from the originating half BCSM. (DP: T_Abandon).  
   
   5.2.4 Present_Call 
   Entry Event: 
   û Available terminating resource identified and facilities  selected.
   (DP: Facility_Selected_and_Available).  Functions: 
   û  Terminating  resource  informed of incoming call (e.g., indication
   sent to RCF about the call).  
   Exit Event: 
   û Terminating party is being alerted (e.g., indication from RCF  that
   ringing   is  being  applied,  ringing  being  applied,  ISDN-UP  ACM
   message).  (DP: Call_Accepted).  
   û  Call  is  accepted  and  answered  by  terminating  party   (e.g.,
   indication  from RCF of call answer by MS, terminating party goes off
   hook, ISDN-UP answer message received).  (DP: T_Answer).  
   û For call routed out of this SSF/CCF to  an  MS,  RedirectionRequest
   INVOKE received with the RedirectionReason parameter indicating Busy, 
   No Page Response, Unavailable or Unroutable. (DP: T_Busy).  
   After  detecting  T_Busy,  if  WIN service logic is not needed on the
   call, an indication of the T_Busy event is passed to the  originating
   half  BCSM  (Send_Call  PIC).  If  a  terminating feature acts on the
   T_Busy event and changes the event [e.g., as in the  Call  Forwarding


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 21]


   feature], the event is not passed to the originating half BCSM.  
   û  For  call  routed out of this SSF/CCF to an MS, RedirectionRequest
   INVOKE  message  received  with   the   RedirectionReason   parameter
   indicating No Answer or Call Refused. (DP: T_No_Answer).  
   After  detecting  T_No_Answer,  if WIN service logic is not needed on
   the call, an indication of the T_No_Answer event  is  passed  to  the
   originating  half BCSM (Send_Call PIC). If a terminating feature acts
   on the T_No_Answer event and changes the event [e.g., as in the  Call
   Forwarding  feature], the event is not passed to the originating half
   BCSM.  
   û A timer expiry upon sending the first Circuit  Reservation  Message
   (CRM) or a  continuity  check  failure.    (SS7 failure).  This event
   causes call processing to move to the Select_Facility PIC.  
   û Presentation Failure: For call routed out of this SSF/CCF, the call 
   cannot be  presented,  (e.g.,  ISDN  user  determined  busy,  ISDN-UP
   release message  with busy cause).  This event causes the terminating
   half BCSM to move to the T_Exception PIC and an  indication  sent  to
   the originating half BCSM (Send_Call PIC).  
   û  An  indication  of  originating  party  abandon  is  received from
   originating half BCSM. (DP: T_Abandon).  
   
   5.2.5 T_Alerting 
   Entry Event: 
   û  Terminating  party  is  being  alerted  of  incoming   call   (DP:
   Call_Accepted).  
   Functions: 
   û  An  indication  is  sent  to  the  originating  half BCSM that the
   terminating party is being alerted.   Continued  processing  of  call
   setup  (e.g.,  ringing,  audible  ring  indication)  is taking place.
   Waiting for the call to be answered by the terminating party.  
   û For call arrival with TLDN, if the MS does not answer the alert and 
   the subscriber profile indicates call redirection on  a  ôno  answerö
   condition1,  a  RedirectionRequest  INVOKE is sent to the Originating
   MSC with the RedirectionReason parameter indicating No Answer or Call 
   Refused, as appropriate.  The response determines the exit event.  
   Exit Event: 
   û  Call  is  accepted  and  answered  by  terminating  party   (e.g.,
   indication  from RCF of call answer by MS, terminating party goes off
   hook, ISDN-UP answer message received).  (DP: T_Answer).  
   û For call arrival with TLDN, the MS does not answer  the  alert  and
   the  response  to  the  RedirectionRequest  INVOKE indicates success.
   (DP: T_Exception).  
   û Terminating party does not  answer  before  the  MSC-based  ringing
   timer expires.  
   For  call arrival with TLDN, the MS does not answer the alert and the
   response to the RedirectionRequest INVOKE indicates failure.  For  MS
   termination,  loss  of  radio contact with MS. For call routed out of
   this SSF/CCF to an MS, RedirectionRequest INVOKE  received  with  the
   RedirectionReason  parameter  indicating  No  Answer or Call Refused.
   (DP: T_No_Answer).  
   The REDREQ will not be sent if  office  provisioning  indicates  that


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 22]


   call redirection will be done by the Serving MSC.  
   After  detecting  T_No_Answer,  if WIN service logic is not needed on
   the call, an indication of the T_No_Answer event  is  passed  to  the
   originating  half BCSM (Send_Call PIC). If a terminating feature acts
   on the T_No_Answer event and changes the event [e.g., as in the  Call
   Forwarding  feature], the event is not passed to the originating half
   BCSM.  
   û Call_rejected exception event may happen when a user rejects a call 
   while being alerted.  This event causes the terminating half BCSM  to
   move to the T_Exception PIC and an indication sent to the originating 
   half BCSM (Send_Call PIC).  
   û   Indication   of  originating  party  abandon  received  from  the
   originating half BCSM. (DP T_Abandon) 
   
   5.2.6 T_Active 
   Entry Event: 
   û Call  is  accepted  and  answered  by  terminating  party.     (DP:
   T_Answer).  
   Functions: 
   û  An  indication  is  sent  to  the  origination  half BCSM that the
   terminating party has accepted and answered  the  call.    Connection
   established between   originating   and   terminating  party.    Call
   supervision is being provided.  
   Exit Event: 
   û An indication is received from the RCF of a service feature request 
   by the terminating MS. (DP: T_Mid_Call).  
   û A disconnect indication is received  from  the  terminating  party.
   (DP: T_Suspend).  
   û  A disconnect indication is received from the originating party via
   the originating half BCSM. (DP: T_Disconnect).  
   û A connection failure occurs or loss of radio contact with MS.  This
   event causes the terminating half BCSM to move to the T_Exception PIC 
   and an indication sent to the originating half BCSM.  
   
   5.2.7 T_Suspended 
   Entry Event: 
   û  A  disconnect  indication  is received from the terminating party.
   (DP: T_Suspend).  
   Functions: 
   û The physical resources associated with the call remain connected.  
   û A suspend indication is sent to the originating half BCSM.  
   û A  disconnect  indication  (e.g.,  Q.931  disconnect  message,  SS7
   release  message) is received from the terminating party, this PIC is
   immediately exited to the T_Disconnect DP without any action.  
   û For an SS7 supported trunk, when the receiving network initiates  a
   suspend message, a timer is started and the call processing waits for 
   re-answer request  from  the terminating party.  If re-answer request
   (e.g., off-hook, SS7 resume message) is received from the terminating 
   party before the  timer  expires,  the  originating  and  terminating
   parties are reconnected.  
   Note:  Both  a Call Resume timer and a Call Retention timer may exist


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 23]


   in this PIC. WIN implementations may use  a  single  timer  for  both
   conditions.  
   Exit Event: 
   û  The  terminating  party re-answers or a resume message is received
   before the timer expires.  The T_BCSM returns to  the  T_Active  PIC.
   (DP: T_Re-answer).  
   Note:  This  transition  to  the  T_Active  PIC is not applicable for
   wireless calls.  
   û The  expiration  of  the  timer  waiting  for  re-answer  from  the
   terminating party.  (DP: T_Disconnect).  
   û  A  disconnection indication is received from the terminating party
   (DP: T_Disconnect).  
   û A disconnection indication is received from the  originating  party
   via the originating half BCSM. (DP: T_Disconnect).  
   û An  exception event is encountered.  This event causes a transition
   to the T_Exception PIC.  
   
   5.2.8 T_Exception 
   Entry Event: 
   û An exception event is encountered as described above for each PIC.  
   Functions: 
   û An indication of the exception condition is sent to the originating 
   half BCSM. Default handling  of  the  exception  condition  is  being
   provided.   This  includes  general  actions  necessary  to ensure no
   resources remain inappropriately allocated, such as: 
   i) If any relationships exist between the SSF  and  SCF(s),  send  an
   error  information  flow  to the SCF(s) closing the relationships and
   indicating that any outstanding call handling instructions  will  not
   run to completion.  
   ii)  The  SSF/CCF  should  make  use of vendor-specific procedures to
   ensure release of resources so that radio, trunk, and other resources 
   are made available for new calls.  
   Exit Event: û Default handling of the exception condition by  SSF/CCF
   completed.  (Transition to O_Null PIC).  
   
   5.3  BCSM  Detection Points Certain call and connection events may be
   visible to WIN service logic instances.  DPs are the  points  in  the
   call processing  at  which  these  events  are detected.  A DP can be
   armed in order to notify a WIN service logic instance that the DP was 
   encountered, and potentially to allow the WIN service logic  instance
   to influence  subsequent  call processing.  If a DP is not armed, the
   SSF/CCF continues call processing without SCF involvement.   DPs  are
   characterized by the following four attributes: 
   
   1. Arming/disarming  mechanism.   A DP must be armed in order for the
   event to be detected.  A DP may be statically  armed  or  dynamically
   armed.    A   DP   is   statically   armed  through  service  feature
   provisioning.  A statically armed DP remains armed  until  explicitly
   disarmed.  Statically armed DPs are of type TDP-R or TDP-N.  
   A  DP  may  be  dynamically  armed  by  a Service Logic Program (SLP)
   instance at an SCF within the context of the  current  call  and  the


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 24]


   current  control  relationship  with  that  SLP instance at that SCF.
   Dynamically armed DPs of this type are labeled EDP-R or EDP-N.  
   While the SSF/CCF-SCF control relationship  exists,  the  dynamically
   armed  triggers at EDPs may be adjusted as needed by the SLP instance
   at the SCF.  EDPs may remain armed to provide notifications  only  to
   the SLP instance at the SCF when the relationship shifts from control 
   to monitoring.    These  dynamically  armed  EDPs  are  automatically
   disarmed  when  the  relationship  terminates,  even  if   the   call
   continues.   If  the  relationship  shifts  to monitoring mode, a new
   control relationship may be established with another SLP instance  at
   the same  or  a  different  SCF  within the same call.  When a mobile
   station initially registers within the serving area  of  an  SSF/CCF,
   the  set  of  DPs armed, the trigger criteria and related information
   (e.g., the SCF to which a call handling instruction request should be 
   addressed) need to be placed in the SSF/CCF  serving  the  subscriber
   when the   registration   takes   place.    This  represents  dynamic
   geographic placement of statically armed DPs, and  is  distinct  from
   dynamic DP arming as discussed above.  This requires that an image of 
   the  statically  armed DPs (type TDP-R and TDP-N) for the registering
   subscriber be provided to the SSF/CCF as  part  of  the  registration
   notification process.  Upon intersystem handoff, the original SSF/CCF 
   becomes   the   anchor   SSF/CCF  and  remains  responsible  for  the
   relationship(s) to the SCF(s) influencing the call.  Therefore, there 
   is no impact as a result of the handoff.  Specific  triggers  may  be
   dynamically  armed  as  TDPs  within the context of the current call.
   The SCF response to the  SSF/CCF  can  provide  this  trigger  arming
   information.  
   
   2.  Criteria.  In  addition  to  the condition that a DP be armed, DP
   criteria must be satisfied in order to notify the SCF that the DP was 
   encountered.  
   
   3. Relationship. Given that  an  armed  DP  was  encountered  and  DP
   criteria are satisfied, the SSF may provide an information flow via a 
   relationship:  
   a)  If  this  relationship is between the SSF/CCF and the SCF for the
   purpose of call and service logic processing, it is considered to  be
   a WIN service relationship.  This relationship may be of two types: û 
   a  control  relationship  if  the  SCF  is  able  to  influence  call
   processing via the relationship; 
   û a monitor relationship if the SCF is not  able  to  influence  call
   processing via the relationship 
   b) If this relationship is between the SSF/CCF and the SCF or the SMF 
   for  management purposes, it is considered to be a service management
   control relationship.  This relationship is for further study.  
   
   4. Call  processing  suspension.    Given  that  an  armed   DP   was
   encountered  and  DP criteria are satisfied for a WIN service control
   relationship, the SSF may suspend call processing to allow the SCF to 
   influence subsequent  call  processing.    When  call  processing  is
   suspended,  the  SSF  sends an information flow to the SCF requesting


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 25]


   instructions, and waits for a response.  When call processing is  not
   suspended, the SSF sends an information flow notifying the SCF that a 
   DP was  encountered,  and does not expect a response.  This attribute
   is set by the same mechanism that arms the DP.  
   Based on these attributes, four types of DPs are identified for  WIN.
   The DP types are: 
   a.  Trigger Detection Point û Request (TDP-R) 
   b.  Trigger Detection Point û Notification (TDP-N) 
   c.  Event Detection Point û Request (EDP-R) 
   d.  Event Detection Point û Notification (EDP-N) 
   
6. Selected Parameter Acronym ASN.1 Notation 
   
   
   AllOrNone AON AllOrNone ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED{
   AllChangesMustSucceedOrNoneShouldBeApplied (1),
   TreatEachChangeIndependently (2)}
   
   Change CHANGE Change ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED {
   SetDataItemToDefaultValue (1),
   AddDataItem (2),
   DeleteDataItem (3),
   ReplaceDataItemWithAssociatedDataValue (4),
   à}
   
   DataAccessElement DAE DataAccessElement ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   DataID OPTIONAL,
   Change,
   DataValue}
   
   DataAccessElementList DAEL DataAccessElementList ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF {
   DataAccessElement}
   
   DataID DATAID DataID ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --encoding of value is any valid TIA/EIA-41 parameter
   --(explicitly defined in standard or private).
   
   DatabaseKey DATAKEY DatabaseKey ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value is determined by bi-lateral negotiation between sender
   --and receiver to be interpreted as a database key.
   
   DataResult DATARES DataResult :: = IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED {
   Successful (1),
   Unsuccessful (2),
   à}
   
   DataUpdateResult DATUR DataUpdateResult ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   DataID,
   DataResult}
   
   DataUpdateResultList DATURL DataUpdateResultList :: = IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF {


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 26]


   DataUpdateResult}
   
   DataValue DATAVAL DataValue :: = IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --encoding of this parameter will vary according to the type
   --of data item
   
   DestinationAddress (none) DestinationAddress ::= CHOICE {
   PC_SSN,
   GlobalTitle}
   
   DetectionPointType DPTYPE DetectionPointType ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED
   ENUMERATED {
   TDP-R (1),
   TDP-N (2),
   EDP-R (3),
   EDP-N (4),
   à}
   
   ExecuteScript EXESCR ExecuteScript ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   ScriptName OPTIONAL,
   ScriptArgument}
   
   FailureCause FAILCAUSE FailureCause ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --encoding of this parameter is based on the encoding of
   --the information elements in T1.113.3 section 2.3.9.
   
   FailureType FAILTYPE FailureType ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED {
   CallAbandoned (1),
   ResourceDisconnect (2),
   FailureAtMSC (3),
   SSFTExpiration (4),
   à}
   
   GlobalTitle (none) GlobalTitle ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --parameter carries the SCCP Global Title as defined in
   --Section 3 of ANSI T1.112.
   
   ModificationRequest MODRQ ModificationRequest ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   ServiceDataAccessElementList OPTIONAL,
   AllOrNone}
   
   ModificationRequestList MODRQL ModificationRequestList ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF {
   ModificationRequest}
   
   ModificationResult MODRS ModificationResult ::= CHOICE
   {DataResult,
   ServiceDataResultList}
   
   ModificationResultList MODRSL ModificationResultList ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF {
   ModificationResult}
   


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 27]


   PrivateSpecializedResource (none) PrivateSpecializedResource ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --values are allocated by network operators for use
   --within their networks
   
   ResumePIC RESUMEPIC ResumePIC ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED {
   Continue_Call_Processing (1),
   Collect_InformationPIC (2),
   Analyze_InformationPIC (3),
   Select_RoutePIC (4),
   Select_FacilityPIC (32),
   Present_CallPIC (33),
   à}
   
   ScriptArgument SCRARG ScriptArgument ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value encoding is undefined
   
   ScriptName SCRNAME ScriptName ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value encoding is undefined
   
   ScriptResult SCRRESULT ScriptResult ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value encoding is undefined
   
   ScriptResult SCRRESULT ScriptResult ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value encoding is undefined
   
   ServiceDataAccessElement SDAE ServiceDataAccessElement ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   DataAccessElementList OPTIONAL,
   ServiceID}
   
   ServiceDataAccessElementList
   SDAEL ServiceDataAccessElementList ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF
   {
   ServiceDataAccessElement}
   
   ServiceDataResult SDR ServiceDataResult ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
   DataUpdateResultList OPTIONAL,
   ServiceID}
   
   ServiceDataResultList SDRL ServiceDataResultList ::= IMPLICIT SEQUENCE OF {
   ServiceDataResult}
   
   SpecializedResource (none) SpecializedResource ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --value encoding is undefined
   
   SRFCapability SRFCAP SRFCapability ::= IMPLICIT SET {
   SpecializedResource OPTIONAL,
   PrivateSpecializedResource OPTIONAL}
   --at least one must be present
   
   TriggerAddressList TRIGADDRLIST TriggerAddressList ::= IMPLICIT SET OF {
   TriggerList}


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 28]


   
   TriggerCapability TRIGCAP TriggerCapability ::= IMPLICIT OCTET STRING
   --see 6.5.2.gg for encoding
   
   TriggerList TRIGLIST TriggerList ::= IMPLICIT SET {
   DestinationAddress,
   CHOICE {
   WIN_Trigger,
   WIN_TriggerList} }
   
   TriggerType TRIGTYPE TriggerType ::= IMPLICIT UNSIGNED ENUMERATED {
   All_Calls (1),
   Double_Introducing_Star (2),
   Single_Introducing_Star (3),
   Reserved_for_Home_System_Feature_Code (4),
   Double_Introducing_Pound (5),
   Single_Introducing_Pound (6),
   Revertive_Call (7),
   0-Digit (8),
   1-Digit (9),
   2-Digit (10),
   3-Digit (11),
   4-Digit (12),
   5-Digit (13),
   6-Digit (14),
   7-Digit (15),
   8-Digit (16),
   9-Digit (17),
   10-Digit (18),
   11-Digit (19),
   12-Digit (20),
   13-Digit (21),
   14-Digit (22),
   15-Digit (23),
   Local_Call (24),
   Intra-LATA_Toll_Call (25),
   Inter-LATA_Toll_Call (26),
   World_Zone_Call (27),
   International_Call (28),
   Unrecognized_Number (29),
   Prior_Agreement (30),
   Specific_Called_Party_Digit_String (31),
   Mobile_Termination (32),
   Advanced_Termination (33),
   Location (34),
   Terminating_Resource_Available (64),
   T_Busy (65),
   T_No_Answer (66),
   T_No_Page_Response (67),
   
   


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 29]


7.0 Acknowledgements
   
  The author would like to thank Igor Faynberg, Vijay Gurbani, Hui-Lan Lu and Doug Varney for their   time and insightful comments during the preparation of this I-D. 
   
   
8.0 References
   
   [1] ITU-T Q.763, December 1999: "Specifications of Signalling System
   No. 7 Formats and codes of the ISDN user part".
   
   [2] Faynberg, I., L. Gabuzda, M. Kaplan, and N.Shah, "The Intelligent
       Network Standards: Their Application to Services", McGraw-Hill, 1997.
   
   [3] TIA/EIA Interim Standard IS-848,  Enhanced Charging Services
   
   [4] TIA/EIA/IS-771, Wireless Intelligent Network; Telecommunications Industry
   Association; December 1998
   
   [5] 3G TS 23.032, "Universal Geographical Area Description (GAD)".
   
   [6] 3G TS 23.073, "Support of Localised Service Area (SoLSA); Stage 2"
   
   [7] GSM 03.32 Version 5.0.0, " Digital cellular telecommunications
   system (Phase 2+) (GSM); Universal Geographical Area Description
   (GAD) "
   
   [8] TS GSM 03.03, " Digital cellular telecommunications system
   (Phase 2+) (GSM); Numbering, addressing and identification"
   
   [9] TS GSM 04.08, " Digital cellular telecommunications system
   (Phase 2+) (GSM); Mobile radio interface; Layer 3 specification"
   
   [10] L. Slutsman (Ed.), I. Faynberg, H. Lu, M. Weissman, "The SPIRITS
   Architecture", IETF RFC 3136, June 2001,
   <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3136.txt>
   
   [12] Adam Roach, "SIP-Specific Event Notification", IETF RFC 3265,
   June 2002, <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3265.txt>
   
   [13]  I.Faynberg, J. Gato, H. Lu, and L. Slutsman, "SPIRITS Protocol
   Requirements", IETF RFC 3298, August 2002,
   <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3298.txt>
   
   [14] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, J. Peterson, R.
   Sparks, A. Johnston, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: Session
   Initiation Protocol" IETF RFC 3261, June 2002,
   <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3261.txt>
   
   [15] M. Unmehopa, K. Vemuri, A. Brusilovsky, E. Dacloush, A. Zaki, F.
   Haerens, J-L. Bakker, B. Chatras, and J. Dobrowolski, "On selection
   of IN parameters to be carried by the SPIRITS Protocol", IETF I-D,


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 30]


   Expires January 2003, Work In Progress.
   
   [16] Vijay K. Gurbani, "Security for SPIRITS services", IETF
   Internet-Draft, Work in Progress.
   
   [17] Intelligent Network Capability Set 2. ITU-T, Recommendation Q.1228
   
   [18] Distributed functional plane for intelligent network capability Set 2.
        ITU-T, Recommendation Q.1224, 09/97.
   
   [19] Recommendation Q.763 (12/99) - Signalling System No. 7 - ISDN user 
        part formats and codes
   
   [20] Recommendation Q.931 (05/98) - ISDN user-network interface layer 3 
        specification for basic call control
   
   [21] 3G TS 23.127 version 4.0.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project;
        Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Virtual
        Home Environment" (Release 4)
   
   [22] 3G TS 29.198-04 version 4.0.0, "3rd Generation Partnership
        Project; Technical Specification Group Core Network; Open Service
        Access (OSA); Application Programming Interface (API); Part 4:
        Call Control" (Release 4)  
   
   [23] 3G TR 29.998 v3.2.0 "3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical 
        Specification Group Core Network; Open Services Architecture;
        Application Programming Interface - Part 2" (Release 1999)
   
   [24] ISO 8601-1997, "Data elements and interchange formats -
        Information interchange - Representation of dates and times".
   
   [25] ETSI DocBox, SPAN 12 OPEN SERVICE ACCESS API,
        http://docbox.etsi.org/tech-org/span/Open/Span12/Overview.html
   
9.0 Authors' Addresses
   
    Alec Brusilovsky,                       
    Artcare,                    
    559 Roxbury Drive,                        
    Naperville, IL 60565                   
    USA.                                    
    abrusilovsky@ieee.org               
   
   
 10.0 Acronyms
   
   3GPP                 Third Generation Partnership Project
   ASN.1                Abstract Syntax Notation One  
   ASP                  Application Service Provider
   API                  Application Programming Interface


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 31]


   BCSM                 Basic Call State Model
   CAMEL                Customized Applications for Mobile Network Enhanced
                        Logic
   CC                   Call Control
   CM                   Call Model
   CS                   Capability Set
   DN                   Directory Number
   DP                   Detection Point
   DTD                  Document Type Definition
   EDP                  Event Detection Point
   EDP-N                Event Detection Point "Notification"
   EDP-R                Event Detection Point "Request"
   GSTN                 Global Switched Telephone Network
   HTTP                 Hypertext Transfer Protocol
   IANA                 Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   ICW                  Internet Call Waiting
   IE                   Information Element
   IDL                  Interface Definition Language
   IF                   Information Flow
   IN                   Intelligent Network
   INAP                 Intelligent Network Application Protocol
   IP                   Internet Protocol
   ISUP                 ISDN User Part (SS7 Protocol)
   ITU                  International Telecommunications Union
   MIME                 Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
   MP CC                MultiParty Call Control
   OBCSM                Originating Basic Call State Model
   PIC                  Point In Call
   PINT                 PSTN/Internet Interworking
   PSTN                 Public Switched Telephone Network
   SCF                  Service Control Function
   SCP                  Service Control Point
   SDP                  Session Description Protocol
   SIP                  Session Initiation Protocol
   SIP-T                SIP for Telephones
   SPIRITS              Services in the PSTN/IN Requesting InTernet Services
   SSF                  Service Switching Function
   SSP                  Service Switching Point
   STD                  State Transition Diagram
   TBCSM                Terminating Basic Call State Model
   TDP                  Trigger Detection Point
   TDP-N                Trigger Detection Point "Notification"
   TDP-R                Trigger Detection Point "Request"
   XML                  Extensible Markup Language
   
   
 11.0 Full Copyright Statement
   
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others,
   and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 32]


   in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
   copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
   Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined
   in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to
   translate it into followed, or as required to translate it into
   languages other than English.
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
   
   
   
   Addendum 1. Figures

                                //---\\                  //---\\
                               |       |                |       |
                               |\\---//+----------------+\\---//|
                               |  VLR  |                |  VLR  |
                               |       +-----------+    |       |
                                \\-+-//            |     \\---//
                                   |               |
                                   |               |
                                   |               |
+---------+   +---------+    +-----+-----+         |     //---\\
|         |   |         |    |  Mobile   |         |    |       |
| Mobile  |   |  Base   |    | Switching |         |    |\\---//|
| Station +---+ Station +----+  Center   |         |    |  HLR  |
|         |   |         |    |           |         |    |       |
+---------+   +---------+    +-+-------+-+         |     \\-+-//
                               |       |           +--------+
                               |       +----+               |
       +-----------+           |            |        +------+-------+
       |  Mobile   |         --+--       /--+-\      |              |
       | Switching |       //     \\   //      \\    |Authentication|
       |  Center   |      |  ISDN   | |   PSTN   |   |    Center    |
       |           |       \\     //   \\      //    |              |
       +-----------+         -----       \----/      +--------------+
   
           Figure 1. Wireless Network Reference Model


<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

On selection of IS-41 SPIRITS mobility-related parameters   [Page 33]


   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
       +---+----------------------------------------+
       |   |        Network Entities (NEs)          |
       |   +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       |   |    |AC |BS |HLR|IP |MS |MSC|SCP|SN |VLR|
       +---+----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       |   |ACF | X |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | X |
       | F +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | u |CCF |   |   |   |   |   | X |   | X |   |
       | n +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | c |LRFh|   |   | X |   |   |   |   |   |   |
       | t +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | i |LRFv|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | X |
       | o +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | n |MACF|   |   |   |   |   | X |   |   |   |
       | a +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | l |RACF|   |   |   |   |   | X |   |   |   |
       |   +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | E |RCF |   | X |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
       | n +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | t |RTF |   |   |   |   | X |   |   |   |   |
       | i +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | t |SCF |   |   | X |   |   |   | X | X |   |
       | i +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       | e |SDF |   |   | X |   |   |   | X | X |   |
       | s +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       |   |SRF |   |   |   | X |   | X |   | X |   |
       |FEs+----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
       |   |SSF |   |   |   |   |   | X |   |   |   |
       +---+----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
   
    Figure 2. Mapping of WIN Functional Entities to Network Entities













<draft-brusilovsky-spirits-is41-00.txt> July 2002   Expires Aug 2003

