draft-ema-vpim-voicemsg-00.txt                          
          Internet Draft                Stuart McRae
          Expires in six months       Lotus Development   October 22, 1999

                                  Internet Voice Messaging
                              <draft-ema-vpim-voicemsg-00.txt>

          Status of this Memo

          This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
          with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

          Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
          Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
          other groups may also distribute working documents as
          Internet-Drafts.

          Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
          months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
          documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
          Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than
          as "work in progress."

          The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

          The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

          1.  Abstract 

          This document provides for the carriage of voicemail messages
          over the Internet.

          The concept described in this document was originally called VPIM
          v3. This term has been dropped to reflect the fact that it is not
          a successor format to VPIM v2, but rather an alternative
          specification for a different application.

          2.  Introduction

          People naturally communicate using their voices, and this is
          preferable to typing for many forms of communication. Therefore,
          if voice messaging is standardised in Internet mail it will be
          possible for users to use this preferred means of communication,
          when appropriate, as well as enabling new devices without
          keyboards to be developed which allow users to participate in
          electronic messaging when mobile, or in a hostile environments,
          or in spite of disabilities.

          There are currently a number of implementations of systems which
          will transmit a voicemail messages over the Internet using
          SMTP/MIME. However these systems suffer from a lack of

          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999

          McRae               Expires 4/22/2000                  [Page 2]



          interoperability because various aspects of such a message have
          not hitherto been standardised.

          Specifically, there are three classes of solution of this form

          voicemail messages in an SMTP/MIME compliant e-mail system when
          received, subsequently allowing retrieval from a mail client or
          the telephone; unified messaging solutions which store voicemail          currently in use: unified messaging solutions which save
          messages in a proprietary e-mail system which then get forwarded
          through a gateway to SMTP/MIME for Internet transmission; and
          voicemail systems conforming to the Voice Profile for Internet
          Messaging (VPIM v2 as defined in RFC 2421 [VPIM2]) for forwarding
          messages to remote voicemail systems. Note that VPIM v2 was
          designed to allow two voicemail systems to exchange messages -
          not to allow a voicemail system to interoperate with a desktop
          e-mail client.

          These solutions suffer from a lack of interoperability when an
          Internet mail recipient receives such a message because there is
          no standard definition for how a voicemail message should be
          represented in SMTP/MIME, resulting in messages which cannot be
          read by the recipient (because of the encoding used), or simply
          look ugly.

          This document therefore proposes a standard mechanism for
          representing a voicemail message within SMTP/MIME, and a standard
          encoding for the audio content, which unified messaging systems
          and mail clients MUST implement to ensure interoperability. By
          using a standard SMTP/MIME representation, and a widely
          implemented audio encoding, this will also permit most users of
          e-mail clients not specifically implementing the standard to
          still access the voicemail message. In addition, this document
          describes features an e-mail client SHOULD implement to allow it
          to display voicemail message in a more friendly, context
          sensitive way to the user, and intelligently provide some of the
          additional functionality typically found in voicemail systems
          (such as responding with a voice message instead of e-mail).

          This document is partly derived from VPIM v2 [VPIMV2], from an
          original proposal for VPIM v3 [VPIMV3], and from an a simple
          version of that specification [SIMPLEV3]. It is intended to be
          based on the VPIM v3 goals document [GOALS], as revised at
          subsequent meetings (this document is currently being revised and
          reissued).

          It is highly desirable that unified messaging mail clients also
          be able to interoperate with voicemail servers. This is possible
          today, providing the client implements VPIM v2 [VPIMV2] in
          addition to this specification, and uses it to construct messages
          to be sent to a voicemail server. Separate work may be undertaken
          in the VPIM Working Group to provide further interoperability
          between clients implementing this specification and voicemail
          systems implementing VPIM.

          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999

          McRae               Expires 4/22/2000                  [Page 3]



          For more information on VPIM v2 and the activities of the VPIM


          3.  Conventions Used in this Document          working group, see 


          "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as defined in "Key
          words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS].

          4.  Mes  ge Format                             http://www.ema.org/vpim/.          The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and

          All messages MUST conform with the Internet Mail format as
          described in DRUMS [DRUMS].  Any content type is allowed to be in
          a message.
               
          The top level content type on origination of a new, forwarded or
          reply message SHOULD be either multipart/mixed or                 sa
          multipart/related. Top level content of audio/wav MUST be
          supported for receipt, to interoperate with clients capable of
          generating suitably encoded voice content but not supporting this
          specification in full.

          The top level content type on origination of a delivery
          notification message MUST be multipart/report.

          Work is currently underway to define a mechanism to indicate the
          primary content type of a message (i.e. to characterise a message
          as being a voicemail message, rather than an e-mail with a WAV
          file attached). It is also desirable to identify critical
          contents (e.g. the voice message the use actually sent), as
          opposed to any subsidiary attachments, to ensure that these are
          not discarded. These two concepts could be indicated separately,
          or combined. This document will be updated once that work has
          generated an Internet Draft.

          An implementation MAY use the multipart/voice-message content
          type as described in [VPIMVM] to package audio content together
          as a voice message in a manner conformant with VPIM v2 [VPIMV2].

          5.  Transport

          All transport MUST support Internet Mail transport (SMTP/ESMTP)
          as  described in DRUMS [DRUMS].

          6.  Addressing

          Any valid Internet Mail address MAY be used.  

          It is desirable to be able to use and onramp/offramp for delivery
          of a voicemail message to a user, which will result in specific
          addressing requirements, based on service selectors as defined in
          [SELECTOR]. Further work on these requirements is in progress.


          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999

          McRae               Expires 4/22/2000                  [Page 4]



          It is desirable to permit the use of a directory service to map



          7.  Notifications

          DSN MUST be supported.  All              of messages MUST result          the E.164 phone number of the recipient into an SMTP mailbox
          in a NDN.

          Partial      (to indicate that one or more contents could not be          address. How this might be achieved is currently under study.                                      non-delivery                  DSNs
          stored/relayed by the receiving MTA) SHOULD be supported.
              
          MDN SHOULD be supported.  Partial MDNs (to indicate that one or
          more contents could not be rendered) SHOULD also be supported.

          Work on defining partial MDNs and DSNs is currently in process.

          8.  Voice Contents

          Voice messages may be contained at any location within a message
          and MUST be contained in an audio/* content-type.  The VOICE
          parameter described in [VPIMV2] SHOULD be used to identify the
          any spoken names or spoken subjects (as distinct from voice
          message contents).

          The originators and recipients spoken names SHOULD be included
          with messages as separate audio contents. If a vCard is also
          included these MAY be referenced from the vCard, or included
          inline with a vCard.  External references SHOULD NOT be used.
               
          An implementation MAY determine the recipient capabilities before
          the sending of a message and choose a codec accordingly (e.g.
          Using Content Negotiation).  In the absence of such recipient
          knowledge, implementations MUST use MS-GSM - indicated via
          audio/msgsm or  "audio/wav; codec=31". [refs tbd]

          Recipients MUST be able to play such MS-GSM messages, and SHOULD
          be able to play G.726 (indicated as audio/32kadpcm) for
          interoperability with VPIM v2 [VPIMV2].

          An implementation MAY be able to play messages encoded with other
          codecs (either natively or via transcoding) but MUST be able to
          record MS-GSM.

          An implementation MAY support interoperability with VPIM v2
          [VPIMV2], in which case it MUST be able to play G.726 (indicated
          as audio/32kadpcm).

          9. Fax Contents

          Fax contents SHOULD be carried according to RFC 2305 [tbd]

          10.  Compatibility with Voicemail Systems supporting VPIM

          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999

          McRae               Expires 4/22/2000                  [Page 5]



          Separate work will be undertaken to investigate mechanisms to
          improve interoperability with voicemail systems implementing VPIM
          v2, or successor specifications.

          11.  References

          [VPIMV2]   Vaudreuil, G., Parsons, G., "Voice Profile for
                     Internet Mail -  version 2", RFC 2421, September 1998.

          [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs To Indicate
                     Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

          [MIME]     Freed, N., Borenstein, N., "Multipurpose Internet Mail
                     Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
                     Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

          [GOALS]    Di Silvestro, Laile, "Goals for VPIM v3",
                     <draft-ema-vpimv3-goals-00.txt>, Work in Progress.

          [VPIMVM]   G. Vaudreuil and G. Parsons, "VPIM Voice Message: MIME
                     Sub-type Registration", RFC 2423, September 1998.

          [VPIMV3]   Vaudreuil, G., Parsons, G., "Voice Profile for
                     Internet Mail - version 3", <draft-ema-vpimv3-00.txt>,
                     Work in Progress.

          [DRUMS]    Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format Standard",  
                     <draft-ietf-drums-msg-fmt-07.txt>, Work in Progress.

          [SIMPLEV3] Parsons, G., " Voice Profile for Internet Mail -
                     Version 3: A Simple Approach"
                     <draft-ema-vpim-simplev3-00.txt>

          [SELECTOR] Allocchio, C., _Minimal PSTN address format in
                     Internet Mail_, RFC 2303, March 1998.


          12.  Security Considerations

          TBD

          13.  Author's Address

          Stuart J. McRae
          Lotus Development
          43 Seymour Gardens
          Twickenham, TW1 3AR,
          United Kingdom

          Phone: +44 181 891 1896
          Fax: +44 1784 499 112
          Email: stuart_mcrae@lotus.com
            
             
          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999

          McRae               Expires 4/22/2000                  [Page 6]



          14.  Full Copyright Statement



          This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished          "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.
          to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
          explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared,
          copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
          restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
          and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
          works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
          way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to
          the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as
          needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which
          case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
          Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate
          it into languages other than English.

          The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
          be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

          This document and the information contained herein is provided on
          an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
          ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
          IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE
          OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
          IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
          PURPOSE."


























          Internet Draft   Internet Voice Messaging      October 22, 1999