

TSVWG                                                         J. Babiarz
Internet-Draft                                                   K. Chan
Expires: January 16, 2005                                      V. Firoiu
                                                         Nortel Networks
                                                           July 18, 2004



         Congestion Notification Process for Real-Time Traffic
                      draft-babiarz-tsvwg-rtecn-01


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2005.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   This memo specifies the usage of Explicit Congestion Notifications
   (ECN) markings for real-time flows that use UDP, such as voice, video
   conferencing and multimedia streaming.  This memo tries to reuse as
   much of RFC 3168, "The Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification
   to IP", as possible.  However, we found it necessary to introduce new
   ECN semantics for real-time UDP flows.  For real-time UDP flows, this




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   memo describes how the network performs ECN marking when congestion
   is experienced, but it is left up to the application designers to
   define how end systems should react to ECN bit marking.  For
   illustration purpose, an example is provided showing how ECN for
   real-time UDP flows can be used for admission control of VoIP flows.


Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Requirements Notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Assumptions and General Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Congestion Detection for Real-Time Traffic . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Explicit Congestion Notification for Real-Time Traffic . . . .  6
   5.  Example of ECN usage for Admission Control . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Non-compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 13































Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



1.  Introduction


   This memo summarizes the recommended method for providing end-to-end
   Explicit Congestion Notifications (ECN) for real-time flows such as
   voice, video conferencing and multimedia streaming.  RFC 3168 [6]
   specifies the incorporation of ECN for IP, focusing on TCP flows,
   including ECN's use of two bits in the IP header.  This memo tries to
   reuse as much of RFC 3168, "The Addition of Explicit Congestion
   Notification to IP", as possible.  We take the same concepts but
   apply them to real-time UDP flows.  However, we found it necessary to
   introduce a new ECN semantics that can provide two levels of
   congestion experienced indication for real-time inelastic UDP flows.
   There are applications or services that need to provide different
   treatment at application level based on importance of the session for
   given level of congestion experienced.  As an example, higher
   importance flows may need to get access to network over regular
   traffic.  In addition this memo specify the requirements for network
   nodes that are configured to provide ECN-capability.


   Defined in this memo are the functions that need to be performed in
   the network for real-time flows, specifically congestion detection
   through the use of flow measurement and marking of ECN bits in the IP
   header of real-time packets.  Since real-time flows like voice and
   video conferencing are very delay sensitive, a different method than
   what is specified in RFC 3168 for determining level of congestion
   needs to be used.  Furthermore, we redefine a new ECN semantics for
   bit 6 and 7 in the DS Field of the IP header to be used for real-time
   UDP flows compared to what is defined in RFC 3168 for TCP flows.


   The proposal is to use ECN as a method to notify to the application
   that there is a bandwidth constraint or congestion along the path in
   the network.  Based on this information, the application may take
   action to reduce its sending rate in what ever means is appropriate,
   stop sending packets, or reduce its rate or not admit any new flows
   if the path is congested.  The reaction or decision taken by the
   application to the ECN marking is not specified in this memo as it
   will depend on the application.  It is left up to the application
   designers to define how applications in end systems should react to
   ECN bit marking that is performed in the network.  It is expected
   that application specific memos will be produced to explain the
   detailed usage of real-time ECN mechanism.  For illustration purpose,
   a high level example of a procedure that may be used for admission of
   VoIP flows based on measured congestion level in the network is
   provided.


1.1  Requirements Notation


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].


2.  Assumptions and General Principles


   In this section, we describe some of the important design principles
   and assumptions that guided the development of this proposal.


   o  Because ECN for real-time flows is likely to be adopted gradually
      and selectively in routers, accommodating migration and selective
      deployment is essential.  Some routers may not be able to detect
      congestion or mark the ECN bits within IP packet headers.  Also
      there may be parts of the network where congestion is very
      unlikely and therefore, there is no need for an ECN function.  The
      most viable strategy is one that accommodates selective or
      incremental deployment in a network with both ECN-capable and
      non-ECN-capable routers.


   o  Asymmetric routing is likely to be a normal occurrence within IP
      networks.  That is the path (sequence of links and routers) taken
      by forward and reverse packet flows may be different.


   o  Many routers process the "regular" header in IP packets more
      efficiently than they process the header information in IP
      options.  This suggests that the ideal approach is to keep
      "congestion experienced" information in the regular header of an
      IP packet.


   o  A specific DiffServ service class would be implemented exclusively
      for real-time traffic flows from ECN-capable end points.
      Different DiffServ service class is used to identify real-time
      flows that are ECN-capable and hence the ECT(0) or ECT(1) states
      defined in RFC 3168 [6] are not needed.  The assumption is that a
      signaling protocol (SIP, H.323, MGCP, H.248, etc.) will be used to
      determine if the end points are capable of understanding ECN bit
      marking and thus, are willing to participate in congestion
      control.


   o  Further, it is desirable that traffic flows from ECN-capable and
      non-ECN-capable end points are not aggregated into the same
      DiffServ service class.  Aggregating the two may cause the flows
      that are non-ECN-capable to generate congestion and to introduce
      delay and/or packet drop to both ECN-capable and non-ECN-capable
      flows.


   o  The proposed real-time ECN mechanism assumes end-to-end usage of
      DiffServ in order to allow differentiation of real-time ECN
      capable traffic from all other traffic on the network.  For the




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



      real-time ECN capable traffic, the ECT(0) and ECT(1) states
      defined inRFC 3168 [6] are not used in the network.  This is
      reasonable as the proposed mechanism is meant for an engineered
      network that is DiffServ capable as compared to the best-effort
      nature of the Internet at-large.


   o  Flow measurement and marking of ECN bits as defined herein is
      performed on flows that are mapped in to this service class and is
      performed only on selected router links in the network where
      congestion is likely to occur.  Other traffic flows are not
      affected by this function.  Routers that do not support this
      function forward packets without modifying bit 6 and 7 in DS Field
      of the IP header.


   o  ECN procedure as defined in RFC 3168 [6] may be applied to
      DiffServ service class(es) in the IP network that are intended for
      applications that use TCP.  Both methods may co-exist in the
      network, but in different DiffServ service classes.



3.  Congestion Detection for Real-Time Traffic


   Real-time traffic generated by applications such as voice, video
   conferencing, multimedia streaming have different performance
   requirements when compared with non-real-time applications that use
   TCP.  One such requirement is that end-to-end delay be bounded by a
   small value, and that packets should not be dropped.


   It is generally accepted that such performance requirements can be
   achieved when the real-time flows are serviced by the routers in
   their path through a real-time service class such as one based on the
   EF PHB treatment.  This treatment can be provided only when the
   real-time service class is under-loaded (i.e., when the aggregate of
   input traffic never exceeds the class' capacity, and thus no
   congestion condition occurs).


   One way to ensure the under-loaded condition of a service class is
   through resource reservation and admission control: a (centralized or
   distributed) database maintains a record of available resources
   (bandwidth) for the real-time service class on each link in the
   network and a new flow is admitted only if there are enough resources
   on the links in its path so that the under-loaded condition is
   maintained.  Checking for available resources can be done with a
   reservation protocol or through a policy based protocol.  An
   important issue is that the maintenance and per-flow querying of the
   resource database in conjunction with the routing database is an
   important overhead that is undesirable in many implementations.





Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   An alternative method for ensuring sufficient forwarding resources
   (bandwidth) is through flow admission control based on local traffic
   measurement.  In this scheme, a continuous process at selected
   link(s) measures the traffic going through a specified real-time
   service class and indicates a level of congestion (such as "not
   congested", "mildly congested" or "severely congested").  This
   congestion indication as described in Section 4 is then used by the
   application to select the action that will be taken by the
   application that controls the service.  The action could be to admit
   or not admit a new flow into that real-time service class in the
   network, or have the sending rate of ECN marked flows reduced,
   stopped or terminated a flow thereby reducing level of congestion.
   It is desirable that the measurement process indicate congestion
   before any significant packet accumulates in the queue such that no
   significant queuing delay is added to the flows' end-to-end delay.
   One way to achieve this is through monitoring the aggregate rate of
   the specified real-time service class and to indicate congestion when
   a certain threshold is exceeded.


4.  Explicit Congestion Notification for Real-Time Traffic


   This memo specifies a method for an IP network to provide congestion
   indication for incipient of congestion and where notification is
   accomplished through marking packets rather than dropping them.  The
   marking is done through the use of the two ECN bits in the IP header.


              <----------- DS FIELD ---------------->
                0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7
              ----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----
             |          DSCP FIELD         |ECN FIELD|
              ----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----
              DSCP: Differentiated Services Codepoint
              ECN: Explicit Congestion Notification


               Figure 1: DSCP and ECN Fields in IP Header


   Bits 6 and 7 in the IPv4 TOS octet are designated as the ECN field.
   The IPv4 TOS octet corresponds to the Traffic Class octet in IPv6,
   and the ECN field is defined identically in both cases.  The
   definitions for the IPv4 TOS octet RFC 791 [1] and the IPv6 Traffic
   Class octet have been superseded by the six-bit Differentiated
   Services (DS) Field RFC 2474 [4],  RFC 2780 [5].  Bits 6 and 7 are
   listed in RFC 2474 as Currently Unused, and are specified in RFC 2780
   as approved for experimental use for ECN.  Finally, RFC 3168 [6]
   standardizes the use of the ECN bits.


   With this memo, we propose an additional usage of the ECN bits for
   indicating congestion for real-time inelastic UDP packet flows in




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   DiffServ capable networks.  The selected routers in the network are
   configured to measure real-time traffic that is classified and marked
   via a DS codepoint as requiring congestion control, i.e., EF DSCP.
   These flows are segregated into a network defined service class where
   flow metering and marking of ECN bits may be performed on selected
   nodes in the network.


   We would like to keep network element processing to be simple,
   without keeping states.  Hence the network only perform the ECN bit
   markings without any state maintenance.  Whereas the application may
   care about the semantics of the total ECN field as a whole.  Figure 2
   defines the new ECN semantics as they apply to real-time inelastic
   UDP flows.  It should be noted that the definition and naming of ECN
   codepoints for real-time UDP flows is different than what is defined
   in RFC 3168.  RFC 3168 only addressed ECN usage for elastic TCP
   flows.  The ECN-Capable Transport (ECT) codepoints '10' (ECT(0)) and
   '01' (ECT(1)) defined in RFC 3168 that are set by the data sender to
   indicate that the end points of the transport are ECN-Capable are not
   used for real-time UDP applications, as only the real-time ECN
   capable traffic will be placed in a specific service class to receive
   the real-time ECN treatment in the network.  The targeted real-time
   UDP applications have a requirement that the network provide
   transport with very low packet loss.  Mixing flows from ECN-capable
   and non-ECN-capable end points into the same service class and using
   ECT codepoint for providing treatment differentiation in routers
   would require that every router in the network to be ECN-capable.  We
   prefer to take a gradual or incremental approach for deployment of
   ECN-capable routers in the network and use DiffServ architecture for
   flow differentiation.  Therefore, this new functionality needs only
   to be deployed in selected nodes.  The premise is that different
   traffic types are separated using Differentiated Services into two or
   more service classes with different polices for each traffic type.
   However, both methods as described in RFC 3168 for TCP traffic and as
   documented herein for real-time UDP traffic can co-exist in the
   network, using independent DiffServ service classes.


   The mapping of ECN bits for real-time UDP flows is defined so that
   routers in the path only need to set one of the ECN bits if the flow
   measurement criteria has been exceeded.  Other approaches could be
   used, but for simplicity we have chosen this one.


   Action Performed in Router:


   o  Bit 7 set to 1 to indicate 1st level of congestion detected


   o  Bit 6 set to 1 to indicate 2nd level of congestion detected


   Nodes that are configured to support congestion notification for




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   real-time flows need to provide the following capability:


   o  Congestion detection MUST be performed using a real-time
      measurement method (e.g., flow metering).


   o  As a minimum, one flow congestion detection mechanism is REQUIRED
      to be associated with a link where congestion measurement is
      performed.


   o  Bit 7 of the DS Field in the IP header MUST be set to 1, when the
      flow rate exceeds the configured rate "A" (i.e., the first level
      of congestion).


   o  Bit 6 of the DS Field in the IP header MUST be set to 1, when the
      flow rate exceeds the configured rate "B" (i.e., the second level
      of congestion).


   o  Measured rate "B" MUST be greater than rate "A".


   Routers in the IP network MAY be configured to support one or two
   congestion detection levels.


   Some real-time applications or services need the indication of two
   levels of congestion experienced, CE(0) and CE(1), for first level
   and second level congestion experienced respectively.  Therefore we
   have selected the following ECN semantics as interpreted by
   applications for real-time UDP traffic.
   ECN States as Interpreted by Application:


   Bits 6 and 7 values
        0     0      Not-CE - Congestion Not Experienced
        0     1      CE(0) - Congestion Experienced only at 1st level
        1     0      CE(1) - Congestion Experienced only at 2nd level
        1     1      CE(2) - Congestion Experienced at 1st and 2nd level


            Figure 2: ECN Semantics for Real-Time UDP Flows


   Specific applications may take different action(s) in response to
   congestion being experienced in the network.  Depending on the
   application, one possible outcome maybe for the application to stop
   initiating new real-time UDP flows at the 1st level of congestion and
   if the offered load in the selected service class where this
   real-time ECN marking is performed reaches 2nd level of congestion
   the application selectively stops sending packets on some flows.
   Most likely, different applications will take various independent
   actions.  The various independent actions taken by the applications
   are out of scope of this memo.





Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



5.  Example of ECN usage for Admission Control


   Normally real-time VoIP bearer traffic is marked with EF DSCP and is
   mapped into a DiffServ service class that produces very low latency,
   jitter and packet loss when traffic load is within the specified
   parameters.  Currently there is no method defined that can limit
   (without dropping packets) the amount of traffic that can be
   aggregated on to a link, therefore controlling loads to within the
   engineered limits is difficult.  To address this issue, we propose
   that for real-time flows we use the metering and ECN marking method
   defined in this memo.


   Here we describe how ECN can be used in real-time VoIP solution to
   provide end-to-end admission of new media flows.  This is only a
   simple example of how admission control may be implemented using rate
   metering and ECN bit marking in the network.  Different applications
   may use modified approaches to verify if there is sufficient
   bandwidth before admitting a new flow.


   Let us assume that the network is configured to mark real-time VoIP
   payload packet with EF DSCP and map this traffic into a DiffServ
   service class referred to as Telephony service class herein.  Further
   we state that only EF-marked traffic flows are mapped into the
   Telephony service class in this example.  Mapping of real-time
   traffic marked with other DSCP is possible but to keep this example
   simple we will only talk about EF marked packets.


   For example, before a session (i.e., a call) is established between
   two clients, the two endpoints involved in the call will execute a
   request/response transaction where the called party (Client B) sends
   a Probe Request packet to the calling party (Client A) and the
   calling party correspondingly sends back a Probe Response packet to
   the called party.  Probe packets are marked with EF DSCP and are
   mapped into the same service class as real-time (ECN-capable) traffic
   flows.


   DiffServ style traffic conditioner, meter and ECN marker are used on
   selected routers in the network along the path to measure the
   aggregated (real-time media and probe packets) flow rate of EF marked
   packets.  If flow rate of EF marked packets as measured by the meter
   is greater than rate "A" bit 7 in DS Field of IP header is set to 1
   and the packet is forwarded as usual.  The metering and marking of
   ECN bit need only to be performed on selected routers where bandwidth
   constraints exist and where congestion is likely to occur.


   Upon receipt of Request Probe packet, the calling party generates and
   sends a Response Probe packet to the called party, echoing the status
   of the received ECN bits in the Response Probe packet.  Again,




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   DiffServ style traffic conditioner, meter and ECN marker are used on
   selected routers in the network along the reverse path to measure the
   aggregated flow rate of EF marked packets.  If flow rate of EF marked
   packets as measured by the meter is greater than rate "A" bit 7 in DS
   Field of IP header is set to 1 and the packet is forwarded as usual.
   On receipt of Response Probe packet, the called party could send a
   notification with the ECN Status to relay the ECN bit status results
   for the media path to a server in the network where call admission
   control is performed.  Based on the received congestion status
   (bandwidth usage) for that path, the admission control function will
   make a decision as to whether or not to continue with call setup and
   admit this new real-time flow.  Should bandwidth usage parameters as
   indicated by ECN bit marking be exceeded, then this new real-time
   flow will not be admitted.


6.  Non-compliance


   Because of the unstable history of the TOS octet, the use of the ECN
   field as specified in this document cannot be guaranteed to be
   backwards compatible with any past uses of these two bits that
   pre-date ECN.  The potential dangers of this lack of backwards
   compatibility are discussed in RFC 3168 Section 22.


7.  Security Considerations


   This document discusses detection of congestion for real-time traffic
   flows and also describes a common policy configuration, for the use
   and application of ECN bit marking.  If implemented as described, it
   should require the network to do nothing that the network has not
   already allowed.  If that is the case, no new security issues should
   arise from the use of such a policy.


   It is possible for the policy to be applied incorrectly, or for a
   wrong policy to be applied in the network for the defined congestion
   detection point.  In that case, a policy issue exists that the
   network must detect, assess, and deal with.  This is a known security
   issue in any network dependent on policy-directed behavior.


   A well known flaw appears when bandwidth is reserved or enabled for a
   service (for example, voice transport) and another service or an
   attacking traffic stream uses it.  This possibility is inherent in
   DiffServ technology, which depends on appropriate packet markings.
   When bandwidth reservation or a priority queuing system is used in a
   vulnerable network, the use of authentication and flow admission is
   recommended.  To the author's knowledge, there is no known technical
   way to respond to or act upon a data stream that has been admitted
   for service but that it is not intended for authenticated use.





Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



8.  IANA Considerations


   To be completed.


9.  Acknowledgements


   The authors acknowledge a great many inputs, most notably from John
   Rutledge, Francois Audet, Tony MacDonald, Mary Barnes, Greg Thor,
   Nabil Bitar, and Hadriel Kaplan.


10  Normative References


   [1]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September 1981.


   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [4]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F. and D. Black, "Definition of
        the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and
        IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998.


   [5]  Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines For
        Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers", BCP 37,
        RFC 2780, March 2000.


   [6]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S. and D. Black, "The Addition of
        Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
        September 2001.



Authors' Addresses


   Jozef Z. Babiarz
   Nortel Networks
   3500 Carling Avenue
   Ottawa, Ont.  K2H 8E9
   Canada


   Phone: +1-613-763-6098
   Fax:   +1-613-768-2231
   EMail: babiarz@nortelnetworks.com








Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



   Kwok Ho Chan
   Nortel Networks
   600 Technology Park Drive
   Billerica, MA  01821
   US


   Phone: +1-978-288-8175
   Fax:   +1-978-288-4690
   EMail: khchan@nortelnetworks.com



   Victor Firoiu
   Nortel Networks
   600 Technology Park Drive
   Billerica, MA  01821
   US


   Phone: +1-978-288-4354
   Fax:   +1-978-288-4690
   EMail: vfiroiu@nortelnetworks.com
































Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Disclaimer of Validity


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 16, 2005               [Page 13]