





Internet Draft                                                 R.G. Cole
Expiration Date: Sept 2000                                          AT&T
                                                          C. Kalbfleisch
                                                             Verio, Inc.
                                                            D. Romascanu
                                                                  Lucent


        A Framework for Active Probes for Performance Monitoring

                        <draft-cole-appm-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C)  The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

2. Abstract

   This memo discusses the use of 'active' probes within the context of
   remote performance monitoring.  It discusses the importance of
   developing an 'active' probe monitoring capability within the
   Internet.  It develops a framework for active probes in performance
   monitoring against the backdrop of previous, related work within the
   IETF.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.



Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


3. Objectives and Motivation

3.1 Introduction

   There is much utility in fully defining a performance monitoring
   capability within the IETF.  As the Internet architecture becomes
   more complex, as enhanced QOS capabilities are defined and deployed,
   performance monitoring capabilities must be developed to account for
   this richer transport and service infrastructure.  ISP's will be
   offering enhanced transport services, content hosting services will
   offer differentiated hosting services, and customers will demand
   methods to monitor the quality of the services to which they
   subscribe.

   This memo defines a framework for the development of an 'active'
   probe capability for the purpose of enhancing remote performance
   monitoring capabilites within IP networks and services.  By an
   'active' probe, we mean a device or embedded software which generates
   a data packet (or packets) and injects it (them) into the network to
   a corresponding probe or existing server for the primary purpose of
   measuring some aspect of the performance of the end-to-end path or
   service.  By performance monitoring we mean the act of collecting a
   specific set of measurements, either actively or passively, for the
   purpose of evaluating the quality of the path or the service.  Much
   work within the IETF exists related to performance monitoring.  One
   interesting aspect of this body of work is that it does not
   explicitly define an 'active' probe capability.  An active probe is
   complimentary to existing capabilities, and should be developed by
   building as much as possible on this existing work.

 3.2 Terms

   This section defines the terms used throughout this memo.

      + 'Performance monitoring' is the act of monitoring traffic for
      the purpose of evaluating a statistic of a metric related to the
      performance of the system.

      + A 'probe' is a device or embedded software program that is
      placed in the data flow path or on a client or server to provide a
      performance monitoring function.

      + An 'active probe' is a probe which generates a data packet (or
      packets) and injects it (them) onto the path to a corresponding
      probe or existing server and provides a performance monitoring
      function based upon measurements made upon the packets that it
      injects.  An active probe may talk intrusively to existing
      application servers.



Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      + A 'passive probe' is a probe which non-intrusively listens to
      packets flowing across the 'wire' or monitors request/responses on
      a client or server and provides a performance monitoring function
      based upon its observations.

      + A 'path' is a set of network transport components that provide a
      transport service between a given source and destination address
      pair.  In its simpliest form the network components are a series
      of routers interconnected by links.  In more complex scenarios, a
      path has a more complex topology due to asymetric routes,
      alternate paths, load balancing and redirection.

      + A 'service' is a collection of network components and servers
      designed to deliver a capability to an end user.  The service
      could be a transport capability, a processing capability, etc.

 3.3 Motivation

   There are a number reasons to develop an active probe capability for
   performance monitoring within the Internet.  However, thay all
   fundamentally boil down to the single issue of control.  As discussed
   at length in the IPPM framework document [1], if you do not control
   the nature of the traffic generation, then you do not control the
   sampling and hence you do not control the quality of the respective
   statistics.  It is important to control the timing of the packet
   generation to ensure the quality of the statistic (i.e., the random
   nature of the underlying sample).  It is important to control the
   path of the test packets (at least the source and destination) to
   ensure that enough measurements are taken over the path in order to
   accurately identify the quality of the path.  It is important to
   control the 'size' of the transactions to ensure that the
   measurements are relavant to the metric, e.g., throughput statistics
   should be based upon measurements with large files.

   The utility of active probe capabilities will be found in:

      + troubleshooting paths - a pingMIB [3] identifies that
      connectivity exists but additional capabilities are required to
      determine the quality of the connectivity,

      + circuit pre-test and turn-up - prior to turning up a capability
      or customer, there is much value in monitoring the quality of
      their path or service prior to putting the customer on-line
      (without the capability of generating probe traffic this can be
      problematic),

      + fault management - allows determination of whether the
      application is operating or not,



Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      + baselining enhancements - active probes could be used to base-
      line BEFORE and measure AFTER a certain set of QoS or routing
      policies are applied.  This would try to provide an answer to the
      question 'how effective is my proposed policy strategy?'.

      + capacity management - typical capacity management programs
      monitor local, utilization statistics to drive a capacity
      management decision, e.g., upgrade a facility, a CPU, etc.  An
      active probe could be used to monitor complimentary aspects of
      network performance, more akin to an end-to-end metric, whose
      results could drive capacity management decisions as well.  (This
      can be correlated to component level measures and can trigger
      specific capacity upgrades.),

      + Service Level Agreement (SLA) monitoring - because the nature of
      the probe packets, which measure a metric, are tightly specified,
      the corresponding statistics will have significance within the
      context of an SLA.

   The bulk of the current development within the IETF is in the area of
   defining 'passive' monitoring, either self-monitoring as counters of
   local metrics or external-monitoring as defined within the RMON
   working group [2].  In contrast to passive monitoring is, what we
   refer to as, active monitoring.  Active monitoring relies upon the
   injection of probe data or 'request' packets into the transport
   network or into a service.  The active monitoring probe (or
   cooperating probes) then performs some type of measurement based upon
   the specific packet(s) it injects.

   There are distinct advantages and disadvantages of both passive and
   active performance monitoring.  These two approaches are very
   complimentary in nature.  Passive probes are, by their vary nature,
   non-intrusive; they add no additional load on the network or service.
   Passive monitors can provide a more extensive measurement capability
   (not only in the type of measurements but also in the amount of
   samples collected).  Passive monitors do not, however, control the
   generation of data for the measurement samples.  In contrast, active
   monitors are intrusive; they add load to the network or service.
   Because they control the generation of the probes, they also control
   the volume of traffic they introduce.  In general, it is not expected
   that the objectives for generating active probes would necessitate
   high volumes of traffic.

   Combined, these attributes limit the volume of measurements collected
   from active monitoring probes.  However, this will allow for a richer
   set of historical data to be maintained in the probe due to the
   relatively low volume of measurement data (as compared, say, to an
   RMON probe sitting on a highly utilized fast ethernet LAN segment).



Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   In the next section we discuss issues of an architectural nature.  We
   follow this with a section on related work, both previous and
   current, within various working groups at the IETF.  Then, we present
   thoughts on Configuration Issues and Implementation Issues.  Finally,
   because this area of work is not currently part of an existing
   working group's charter, we end with a brief presentation of Next
   Steps in order to move the discussion of these capabilities within
   the IETF along.

4. Architectural Considerations

   There are various architectural considerations when discussing active
   probes within the context of the Internet and it's standards.  These
   include:

      + the target of the monitoring process, e.g., network transport
      versus server or process,

      + the 'layer' at which the probe functions, e.g., transport probes
      versus synthetic applications,

      + relationship between fault management and performance management
      data,

      + configuration - how to setup the behavior of the probe through a
      RW MIB table for configuring the probe,

      + communication channels to remote probes,

      + the deployment architecture and its relationship to other
      monitoring methods, e.g., passive monitoring devices, and

      + security - related to probe control and generation.

   We consider each of these issues in this section.

   It is envisioned that specific probes/monitoring capabilities are to
   be developed specific to the service being monitored.  When the
   target of the monitoring process is a transport service, then one
   naturally thinks of delay probes, loss probes, throughput and jitter
   probes, etc.  When one thinks of database access services, one
   naturally thinks of various types of application request probes.  We
   will talk of 'network' or 'transport' probes when monitoring
   transport services.  We will speak of 'process-level', 'application-
   level or 'synthetic-application' probes when speaking of monitoring
   applications or a combination of transport and application services
   depending upon the location of the probes.  It may even make sense to
   define an intermediate probe type, e.g., and 'infrastructure' probe,



Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   for the purpose of monitoring some common aspects of the service and
   transport services.

   Examples of 'transport-level' probes are delay, loss, delay
   variation, jitter, and throughput probes.  Examples of 'synthetic-
   application' probes would be Oracle or SAP transaction probe or
   HTTP_get request probes, etc.  Examples of 'infrastructure-level'
   probes might be DNS or DHCP probes, SIP probes for monitoring aspects
   of call setup delays, etc.

   Related to each defined transport or application service, we
   introduce the concept of a monitoring service, characterized by type
   of service, passive monitoring method (if relevant), active
   monitoring method (if relevant), metrics, passive probe and active
   probe. In this context, a passive probe is an implementation of a
   passive monitoring method. An active probe is an implementation of an
   active monitoring method.  Such an approach is currently being
   discussed within the context of a passive monitoring capability in
   the RMON working group.  See, for example, [14] and [16].

   There are very few pieces of information that one might extract from
   a resource that are only useful for just one purpose, e.g., fault or
   performance monitoring.  For most of the attributes available today,
   the differences are in the use to which the information is put, not
   the data itself.  It is only after we have defined higher-level
   objects (computed from existing ones) that we really have
   "performance data" or "fault data".  Thus it should be possible to
   report basic fault information as well as gather performance
   statistics.  For instance, at a mininmum the detected operational
   state should be reportable with a notification to indicate the
   transitions.

   Given a probe, a framework can be built that looks something like:

   +-----------------+------------+
   |performance app. | fault app. |
   +-----------------+------------+
   |       monitoring software    |
   +------------------------------+
   | central selection,           |
   |         aggregation & stats. |
   +------------------------------+
   | remote selection,            |
   |         aggregation & stats. |
   +------------------------------+
   |          probe hardware      |
   +------------------------------+




Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   In the context of performance, fault can be viewed as not performing
   at all.  They should both be monitorable with the same probes to
   reduce network traffic.


   Various deployment scenarios are feasible, depending upon the
   functionality desired and the allocation of that functionality across
   components.  Clearly, active and passive probes can be implemented as
   either stand-alone devices that sit on the wire, or they can be
   implemented as embedded software within specific network elements or
   clients or server applications.  An architecture can be envisioned
   which combines active and passive probes, where the active probe is
   designed for the sole purpose of generating traffic at particular
   time points and the sample collection and statistical computations
   occur in already defined passive probes, e.g., RMON probes.

   Other architectural options relate to a) the fundamental nature of
   the active probe development and b) the communications with the
   remote probes and between the remote probes.  The active probes could
   be developed along the lines of the DISMAN's pingMIB [3], i.e., it is
   defined within the context of a MIB, directly accessable through SNMP
   and resident on a remote device.  It could, instead be developed
   within the framework of the DISMAN's scriptMIB [4], where the active
   probe is an application which is distributed to the remote monitoring
   device and run on that remote device.  Within this latter
   architecture, access to the probe's configuration, etc., may be
   through means other than SNMP and a MIB.  Also, depending upon the
   nature of the probes, some form of communication and control may be
   necessary between the communicating probes themselves (in addition to
   the probe packets).

   With respect to security considerations, past discussions related to
   active monitoring encountered a certain degree of pessimism, as did
   many other SNMP applications that involved configuration operations.
   However, the recent development of the SNMPv3 [references..] security
   model, improved this situation, and we are witnessing the increased
   acceptance of SNMP as a 'trusted' and 'secure' protocol.  This
   framework will analyze the issue of security and propose if necessary
   extra measures for ensuring a safe and secure utilization of the
   active monitoring capabilities.

   Several security issues exists, including:

      + the security of the communication between a management
      application and the remote, active probes (at a minimum snmpv3
      authentication mechanisms should be consider for this aspect of
      configuration.),




Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      + when the probes are probing things at application levels we need
      to discuss the security of those applications.  (For instance we
      may need to use secure protocols.)

      +  there is the potential that the probes for monitoring will be
      perceived as secuirty violations (port scans)

      + the nature of the communications between the active probes
      themselves,

      + spoofing results (potentially disrupting communications), and

      + using the probes in denial of service attacks.

      {Comment:  These and other security issues need to be further
      developed.  Also see the note in Section 10 below on 'Security
      Considerations'.}

5. Relationship to Other Work

      Much work has already occurred within the IETF which has a direct
      bearing on the development of active performance probe
      definitions.  This body of work is addressed in various working
      groups over the years.  In this section we focus our attention to
      the work of a) the IPPM working group, b) the DISMAN working
      group, c) the RMON working group, d) the ApplMIB working group,
      and e) the RTFM working group.

5.1 IPPM

      The IPPM working group has defined in detail a set of performance
      metrics, sampling techniques and associated statistics for
      transport level measurements.  The IPPM framework document [1]
      discusses numerous issues around samplying techniques, clock
      accuracy, resolution and skew, wire time versus host time, error
      analysis, etc.  Much of these are considerations for Configuration
      and Implementation Issues discussed below.  The IPPM working group
      has defined several metrics and their associated statistics,
      including

      + a connectivity metric [5]

      + one-way delay metric [6]

      + one-way loss metric [7]

      + round trip delay and loss metrics [8]




Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      + delay variation metric [9]

      + a streaming media metric [10]

      + a throughput metric [11] and [12], and

      + others are under development.

   These (or a subset) could form the basis for a set of active,
   transport-level, probe types designed for the purpose of monitor the
   quality of transport services.  A consideration of some of these
   metrics may form a set of work activites in a new working group
   developing active probe monitoring capabilities and a set of early
   deliverables out of such a working group.

5.2 DISMAN

   The DISMAN working group is defining a set of 'active' tools for
   remote management.  Of relevance to this draft are:

      + the pingMIB [3],

      + the DNS Lookup MIB [3],

      + the tracerouteMIB [3], and

      + the scriptsMIB [4].

   The pingMIB and tracerouteMIB define an active probe capability,
   primarily for the remote determination of path and path connectivity.
   There are some performance related metrics collected from the pingMIB
   and one could conceivably use these measurements for the evaluation
   of a limited set of performance statistics.  But there is a
   fundamental difference in determining connectivity versus determining
   the quality of that connectivity.  The DNS Lookup MIB also includes
   some probe-like capabilities and performance time measurements for
   the DNS lookup.

   In the context of performance monitoring, a fault can be viewed as
   not performing at all.  Therefore, tThey should both be monitorable
   with the same probes to reduce network traffic.  This was discussed
   further in the Architecture section above.

   Also mentioned in the Architecture section above, the scriptsMIB
   allows a network management application to distribute and manage
   scripts to remote devices.  Conceivably, these scripts could be
   designed to run a set of active probe monitors on remote devices.




Cole, et al.                                                   [Page 9]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   One possible outcome we would like to consider is the extension of
   the DISMAN work to monitoring of the quality of the connectivity.

5.3 RMON

   The RMON working group has developed a extensive, passive monitoring
   capability defined in [2], [13], ...  Initially, the monitors
   collected statistics at the MAC layer, but has now been extended to
   high-layer statistics.  Higher-layer statistics are identified
   through the definition of a Protocol Directory [2].  The working
   group is recently re-chartered and is now concentrating on, amoung
   other items, passive monitoring at the application level.

   {Comment: Is this statement true, that the RMON group is totally
   under the passive approach category?}

   The minutes of the Boston interim meeting in January 2000 are the
   best source right now for information about what these activities in
   the RMON WG [19].  A number of individual drafts exist which discuss
   a number of interesting areas such as:

      + application typing and relevant metrics [14] and [15]

      + transaction level statistics collection and reporting [15] and
      [16]

   One possible outcome we would like to consider is the extension of
   the RMON work as it relates to application monitoring.  Further, RMON
   MIB data can be correlated with active probes actions.

5.4 ApplMIB

   The ApplMIB working group defined a series of MIBs which monitor
   various aspects of applications, processes and services.

   The system application MIB (RFC 2287 [20]) describes a basic set of
   managed objects for fault, configuration and performance management
   of applications from a systems perspective.  More specifically, the
   managed objects it defines are restricted to information that can be
   determined from the system itself and which does not require special
   instrumentation within the applications to make the information
   available.

   The Application MIB (RFC 2564 [17]) complements the System
   Application MIB, providing for the management of applications' common
   attributes which could not typically be observed without the
   cooperation of the software being managed. There are attributes which
   provide information to application and communication performance.



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 10]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   {Comment: Should we include a list of attributes?}

   The WWW MIB (RFC 2594 [18]) describes a set of objects for managing
   network management protocols in the Internet Community, particularly
   World Wide Web (WWW) services. Performance attributes are available
   for the infomration about each WWW service, each each type of
   request, each type of response and top accessed documents.

   {Comment: Should we include a list of attributes?}

   In the development of synthetic application-level probes,
   consideration should be given to the relationship of the application
   MIBs to the measurements being performed through a synthetic
   application-level probe.  Similar, cross-indexing issues arise within
   the context of the RMON monitoring and synthetic application-level
   active probes.

5.5 RTFM

   {Comment: This section is to discuss the relevant aspects of the RTFM
   working group to this draft.}

6. Configuration Issues

   It is primarily assumed within this memo that the configuration of
   the probes is accessable through a MIB and communications to the
   remote probe is via SNMP.  Other options, exist; one such option was
   briefly discussed above in the Architecture section.

   The remainder of this section focuses on various configuration issues
   surrounding the definition and development of an active probe
   capability.  Here we discuss a) sampling methodologies, b) useful
   probe configuration options, c) statistics, reporting and historical
   data, and d) correlation of results to other measurements.

6.1 Sampling

   {Comment: This section should cover frequency, interpacket times
   (deterministic, random), timeouts, number of packets sent, probe
   lifetime, etc.  This section should also include reasonable defaults
   and recommended ranges for polling intervals and retries. For
   instance it may be fine for ping to have a 1 second retry. But for
   higher level applications we may not want to allow 1 second retries.
   }

6.2 Probe Configurations

   The configuration of the specific probes can be quite extensive,



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 11]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   given all of the potential options.  The options would cover areas
   such as:

      + static, read only information related to the implementation of
      the active probes,

      + timing and frequency of the probe packets (see Sampling section
      above),

      + data configuration (payload size, data fill, etc),

      + protocol options (could include multiple layers of protocol
      processing),

      + path configuration options (source and destination addresses,
      TOS field settings, do not fragment settings, ifNumber, TTL,
      etc.), and

      + others?

6.3 Statistics, Reports and Historical Data

      {Comments: This section should cover the statistics computed
      locally, the nature of the reports generated, and the storage of
      historical data.  Reference [16] has a good discussion of a
      general set of statistics to maintain in probes, the complexities
      involved and the utility of the various statistics.  Also, the
      work of the IPPM working group and their specific documents
      discusses or recommends statistics related to the metrics they
      define.  This should be covered in this section.}

6.4 Indexing to Other Measurements

      There will potentially be a great deal of performance related
      information collected across numerous MIBs.  The definition of a
      set of active probes only adds to this data.  Methods are
      available within subsets of this data to cross-correlate results
      through standard indexing tables.  Various MIBs from the Appl
      working group, i.e., [17], [18], and [20], are related through a
      service instance identifier.  To quote [18], "The WWW Service MIB
      interfaces to the Application MIB [17] by using the service
      instance identifier {applSrvIndex} for wwwServiceIndex if an
      applicable instance of applSrvIndex is available."  The discussion
      and early drafts from the RMON working group, i.e., [16] and [14],
      discuss the relationship between the metrics of application-level
      and transport-level measurements and their cross-indexing.  To
      quote [16], ....




Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 12]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      {Comment: Get quote from [16].}

      The definition of active probes and their related statistics
      should be defined in such a way that useful cross-correlation of
      results is possible.

      This type of correlation is currently possible for certain
      definitions of "service" in RFC 2564 [17].  For instance in
      Section 6.1 or RFC 2594 [18] indicates that for long lived
      services like http and smtp there would be instances in the
      service-level tables.  For finger there may not be an entry.  From
      here we can determine the reference points back to system
      application MIB and deteremine all of the information about the
      application.

      Clearly, it would be desirable to be able to correlate, e.g., the
      results of a synthetic application probe running on a remote
      device into an application server with the measurements found
      within the applMIB for that same application running on that
      server.  To take this example further, then to correlate the
      applications-level probe's measurements to transport-level
      measurments and even to the individual component level.  This
      would require the ability to relate the path of the probes to the
      specific components, which may be complicated due to asymmetries
      in routing, load balancing across paths and servers, etc.

7. Implementation Issues

      Implementation of active probes and their corresponding
      measurements is a tricky business, as discussed in detail in the
      body of the IPPM WG documents, in particular references [1] and
      [6].  In this section we reinforce some of the discussion in these
      references in the area of measurement accuracy, etc.
      Specifically, we discuss a) requirements on implementations, b)
      error analysis statements, and c) compliance tests.

7.1 Requirements on Implementations

      {Comment: This section should discuss potential requirements on
      specific implementations.  Areas to cover include clock
      resolution, and skew, types of packet injection process supported,
      requirements on the upper and lower bounds on packet generation
      rates, etc.}

7.2 Error Analysis Statements

      Performance measurements, whether they are based on active or
      passive monitoring, are error prone.  It may make sense to define



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 13]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      an error analysis statement/methodolgy so that implementations can
      clearly define their source of errors and hence the accuracy of
      their results.  There is a fair amount of discussion within the
      IPPM framework document surrounding this issue, which should be
      drawn upon extensively.

7.3 Compliance Tests

      {Comment: this section should cover identifying supported probe
      types, test to determine the accuracy of the specific
      implementations, etc.}

8. Next Steps

      There are several steps to move this work forward.  A BOF is being
      held in Adelaide to discuss this area of work as a potential basis
      for a working group at the IETF.  Here we throw out some thoughts
      on moving this work forward.  This includes a proposed set of
      possible deliverables for the working group.

      + The first step is to have the BOF and see what momentum is
      gained from it.  At that point it will likely be more clear what
      the next steps should be, where the work will be done within the
      IETF and so forth.

      If the decision is to move forward, we suspect several documents
      may be reasonable.  For example, we suggest:

      + Develop a framework/architecture document defining the
      architecture of an active performance monitoring capability, its
      tradeoffs relative to other potential architecures, and its
      relationship to other, already defined monitoring capabilities.

      + (possibly) Develop a seperate security document,

      + Develop a MIB for active probes and another for a usage of that
      MIB for some specific network or application layer.  To accomplish
      the later, then

      + Define a set of transport level metrics, drawing from the work
      of the IPPM working group for the purpose of defining assocaited
      active, transport-level probes.

      + Develop a set of related transport level performance probes.
      These may require a document defining the metrics and a common
      structure for the transport level probes, with a method for
      extending this to include other transport level probes (as alluded
      to in the above bullet).  Then the seperate transport-level probes



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 14]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


      may be seperately defined.

      + If interest merits it, there may be a set documents surrounding
      the definition of synthetic application-level probes.


9. Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

10. Security Considerations

   {Comment: This needs a very close examination, probably more than
   usual.  Some security issues are briefly mentioned in the
   Architecture section above, but the issue of security was one of the
   reasons for this work being deferred in the past.  We may want to
   create a special document or a special section in this document that
   deals with the issue.}

11. Acknowledgements

   to be supplied.

12. References:

   [1] Paxson, V., Almes, G., Mahdavi, J. and M. Mathis, "Framework for
   IP Performance Metrics", RFC 2330, May 1998.

   [2] Waldbusser, S., "Remote Network Monitoring Management Information
   Base Version 2 using SMIv2", RFC 2021, January 1997.



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 15]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   [3] White, K., "Definitions of Managed Objects for Remote Ping,
   Traceroute, and Lookup Operations", Internet Draft, <draft-ieft-
   disman-reops-mib-07.txt>, August 1999.

   [4] Levi, D. and J. Schoenwaelder, "DDDefinitions of Managed Objects
   for the Delegation of Management Scripts", RFC 2592, May 1999.

   [5] IPPM connectivity metric (?)

   [6] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S. and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way Delay
   Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999.

   [7] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S. and M. Zekauskas, "A One-Way Packet Loss
   Metric for IPPM", Internet Draft, <draft-ietf-ippm-loss-07.txt>, May
   1999.

   [8] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S. and M. Zekauskas, "A Round-Trip Delay
   Metric for IPPM", RFC 2681, September 1999.

   [9] Chimento, P., "Instantaneous PPPacket Delay Variation Metric for
   IPPM", Internet Draft, <draft-ietf-ippm-ipdv-04.txt., October 1999.

   [10] Raisanen, V. and G. Grotefeld, "Network Performance Measurement
   for Periodic Streams", Internet Draft, <draft-ietf-ippm-
   npmps-00.txt>, March 2000.

   [11] Mathis, M. and M. Allman, "Empirical Bulk Transfer Capacity",
   Internet Draft, <draft-ietf-ippm-btc-framework-02.txt>, Octobet 1999.

   [12] Mathis, M., "TReno Bulk transfer Capacity", Internet Draft,
   <draft-ietf-ippm-treno-btc-03.txt>, February 1999.

   [13] Waldbusser, S., "Remote Network Monitoring Management
   Information Base", RFC 1757, February 1995.

   [14] Waldbusser, S., "Application performance measurement MIB",
   <draft-waldbusser-apm-mib-00.txt>, March 2000.

   [15] Warth, A. and J. McQuaid, "Application Response Time (ART) MIB",
   Internet Draft, <draft-warth-art-mib-01.txt>, October 1999.

   [16] Dietz, R. "Transport Performance Metrics MIB", Internet Draft,
   <draft-dietz-tpm-mib-00.txt>, March 2000.

   [17] Kalbfleisch, C., Krupczak, C., Presuhn, R. and J. Saperia,
   "Application Management MIB", RFC 2564, May 1999.

   [18] Hazewinkel, H., Kalbfleisch, C., and J. Schoenwaelder,



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 16]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   "Definitions of Managed Objects for WWW Services", RFC 2594, May
   1999.

   [19] Meeting minutes from the interim meeting of the RMON working
   group on January 11 and 12, 2000 in Boston, MA.

   [20] Krupczak, C. and J. Saperia, "Definitions of System-Level
   Managed Objects for Applications", RFC 2287, February 1998.

13. Author Information

      Robert G. Cole
      AT&T Laboratories
      Network Design and Performance Analysis Department
      330 Saint John Street, 2nd Floor
      Havre de Grace, MD  21078

      Phone: +1 410-939-8732
      Fax: +1 410-939-8732
      Email: rgcole@att.com


      Carl W. Kalbfleisch
      Verio, Inc.
      1950 Stemmons Freeway
      Suite 2026
      Dallas, TX 75207

      Phone: + 1 214-853-7339
      Fax: +1 214-744-0742
      Email: cwk@verio.net


      Dan Romascanu
      Lucent Technologies
      Atidim Technology Park, bldg. #3
      Tel Aviv, 61131
      Israel

      Phone: +972-3-645-8414
      Fax: +972-3-648-7146
      Email: dromasca@lucent.com

A.  Full Copyright Statement

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published



Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 17]

Internet Draft           draft-cole-appm-00.txt               March 2000


   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.































Cole, et al.                                                  [Page 18]

