


NSIS Working Group                                        M. Stiemerling
Internet-Draft                                                M. Brunner
Expires: December 21, 2006                                           NEC
                                                           June 19, 2006


               Additional Communication Patterns for NSIS
                 draft-stiemerling-nsis-mrm-patterns-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The General Internet Signaling Transport (GIST) protocol defines two
   message routing methods.  These methods are used by the currently
   defined NSIS Signaling Layer Protocols to route their messages.  This
   message routing method mechanism opens the space for supporting
   multiple communication patterns.  This memo describes the usage of
   the additional communication patterns with GIST's message routing
   method mechanism.




Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Patterns and Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Echo Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Path-directed Pattern  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   3.  Integration in GIST  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   4.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


1.  Introduction

   Various applications require network support including QoS and NAT
   traversal as defined in the NSIS WG.  Naturally a number of other
   applications require network support as well.  Various network
   management applications [2] or overlay node detection [3] are
   examples, that require network support to locate network nodes with a
   particular property.  Typically, a centralized database would be used
   to match the required property with a node and to learn about how to
   reach that node.  This type of query can be scoped saying which IP
   address or in IP address space the node should be located.  However,
   this requires to know what the retrieved information about IP
   addresses mean in term of their location within the network topology.
   Whenever an application needs to find a node with a particular
   property close to the application's node or close to the data path
   between two nodes of that application, a better lookup service is
   needed.

   An existing example of a protocol that is locating nodes on the data
   path with a particular property is the General Internet Signaling
   Transport (GIST) protocol, as defined in [1].  Simplified said, GIST
   runs from a sender to the destination and locates GIST nodes running
   an NSIS Service Layer Protocol (NSLP) entity, i.e., a particular
   service.  Those services are currently QoS signaling entities or NAT/
   Firewall control entities, the QoS NSLP and NATFW NSLP respectively.

   The routing of GIST messages carrying the NSLP messages is defined by
   the message routing method (MRM) of GIST.  The MRM defines how to
   route the message through the network.  Currently, a path-coupled
   message transport is provided by the path-coupled message routing
   method (PCMRM) and the loose-end message routing method (LEMRM).
   Both MRMs will find GIST nodes located on the data path but GIST
   nodes located close to the path will not be found.

   The memo suggests to define other types of MRMs that also support a
   message routing that is not necessarily path-coupled as defined by
   the PCMRM and the LEMRM.  These base patterns are a basic
   communication scheme, without specifying the application or
   functionality performing on the nodes.  Therefore, a pattern would
   support base communication taking into account the topology of the
   network only.  Similar to NSLPs, various other NSLPs or applications
   implementing certain functions to be performed on the visited nodes
   need to be defined.  Different NSLPs or applications require a
   different pattern for finding its way through the network topology.
   Finally, it should be noted that patterns are inherently distributed
   and must be defined for correct and robust behavior, as one that has
   been done and experimented with it, the patterns can then be reused.




Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


   The next Section 2 gives some use cases for other types of MRM and
   Section 3 describes a preliminary integration into the MRM mechanism
   of GIST.
















































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


2.  Patterns and Use Cases

2.1.  Echo Pattern

   Searching a network node is typically not limited to a path-coupled
   search as currently defined by GIST's MRMs.  For some applications it
   is more interesting to locate nodes that are located close to the
   application's node or close to path between two peers. [2] describes
   a network search pattern for decentralized network management, where
   a nodes is issuing a so called echo pattern.  The echo pattern refers
   to a network search starting from a single point and then
   distributing in rings from the center with a configurable diameter.

   A node can locate other nodes with its vicinity with this kind of
   echo pattern, i.e., other network management stations of nodes to be
   managed.  Furthermore, this type of pattern is interesting for the
   discovery of nodes belonging to peer-to-peer networks.  Typical peer-
   to-peer networks require some sort of entry point to connect to the
   peer-to-peer network.  This entry point can be a file with in
   advanced collected IP addresses of other peers, a single server, or a
   server that gives the seed for connecting to a distributed lookup
   services.

2.2.  Path-directed Pattern

   The basic idea of this pattern is to limit the scope of the search to
   a configurable area along the end-to-end path between the
   communicating peers.  The search pattern uses a parameter that
   defines the "distance" (e.g. in number of hops off the data path)
   from the routing path that should be searched.  This distance is also
   referred to as sideway expansion.  Depending on the type of resource
   or function that is searched, this parameter can be changed.  See
   also [3].

   The path-directed search pattern starts from the source node and
   expands along the end-to-end routing path towards the destination
   nodes with a sideway expansion of a given distance.  After visiting
   the nodes defined by the pattern scope, the pattern contracts towards
   the source node gathering the requested information (depending on the
   resources/service we are looking for).  The sideway expansion
   parameter of the pattern controls the scope of the search and thus
   limits the number of nodes probed during the detection.  Above all,
   it allows the discovery of network-side resources along a close
   approximation of the routing path.  However, note that the pattern
   itself does not define the application as described, but the search
   would be an example suitable to perform on the NSLP level, and would
   naturally need to be further defined.




Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


3.  Integration in GIST

   The routing of GIST messages is defined by the used message routing
   method (MRM) as defined in [1] Section 5.8.  Within the MRM mechanism
   it is possible to define different algorithms for discovering the
   route that signaling messages should take.  Therefore, we propose to
   extend the MRM space of GIST by the two described patterns
   (Section 2.1 and Section 2.2).  For each of them, the parameters and
   the semantics of the message routing need to defined.

   The straightforward way is to start with the path-directed pattern,
   because it is a derivation of the already defined path-coupled MRM.
   The basic communication pattern would be unchanged, i.e., the
   signaling must follow the end-to-end path from source to destination.
   The sideway expansion needs to be defined in terms of which elements
   are needed for the routing and in terms of when the GIST messaging
   associations are instantiated.

   The exact definition of the MRM is to be done in future revisions of
   this memo.































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


4.  Conclusions

   This memo discussed two new communication patterns that are quite
   useful for decentralized network management applications and in peer-
   to-peer networks.  These two new patterns can be seamlessly
   integrated into GIST by using the already defined message routing
   method mechanism.












































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations are to be done.
















































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H. and R. Hancock, "GIST: General Internet
        Signaling Transport", draft-ietf-nsis-ntlp-09 (work in
        progress), February 2006.

6.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Lim, K., Adam, C., and R. Stadler, "Decentralizing Network
        Management", IEEE electronic Transac-tions on Network and
        Service Management (eTNSM), Vol 1(2), 2004.

   [3]  Asmare, E., Schmid, S., and M. Brunner, "Setup and Maintenance
        of Overlay Networks for Multimedia Services in Mobile
        Environments", 8th International Conference on Management of
        Multimedia Networks and Services,  Barcelona, Spain.,
        October 2005.
































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Stiemerling
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 113
   Email: stiemerling@netlab.nec.de


   Marcus Brunner
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 129
   Email: brunner@netlab.nec.de































Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             NSIS Additional MRM                 June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stiemerling & Brunner   Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 11]


