

Megaco WG                                                     J. Bouwen
Internet Draft                                                  Alcatel
Document: <draft-bouwen-megaco-isdn-pack-01.txt>          February 2001
Category: Informational


                        ISDN Package for Megaco


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   This draft introduces a Megaco package to support voip access
   gateways with ISDN terminations. The package defines
   TerminationState properties for ISDN terminations.

2. ISDN Package Description

   Package Name: isdnpack
   Package ID: ISDN (0x00xx)
        Version: 1
        Extends: none
        Description:
          This package defines properties for ISDN basic and primary
          rate terminations, and events/signals for layer 1
          activation/deactivation

   PROPERTIES

   Channel Type
        PropertyID: chantype (0x0001)
        Description:
          Identifies the type of ISDN channel for a ISDN termination
        Type: Enumeration
        Possible Values:
          "BA D"        D-channel in basic access interface

Bouwen                      Expires August

Internet Draft         ISDN Package for Megaco          November 2000


          "BA B"        B-channel in basic access interface
          "PRA2048 D"   D-channel in 2048kbit primary rate interface
          "PRA2048 B"   B-channel in 2048kbit primary rate interface
          "PRI1544 D"   D-channel in 1544kbit primary rate interface
          "PRI1544 B"   B-channel in 1544kbit primary rate interface
        Defined in: TerminationState
        Characteristics: Read


   Q.931 Interface Identifier
        PropertyID: interfaceid (0x0002)
        Description:
          Contains the binary interface identifier used in Q.931
          Messages when a D-channel in a PRI has been provisioned to
          act as signalling channel for several PRIs.
        Type: Double
        Possible Values: operator-dependent
        Defined in: TerminationState
        Characteristics: Read

   Associated D-channel
        PropertyID: assocd (0x0003)
        Description:
          Contains the name of the D-channel termination that is
          associated with this B-channel
        Type: String
        Possible Values:
        Defined in: TerminationState

   Activation Policy
        PropertyID: permact (0x0004)
        Description:
          Specifies if the Basic Interface is permanently activated, or
          if the activation/deactivation procedure should be followed.
        Type: Boolean
        Possible Values:
          True: permanent activation is installed
          False: activation/de-activation procedure necessary
        Defined in: TerminationState
        Characteristics: Read



3. References



4. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Bart Van Doorselaer, Miek Dekeyser, Johan Van Dun, Anders
   Lopez.



Bouwen                   Expires August 2001                        2

Internet Draft         ISDN Package for Megaco          November 2000


5. Author's Addresses

   Jan Bouwen
   Alcatel
   F. Wellesplein 1
   B-2000 Antwerpen
   Belgium
   Email: jan.bouwen@alcatel.be















































Bouwen                   Expires August 2001                        3

Internet Draft         ISDN Package for Megaco          November 2000



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into







































Bouwen                   Expires August 2001                        4
