





Network Working Group                                 C. Huitema (INRIA)
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     S. Thomson (Bellcore)
<draft-ietf-sip-sippdns-00.txt>                             October 1993


                   Extensions to DNS to support SIPP


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts).

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
   Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.


Abstract

   SIPP is an internet protocol intended as the replacement for IP
   version 4. SIPP addresses differ from IP addresses in that they are
   at least 64 bits long and may be extended in multiples of 64 bits.
   This specification describes the modifications that need to be made
   to DNS to store SIPP addresses and to support the transition from use
   of IP to use of SIPP.



1.  INTRODUCTION


   SIPP is an internet protocol intended as the replacement for IP ver-
   sion 4. SIPP addresses differ from IP addresses in that they are at
   least 64 bits long and may be extended in multiples of 64 bits.  This
   specification describes the modifications that need to be made to DNS
   to store SIPP addresses and support the transition from use of IP to



SIPP WG, Expires April 30, 1994                                 [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT                  SIPP DNS                    October 1993


   use of SIPP.

   In this specification, we introduce a new resource record (RR) type
   to store a SIPP address and a new domain to form inverse lookups on
   an address. We also describe modifications to existing RR definitions
   and resolvers/applications to support IP, SIPP and dual-stack hosts
   during transition.  The transition of DNS itself from being an IP-
   only service to supporting both IP and SIPP is also discussed.



2.  Storing SIPP Addresses





2.1.  ASEQ type value


   The ASEQ RR is a new Internet-specific RR added to store a SIPP
   address. Pending assignment by IANA, the provisional type value used
   is 64.



2.2.  ASEQ data format


   SIPP addresses are encoded as a sequence of 64-bit words in the RDATA
   section of a record:
           +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
           /                  ASEQ                            /
           /                                                  /
           +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

      where:

      ASEQ   One or more 64-bit words containing a SIPP address


   Hosts that have multiple SIPP addresses will have multiple ASEQ RRs.
   Type ASEQ RRs cause no additional section processing.  The RDATA sec-
   tion of an ASEQ line in a master file is a SIPP address expressed in
   its textual format, yet to be defined. In this draft, an address is



SIPP WG, Expires April 30, 1994                                 [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT                  SIPP DNS                    October 1993


   written as a sequence of hex digits, separated by colons after every
   4 digits, e.g. 0bcd:0000:1234:5678.



2.3.  Inverse Domain


   A special domain is needed to map a SIPP address to a hostname.
   Pending assignment by IANA, the domain is provisionally rooted at
   SIPP-ADDR.ARPA.

   Domain names in the SIPP-ADDR.ARPA domain have a variable number of
   labels with suffix "SIPP-ADDR.ARPA". The low-order 32-bits of a SIPP
   address are represented by four labels, one per octet. The labels are
   expressed as a character string for a decimal value in the range 0-FF
   with leading zeroes omitted except in the case of a null value which
   is represented by a single zero.  The higher order parts of the
   address have labels that represent two octets each.  Each label is
   expressed as a character string for a hex value in the range 0-FFFF
   with leading zeroes omitted except in the case of a null value which
   is represented by a single zero.  For example, an address in hex of
           0bcd:0000:8060:2105
   would be represented by
           5.33.96.128.0.bcd.SIP-ADDR.ARPA



3.  IP-to-SIPP Transition


   During transition, some hosts will have IP addresses only, others
   SIPP addresses only and others both addresses.  DNS must support all
   three cases efficiently.  Moreover, some name servers will have been
   modified to support SIPP and IP address records, and others not. This
   section discusses the modifications required to support the use of
   two different address spaces efficiently. It also discusses how tran-
   sition of the name service itself is expected to take place and the
   assumptions made about existing implementations for this to work.



3.1.  Resolver/Application Extensions


   Since it is in general not known whether a host is IP or SIPP before



SIPP WG, Expires April 30, 1994                                 [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT                  SIPP DNS                    October 1993

   its address is looked up in DNS, resolvers or application alibraries
   must be modified to query for both types of address.  This change
   affects both full-service resolvers and stub resolvers (or the appli-
   cation libraries that use them). In particular, full-service
   resolvers need to determine the SIPP or IP addresses of name servers
   to be contacted during a lookup.



3.2.  Modifications to other RR types


   To enable efficient operation, all RR types that perform type A addi-
   tional section processing, i.e.  NS, MX and MB record types, must be
   redefined to perform both type A and type ASEQ additional section
   processing. Additional section processing is thus useful whether a
   host named in one of these records has an IP address, a SIPP address
   or both.



3.3.  DNS Transition


   During transition, there will be name servers modified to support
   both SIPP and IP address records and unmodified name servers that
   store IP addresses only.  Any zone that has a SIPP host must have a
   name server that stores SIPP records. IP-only zones may or may not
   have a SIPP-modified name server.  Parents of SIPP-modified name
   servers should be converted to store SIPP address records as quickly
   as possible (if they have not been converted already) so that they
   cache these records when the opportunity arises.



3.4.  Assumptions Made


   This transition scheme assumes existing IP name servers have been
   implemented to accept requests for RR types that they do not recog-
   nize, and that IP resolvers ignore all RR types received that they
   do not understand. In particular, an unmodified resolver that
   receives a SIPP address as part of additional section processing
   should ignore it.



SIPP WG, Expires April 30, 1994                                 [Page 4]
