




     IRTF Routing Research Group                        F. Kastenholz, 
     Internet Draft                                               (ed) 
     Document <draft-irtf-routing-reqs-groupa-      Unisphere Networks 
     00.txt>                                                April 2002 
     Category: Informational 


                     Requirements For a Next Generation  
                     Routing and Addressing Architecture 
                  < draft-irtf-routing-reqs-groupa-00.txt> 


     Status of this Memo 

        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
        with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts.  Internet-Drafts are draft 
        documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, 
        replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is 
        inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material or 
        to cite them other than as "work in progress."  

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
        at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 






















       
     Kastenholz (ed)    Informational - Expires 10/2002                  1 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      


     Table of Contents 

        1 Abstract...................................................3 

        2 Conventions used in this document..........................3 

        3 Requirements...............................................4 

         3.1  Architecture..........................................4 

         3.2  Separable Components..................................5 

         3.3  Scalable..............................................6 

         3.4  Lots of Interconnectivity.............................7 

         3.5  Random Structure......................................8 

         3.6  Multi-homing..........................................9 

         3.7  Multi-path............................................9 

         3.8  Convergence..........................................10 

         3.9  Routing System Security..............................12 

         3.10 End Host Security....................................14 

         3.11 Rich Policy..........................................14 

          3.11.1 Routing Information Policies......................14 

          3.11.2 Traffic Control Policies..........................15 

         3.12 Incremental Deployment...............................16 

         3.13 Mobility.............................................16 

         3.14 Address Portability..................................17 

         3.15 Multi-Protocol.......................................17 

         3.16 Abstraction..........................................17 

         3.17 Simplicity...........................................18 

         3.18 Robustness...........................................18 

         3.19 Media Independence...................................19 

         3.20 Stand-alone..........................................19 

         3.21 Safety of Configuration..............................19 

         3.22 Renumbering..........................................19 

         3.23 Multi-prefix.........................................19 

         3.24 Cooperative Anarchy..................................19 

         3.25 Network Layer Protocols and Forwarding Model.........20 

         3.26 Routing Algorithm....................................20 

         3.27 Positive Benefit.....................................20 

         3.28 Administrative Entities and the IGP/EGP Split........20 

        4 Non-Requirements..........................................21 

         4.1  Forwarding Table Optimization........................21 

         4.2  Traffic Engineering..................................21 

         4.3  Multicast............................................22 

         4.4  QOS..................................................22 

         4.5  IP Prefix Aggregation................................22 

         4.6  Perfect Safety.......................................23 

         4.7  Dynamic Load Balancing...............................23 

         4.8  Renumbering of hosts and routers.....................23 

         4.9  Host Mobility........................................23 

         4.10 Clean Slate..........................................24 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  2 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

        5 Discussion of other Inter-Domain Routing Requirements 

        documents....................................................24 

         5.1  Comments on "Architectural Requirements for Inter-Domain 

         Routing in the Internet"..................................24 

         5.2  Comments on "Future Domain Routing Requirements".....25 

        6 Security Considerations...................................28 

        7 IANA Considerations.......................................28 

        8 References................................................28 

        9 Acknowledgments...........................................28 

        10           Editor's Addresses........................................29 

         



     1  Abstract 


        This note sets requirements for a new routing and addressing 
        architecture for the Internet.  These requirements were 
        developed by the IRTF's Routing Research Group. 

        This draft is the product of Group ~B, which is one of the 
        subgroups in the IRTF-Routing Research Group working on 
        requirements for routing solutions for the future.  This 
        document sets out requirements that we believe are important 
        for a future routing architecture and routing protocols.  The 
        IRTF Routing Research Group (RRG) does not endorse this set of 
        requirements or any other set of requirements as the one and 
        only set of requirements. 

        The seemingly simple requirement is to "fix routing and 
        addressing".  However, in order to "fix" it, we also need to 
        understand how routing and addressing are _actually_ used 
        today.  This is not a straightforward task.  Service providers 
        and network administrators have many different operational and 
        administrative needs.  Quite often, the only tool available to 
        meet those needs is the routing system and they have proven 
        amazingly crafty at using that tool in ways that were never 
        envisioned.  Thus, one of the most important steps in 
        developing these requirements has been to learn what the 
        operational community really is doing with the routing system, 
        why they are doing it, and then abstracting those tasks into 
        requirements. 



     2  Conventions used in this document 


        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
        NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and 
        "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
        in RFC-2119 [2]. 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  3 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        We believe that we have captured the essential requirements for 
        one possible future routing and addressing architecture for the 
        Internet.  We do not consider features, functions, or 
        capabilities not described in this note to be critically 
        important for a future routing and addressing architecture and 
        they should be considered optional.  A specific architecture 
        MAY include OR exclude them without conflicting with this note. 

        There are many IETF documents that define specific terms.  We 
        generally choose not to use these strict, well-crafted, 
        definitions.  They were made with the current architecture and 
        protocols in mind.  A goal of this work is to foster 
        development of new and different architectures.  By using the 
        "old" terms we may inadvertently limit or constrain avenues of 
        enquiry and investigation, possibly preventing consideration of 
        promising architectures. 



     3  Requirements 


        This chapter presents the requirements. 

        The requirements presented in this section are NOT presented in 
        any order.  A later version of this note may order the 
        requirements in some kind of priority. 


     3.1 Architecture 


        The new routing and addressing protocols, data structures, and 
        algorithms MUST be developed from a clear, well thought out, 
        documented, architecture. 

        The new routing and addressing system must have an 
        architectural specification which describes all of the routing 
        and addressing elements, their interactions, what functions the 
        system performs, and how it goes about performing them.  The 
        architectural specification does not go into issues such as 
        protocol and data structure design. 

        The Architecture SHOULD be agnostic with regard to specific 
        algorithms and protocols. 

        Doing architecture before doing detailed protocol design is 
        good engineering practice.  This allows the architecture to be 
        reviewed and commented upon, with changes made as necessary, 
        when it is still easy to do so.  Also, by producing an 
        architecture, the eventual users of the protocols (the 
        operations community) will have a better understanding of how 
        the designers of the protocols meant them to be used. 




       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  4 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     3.2 Separable Components 


        The architecture MUST place different functions into separate 
        components. 

        Separating functions, capabilities, and so forth, into 
        individual components, and making each component "stand alone" 
        is generally considered by system architects to be "A Good 
        Thing".  It allows individual elements of the system to be 
        designed and tuned to do their jobs "very well".  It also 
        allows for piecemeal replacement and upgrading of elements as 
        new technologies and algorithms become available. 

        The architecture MUST have the ability to replace or upgrade 
        existing components, and to add new ones, without disrupting 
        the remaining parts of the system.  Operators must be able to 
        roll out these changes and additions incrementally (i.e. no 
        "flag days").  These abilities are needed to allow the 
        architecture to evolve as the Internet changes. 

        The Architecture Specification shall define each of these 
        components, their jobs, and their interactions.  

        Some thoughts to consider along these lines are 

          o Making topology and addressing separate subsystems.  This 
             may allow highly optimized topology management and 
             discovery without constraining the addressing structure or 
             physical topology in unacceptable ways. 

          o Separate "fault detection and healing" from basic 
             topology.  From Mike O'Dell: 
               "Historically the same machinery is used for both.  
               While attractive for many reasons, the availability of 
               exogenous topology information (i.e., the intended 
               topology) should, it seems, make some tasks easier than 
               the general case of starting with zero knowledge.  It 
               certainly helps with recovery in the case of constraint 
               satisfaction.  In fact, the intended topology is a 
               powerful way to state certain kinds of policy. 

          o Making policy definition and application a separate 
             subsystem, layered overtop of the others. 

        The architecture should also separate topology. routing and 
        addressing from the application that use those components.  
        This implies that applications such as policy definition, 
        forwarding, and circuit and tunnel management are separate 
        subsystems layered overtop of the basic topology, routing, and 
        addressing systems. 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  5 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     3.3 Scalable 


        Scaling is the primary problem facing the routing and 
        addressing architecture today.  This problem must be solved and 
        it must be solved for the long term.  

        The Architecture MUST support a large and complex network.  
        Ideally, it will serve our needs for the next 20 years.  
        Unfortunately 
        1.   We do not  know how big the Internet will grow over that 
             time, and 
        2.   The architecture developed from these requirements may 
             change the fundamental structure of the Internet, and 
             therefore its growth patterns.  This change makes it 
             difficult to predict future growth patterns of the 
             Internet. 

        As a result, we can't quantify the requirement in any 
        meaningful way.  Using today's architectural elements as a 
        mechanism for describing things, we believe that the network 
        could grow to 
        1.   Tens of thousands of ASes and 
        2.   Tens to hundreds of millions  of prefixes during the 
             lifetime of this architecture. 
        These sizes are given as a 'flavor' for how we expect the 
        Internet to grow.  We fully believe that any new architecture 
        may eliminate some current architectural elements and introduce 
        new ones. 

        A new routing and addressing architecture designed to a 
        specific network size would be inappropriate.  First, the cost 
        of routing calculations is based only in part on the number of 
        AS's or prefixes in the network.  The number and locations of 
        the links in the network is also a significant factor.  Second, 
        past predictions of Internet growth and topology patterns have 
        proven to be wildly inaccurate so developing an architecture to 
        a specific size goal would at best be shortsighted. 

        Therefore we will not make the scaling requirement based on a 
        specific network size.  Instead, the new routing and addressing 
        architecture should have the ability to constrain the increase 
        in load (CPU, memory space and bandwidth, and network 
        bandwidth) on ANY SINGLE ROUTER to be less than these specific 
        functions: 

        1. The computational power and memory sizes required to execute 
           the routing protocol software and to contain the tables must 
           be less than the growth in hardware capabilities described 
           by Moore's Law, which has hardware capabilities doubling 
           every 18 months or so.  Other observations indicate that 
           memory sizes double every 2 years or so. 


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  6 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        2. Network bandwidth and latency are some key constraints on 
           how fast routing protocol updates can be disseminated (and 
           therefore how fast the routing system can adapt to changes).  
           Raw network bandwidth seems to quadruple every 3 years or 
           so.  However, it seems that there are some serious physics 
           problems in going faster than 40gbits (OC768).  We should 
           not expect raw network link speed to grow much beyond OC768.  
           In addition, for economic reasons, large swathes of the core 
           of the Internet will still operate at lower speeds, possibly 
           as slow as DS3. 

           Furthermore, in some sections of the Internet even lower 
           speed links are found.  Corporate access links are often T1, 
           or slower.  Low-speed radio links exist.  Intra-domain links 
           may be T1 or fractional-T1 (or slower). 

           Therefore, the architecture MUST NOT make assumptions about 
           the bandwidth available. 

        3. The speeds of high-speed RAMS (SRAMs, used for caches and 
           the like) are growing, though slowly.  Because of their use 
           in caches and other very specific applications, these RAMs 
           tend to be small, a few megabits, and the size of these RAMs 
           is not increasing very rapidly.   

           On the other hand, the speed of "large" memories (DRAMs) is 
           increasing even slower than that for the high speed RAMS.  
           This is because the development of these RAMs is driven by 
           the PC market, where size is very important, and low speed 
           can be made up for by better caches. 

           Memory access rates should not be expected to increase 
           significantly. 

        The growth in resources available to any one router will 
        eventually slow down.  It may even stop.  Even so, the network 
        will continue to grow.  The routing and addressing architecture 
        must continue to scale in even this extreme condition.  We 
        cannot continue to add more computing power to routers forever.  
        Other strategies must be available.  Some possible strategies 
        are hierarchy, abstraction, and aggregation of topology 
        information.. 


     3.4 Lots of Interconnectivity 


        The new routing and addressing architecture MUST be able to 
        cope with a high degree of interconnectivity in the Internet.  
        That is, there are large numbers of alternate paths and routes 
        among the various elements.  Mechanisms are required to prevent 
        this interconnectivity (and continued growth in 
        interconnectivity) from causing tables, compute time, and 
        routing protocol traffic to grow without bound.  The "cost" to 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  7 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        the routing system of an increase in complexity MUST be limited 
        in scope; sections of the network that do not see, or do not 
        care about, the complexity ought not pay the cost of that 
        complexity. 

        Over the past several years, the Internet has seen an increase 
        in interconnectivity.  Individual end sites (companies, 
        customers, etc), ISPs, exchange points, and so on, all are 
        connecting up to more "other things".  Company's multi-home to 
        multiple ISPs, ISPs peer with more ISPs, and so on.  These 
        connections are made for many reasons, such as getting more 
        bandwidth, increased reliability and availability, policy, and 
        so on.  However, this increased interconnectivity has a price.  
        It leads to more scaling problems as it increases the number of 
        AS paths in the networks. 

        Any new architecture must assume that the Internet will become 
        "meshier".  It MUST NOT assume, nor can it dictate, certain 
        patterns or limits on how various elements of the network 
        interconnect. 

        Another facet of this requirement is that there may be multiple 
        valid, loop free, paths available to a destination.  When there 
        are multiple valid, loop free, paths available, all such paths 
        MUST be available for forwarding traffic. 

        We wryly note that one of the original design goals of IP was 
        to support a large, heavily interconnected, network, which 
        would be highly survivable (such as in the face of a nuclear 
        war). 


     3.5 Random Structure 


        The routing and addressing architecture MUST NOT make any 
        constraints on or assumptions about the topology or 
        connectedness of the elements comprising the Internet.  The 
        routing and addressing architecture MUST NOT presume any 
        particular network structure.  The network does not have a 
        "nice" structure.  In the past we used to believe that there 
        was this nice "backbone/tier-1/tier-2/end-site" sort of 
        hierarchy.  This is not so.  Therefore, any new Architecture 
        must not presume any such structure. 

        Some have proposed that a geographic addressing scheme be used, 
        requiring exchange points to be situated within each geographic 
        'region'.  There are many reasons why we believe this to be a 
        bad approach, but those arguments are irrelevant.  The main 
        issue is that the routing architecture should not presume a 
        specific network structure. 




       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  8 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     3.6 Multi-homing 


        The Architecture MUST provide multi-homing for all elements of 
        the Internet.  That is, multihoming of hosts, subnetworks, end-
        sites, "low-level" ISPs, and backbones (i.e. lots of redundant 
        interconnections) must be supported.  Among the reasons to 
        multi-home are reliability, load sharing, and performance 
        tuning. 

        The term "multihoming" may be interpreted in its broadest sense 
        -- one "place" has multiple connections or links to another 
        "place". 

        The architecture MUST NOT limit the number of alternate paths 
        to a multi-homed site.   

        When multi-homing, it MUST be possible to use one, some (more 
        than one but less than all) or all of the available paths to 
        the multi-homed site.  The multi-homed site must have the 
        ability to declare which path(s) are used and under what 
        conditions (for example, one path may be declared "primary" and 
        the other "backup" and to be used only when the primary fails). 

        A current problem in the Internet is that multihoming leads to 
        undue increases in the size of the BGP routing tables.  The new 
        architecture must support multi-homing without causing undue 
        routing table growth. 


     3.7 Multi-path 


        As a corollary to multi-homing, the Architecture MUST allow for 
        multiple paths from a source to a destination to be active at 
        the same time.  These paths need not have the same attributes.  
        Policies are to be used to disseminate the attributes and to 
        classify traffic for the different paths. 

        There must be a rich "language" for use in specifying the rules 
        for classifying the traffic and assigning classes of traffic to 
        different paths (or prohibiting it from certain paths).  The 
        rules for classification should allow traffic to be classified 
        based on 
          o IPv6 FlowIDs 
          o TOS byte 
          o Source and/or Destination prefixes 
          o Random selections at some probability 
          o ... 

        A mechanism is needed that allows operators to plan and manage 
        the traffic load on the various paths.  To start, this 
        mechanism can be semi-automatic, or even manual.  Eventually it 
        ought to become fully automatic. 


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                  9 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        When multi-path forwarding is used, options must be available 
        to preserve packet ordering where appropriate (such as for 
        individual TCP connections). 

        Past experience with dynamic load-balancing and management over 
        multiple paths has been bad. Typically, traffic would 
        oscillate, first all traffic would go over one path, then it 
        would all be 'migrated' to a different path, and then back 
        again.  Significant research is needed in this area. 


     3.8 Convergence 


        The speed of convergence (also called the "stabilization time") 
        is the time it takes for a router's routing processes to come 
        up with a new, stable, "solution" (i.e. forwarding information 
        base) after a change someplace in the network.  In effect, what 
        happens is that the output of the routing calculations 
        stabilizes -- the Nth iteration of the software produces the 
        same results as the N-1th iteration. 

        The speed of convergence is generally considered to be a 
        function of the number of subnetworks in the network and the 
        amount of connections between those networks.  As either number 
        grows, the time it takes to converge increases. 

        In addition, a change can "ripple" back and forth through the 
        system.  One change can go through the system, causing some 
        other router to change its advertised connectivity, causing a 
        new change to ripple through.  These oscillations can take a 
        while to work their way out of the network.  It is also 
        possible that these ripples never die out.  In this situation 
        the routing and addressing system is unstable; it never 
        converges. 

        Finally, it is more than likely that the routers comprising the 
        Internet never converge simply because the Internet is so large 
        and complex.  Assume it takes S seconds for the routers to 
        stabilize on a solution for any one change to the network.  
        Also assume that changes occur, on average, every C seconds.  
        Because of the size and complexity of the Internet, C is now 
        less than S.  Therefore, if a change, C1, occurs at time T, the 
        routing system would stabilize at time T+S, but a new change, 
        C2, will occur at time T+C, which is before T+S.  The system 
        will start processing the new change before it's done with the 
        old. 

        This is not to say that all routers are constantly processing 
        changes.  The effects of changes are like ripples in a pond.  
        They spread outward from where they occur.  Some routers will 
        be processing just C1, others C2, others both C1 and C2, and 
        others neither. 


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 10 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        We have two separate scopes over which we can set requirements 
        with respect to convergence: 

        1. Single Change 
           In this requirement a single change of any type (link 
           addition or deletion, router failure or restart, etc.) is 
           introduced into a stabilized system.  No additional changes 
           are introduced.  The system must restabilize within TBDms.  
           This requirement is a fairly abstract one as it would be 
           impossible to test in a real network. 

        2. System-wide 
           Defining a single target for maximum convergence time for 
           the real Internet is absurd.  As we mentioned earlier, the 
           Internet is large enough and diverse enough so that it is 
           quite likely that new changes are introduced somewhere 
           before the system fully digests old ones.   

           So, the first requirement here is that there must be 
           mechanisms to limit the scope of any one change's visibility 
           and effects.  The number of routers that have to perform 
           calculations in response to a change is kept small, as is 
           the settling time. 

           The second requirement is based on the following assumptions  

               -  the scope of a change's visibility and impact can be 
                  limited.  That is, routers within that scope know of 
                  the change and recalculate their tables based on the 
                  change.  Routers outside of the scope don't see it at 
                  all. 

               -  Within any scope, S, network changes are constantly 
                  occurring and the average inter-change interval is Tc 
                  seconds. 

               -  There are Rs routers within scope S 

               -  A subset of the destinations known to the routers in 
                  S, Ds, are impacted by a given change. 

               -  We can state that for Z% of the changes, within Y% of 
                  Tc seconds after a change, C, X% of the Rs routers 
                  have their routes to Ds settled to a useful answer 
                  (useful meaning that packets can get to Ds, thought 
                  perhaps not by the optimal path -- this allows some 
                  'hunting' for the optimal solution) 

               X, Y, Z, ARE TBD 

           This requirement implies that the scopes can be kept 
           relatively small in order to minimize Rs and maximize Tc. 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 11 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        The growth rate of the convergence time MUST NOT be related to 
        the growth rate of the Internet as a whole.  This implies that 
        the convergence time either  
        1. Not be a function of basic network elements (such as 
           prefixes and links/paths), and/or 
        2. That the Internet be continuously divisible into chunks that 
           limit the scope and effect of a change, thereby limiting the 
           number of routers, prefixes, links, and so on involved in 
           the new calculations. 


     3.9 Routing System Security 


        The security of the Internet's routing system is paramount.  If 
        the routing system is compromised or attacked, the entire 
        Internet can fail.  This is unacceptable.  Any new Architecture 
        must be secure. 

        Architectures by themselves are not secure.  It is the 
        implementation of an architecture; its protocols, algorithms, 
        and data structures, that are secure.  These requirements apply 
        primarily to the implementation.  The architecture MUST provide 
        the elements that the implementation needs to meet these 
        security requirements.  Also, the architecture MUST NOT prevent 
        these security requirements from being met. 

        Security means different things to different people.  In order 
        for this requirement to be useful, we must define what we mean 
        by security.  We do this by identifying the attackers and 
        threats we wish to protect against.  They are:  

        Masquerading 
           The system, including its protocols, MUST be secure against 
           intruders adopting the identity of other known, trusted, 
           elements of the routing system and then using that position 
           of trust for carrying out other attacks.  Protocols MUST use 
           cryptographically strong authentication. 

        DOS Attacks  
           The architecture and protocols SHOULD be secure against DOS 
           attacks directed at the routers. 

           The new architecture and protocols SHOULD provide as much 
           information as it can to allow administrators to track down 
           sources of DOS and DDOS attacks. 

        No Bad Data 
           Any new architecture and protocols must provide protection 
           against the introduction of bad, bogus, or misleading, data 
           by attackers.  Of particular importance, an attacker must 
           not be able to redirect traffic flows, with the intent of 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 12 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
            o Directing legitimate traffic away from a target, causing 
               a denial-of-service attack by preventing legitimate data 
               from reaching its destination, 
            o Directing additional traffic (going to other 
               destinations which are 'innocent bystanders') to a 
               target, causing the target to be overloaded, or 
            o Directing traffic addressed to the target to a place 
               where the attacker can copy, snoop, alter, or otherwise 
               affect the traffic. 

        Topology Hiding  
           Any new architecture and protocols must provide mechanisms 
           to allow network owners to hide the details of their 
           internal topologies, yet maintaining the desired levels of 
           service connectivity and reachability. 

        Privacy 
           By "privacy" we mean privacy of the routing protocol 
           exchanges between routers.  In the past this has not been 
           considered important for routing protocols. 

           When the routers are on point-to-point links, with routers 
           at each end, there is no need to encrypt the routing 
           protocol traffic; there is no possibility of a third party 
           intercepting the traffic, and if one of the two routers are 
           compromised then it doesn't matter.  This is not sufficient.  
           We believe that it is important to have the ability to 
           protect routing protocol traffic in two cases: 
            1. When the routers are on a shared network it is possible 
               that there are hosts on the network that have been 
               compromised.  These hosts could surreptitiously monitor 
               the protocol traffic. 
            2. When two routers are exchanging information "at a 
               distance" (over intervening routers and, possibly, 
               administrative domains).  In this case, the security of 
               the intervening routers, links, and so on, cannot be 
               assured.  Thus, the ability to encrypt this traffic is 
               important. 

           Therefore, we believe that the option to encrypt routing 
           protocol traffic is required. 

        Data Consistency 
           A router should be able to detect and recover from any data 
           that is received from other routers which is inconsistent.  
           That is, it MUST NOT be possible for data from multiple 
           routers, none of which is malicious, to "break" another 
           router. 

        Where security mechanisms are provided, they must use methods 
        that are considered to be cryptographically secure (e.g. using 
        cryptographically strong encryption and signatures -- no clear 
        text passwords!). 
       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 13 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        Use of security features SHOULD NOT be optional (except as 
        required above).  This may be "social engineering" on our part, 
        but we believe it to be necessary.  If a security feature is 
        optional, the implementation of the feature MUST default to the 
        "secure" setting. 


     3.10    End Host Security 


        The Architecture MUST NOT prevent individual host-to-host 
        communications sessions from being secured (i.e. it cannot 
        interfere with things like IPSEC). 


     3.11    Rich Policy 


        Before setting out Policy requirements, we need to define the 
        term.  Like "security", "policy" means many things to many 
        people.  For our purposes, we define policy as 

            Policy is the set of administrative influences that alter 
            the path determination and next-hop selection procedures of 
            the routing software. 

        The main motivators for influencing path and next-hop selection 
        seem to be transit rules, business decisions and load 
        management. 

        The new Architecture must support rich policy mechanisms.  
        Furthermore, the policy definition and dissemination 
        mechanismsshould be separated from the network topology and 
        connectivity dissemination mechanisms.  Policy provides input 
        to and controls the generation of the forwarding table and the 
        abstraction, filtering, aggregation, and dissemination of 
        topology information. 

        Note that if the architecture is properly divided into 
        subsystems then at a later time, new policy subsystems that 
        include new features and capabilities could be developed and 
        installed as needed. 

        We divide the general area of policy into two sub-categories, 
        routing information and traffic control.  Routing Information 
        Policies control what routing information is disseminated or 
        accepted, how it is disseminated, and how routers determine 
        paths and next-hops from the received information.  Traffic 
        Control Policies determine how traffic is classified and 
        assigned to routes. 


     3.11.1  Routing Information Policies 


        There must be mechanisms to allow network administrators, 
        operators, and designers to control receipt and dissemination 


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 14 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        of routing information.  These controls include, but are not 
        limited to: 
        - Selecting to which others routing information will be 
          transmitted. 
        - Specifying the "granularity" and type of transmitted 
          information.  The length of IPv4 prefixes is an example of 
          "granularity". 
        - Selection and filtering of topology and service information 
          that is transmitted.  This gives different 'views' of 
          internal structure and topology to different peers. 
        - Selecting the level of security and authenticity for 
          transmitted information 
        - Being able to cause the level of detail that is visible for 
          some portion of the network to reduce the farther you get 
          from that part of the network. 
        - Selecting from whom routing information will be accepted. 
          This control should be "provisional" in the sense of "accept 
          routes from "foo" only if there are no others available". 
        - Accepting or rejecting routing information based on the path 
          the information traveled (using the current system as an 
          example, this would be filtering routes based on an AS 
          appearing anywhere in the AS path).  This control should be 
          "provisional" in the sense of "accept routes that traverse 
          "foo" only if there are no others available". 
        - Selecting the desired level of "granularity" for received 
          routing information (this would include, but is not limited 
          to, things similar in nature to the prefix-length filters 
          widely used in the current routing and addressing system). 
        - Selecting the level of security and authenticity of received 
          information in order for that information to be accepted. 
        - Determining the treatment of received routing information 
          based on attributes supplied with the information. 
        - Applying attributes to routing information that is to be 
          transmitted and then determining treatment of information 
          (eg, sending it "here" but not "there") based on those tags. 
        - Selection and filtering of topology and service information 
          that is received.   


     3.11.2  Traffic Control Policies 


        The architecture SHOULD provide mechanisms that allow network 
        operators to manage and control the flow of traffic.  The 
        traffic controls should include, but are not limited to: 
        - The ability to detect and eliminate congestion points in the 
          network (by re-directing traffic around those points) . 
        - The ability to develop multiple paths through the network 
          with different attributes and then assign traffic to those 
          paths based on some discriminators within the packets 
          (discriminators include, but are not limited to, IP Addresses 
          or prefixes, DSCP values, and MPLS labels) . 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 15 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        - The ability to to find and use multiple, equivalent, paths 
          through the network (i.e. they would have the "same" 
          attributes) and allocate traffic across the paths. 
        - The ability to accept or refuse traffic based on some traffic 
          classification (providing, in effect, transit policies). 

        Traffic classification must at least include the source and 
        destination IP addresses (prefixes) and the DSCP value.  Other 
        fields may be supported, such as 
          o Protocol and port based functions,  
          o TOS/QOS tuple (such as ports)  
          o Per-host operations (i.e. /32s for IPv4 and /128s for 
             IPv6),  
          o Traffic matrices (e.g., traffic from prefix X and to 
             prefix Y). 


     3.12    Incremental Deployment 


        The reality of the Internet is that there can be no Internet-
        wide cutover from one architecture and protocol to another.  
        This means that any new architecture and protocol MUST be 
        incrementally deployable; ISPs must be able to set up small 
        sections of the new architecture, check it out, and then slowly 
        grow the sections.  Eventually, these sections will "touch" and 
        "squeeze out" the old architecture. 

        The protocols that implement the Architecture MUST be able to 
        interoperate at "production levels" with currently existing 
        routing protocols.  Furthermore, the protocol specifications 
        MUST define how the interoperability is done. 

        We also believe that sections of the Internet will never 
        convert over to the new architecture.  Thus, it is important 
        that the new architecture and its protocols be able to 
        interoperate with "old architecture" regions of the network 
        indefinitely.   

        The architecture's addressing system MUST NOT force existing 
        address allocations to be redone: no renumbering! 


     3.13     Mobility 


        There are two kinds of mobility; host mobility and network 
        mobility.  Host mobility is when an individual host moves from 
        where it was to where it is.  Network mobility is when an 
        entire network (or subnetwork) moves. 

        The architecture MUST support network level mobility. 





       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 16 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     3.14     Address Portability 


        One of the big "hot items" in the current Internet political 
        climate is portability of IP addresses (both V4 and V6).  The 
        short explanation is that people do not like to renumber and do 
        not trust automated renumbering tools. 

        The Architecture MUST provide complete address portability. 


     3.15    Multi-Protocol 


        The Internet is expected to be "multi-protocol" for at least 
        the next several years.  IPv4 and IPv6 will co-exist in many 
        different ways during a transition period.  The architecture 
        MUST be able to handle both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.  
        Furthermore, protocols that supplant IPv4 and IPv6 may be 
        developed and deployed during the lifetime of the architecture. 
        The architecture MUST be flexible and extensible enough to 
        handle new protocols as they arise. 

        Furthermore, the architecture MUST NOT assume any given 
        relationships between a topological element's IPv4 address and 
        its IPv6 address.  The architecture MUST NOT assume that all 
        topological elements have IPv4 addresses/prefixes, nor can it 
        assume that they have IPv6 addresses/prefixes. 

        The architecture SHOULD allow different paths to the same 
        destination to be used for different protocols, even if all 
        paths can carry all protocols. 

        In addition to the addressing technology, the architecture need 
        not be restricted to only packet  based 
        multiplexing/demultiplexing technology (such as IP); support 
        for other multiplexing/ demultiplexing technologies MAY be 
        added. 


     3.16    Abstraction 


        The architecture must provide mechanisms to for network 
        designers and operators to 
          o Group elements together for administrative control 
             purposes, 
          o Hide the internal structure and topology of those 
             groupings for administrative and security reasons, 
          o Limit the amount of topology information that is exported 
             from the groupings in order to control the load placed on 
             external routers, 
          o Define rules for traffic transiting or terminating in the 
             grouping. 

        The architecture MUST allow the current Autonomous System 
        structure to be mapped into any new abstraction schemes.  

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 17 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        Mapping mechanisms, algorithms, and techniques MUST be 
        specified. 


     3.17    Simplicity 


        The architecture MUST be simple enough so that Radia Perlman 
        can explain all the important concepts in less than an hour. 

        The requirement is that the routing architecture be kept as 
        simple as possible.  This requires careful evaluation of 
        possible features and functions with a merciless weeding out of 
        those that "might be nice". 

        By keeping the architecture simple, the protocols and software 
        used to implement the architecture are simpler.  This 
        simplicity in turn leads to: 
        1. Faster implementation of the protocols.  If there are fewer 
           bells and whistles, then there are fewer things that need to 
           be implemented. 
        2. More reliable implementations.  With fewer components, there 
           is less code, reducing bug counts, and fewer interactions 
           between components that could lead to unforeseen and 
           incorrect behavior. 


     3.18     Robustness 


        The architecture, and the protocols implementing it, should be 
        robust.  Robustness comes in many different flavors.  Some 
        considerations with regard to robustness include (but are not 
        limited to): 
          o Defective (even malicious) trusted routers. 
          o Network failures.  Whenever possible, valid alternate 
             paths are to be found and used. 
          o Failures must be localized.  That is, the architecture 
             must limit the "spread" of any adverse effects of a 
             misconfiguration or failure.  Badness must not spread. 

        Of course, the general robustness principle of being liberal in 
        what's accepted and conservative in what's sent must also be 
        applied. 

        EDITOR'S NOTE: 
               Some of the contributors to this note have argued that 
               robustness is an aspect of Security.  I have exercised 
               editor's discretion by making it a separate section.  
               The reason for this is that to too many people 
               "security" means "protection from breakins" and 
               "authenticating and encrypting data".  This requirement 
               goes beyond those views. 




       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 18 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     3.19    Media Independence 


        While it is an article of faith that IP operates over a wide 
        variety of media (such as Ethernet, X.25, ATM, and so on), IP 
        routing must take an agnostic view towards any "routing" or 
        "topology" services that are offered by the medium over which 
        IP is operating.  That is, the new architecture MUST NOT be 
        designed to integrate with any media-specific topology 
        management or routing scheme. 

        The routing architecture must assume, and must work over, the 
        simplest possible media. 

        The routing and addressing architecture can certainly make use 
        of lower-layer information and services, when and where 
        available, and to the extent that IP routing wishes. 


     3.20     Stand-alone 


        The routing architecture and protocols MUST NOT rely on other 
        components of the Internet (such as DNS) for their correct 
        operation.  Routing is the fundamental process by which data 
        "finds its way around the Internet" and most, if not all, of 
        those other components rely on routing to properly forward 
        their data.  Thus, Routing cannot rely on any Internet systems, 
        services or capabilities that in turn rely on Routing.  If it 
        did, a dependency loop would result. 


     3.21    Safety of Configuration 


        The architecture, protocols, and standard implementation 
        defaults must be such that a router installed "out of the box" 
        with no configuration/etc by the operators will not cause "bad 
        things" to happen to the rest of the routing system (no dialup 
        customers advertising routes to 18/8!) 


     3.22    Renumbering 


        The routing system MUST allow topological entities to be 
        renumbered. 


     3.23    Multi-prefix 


        The architecture MUST allow topological entities to have 
        multiple prefixes (or the equivalent under the new 
        architecture).  


     3.24    Cooperative Anarchy 


        As RFC1726[5] said: 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 19 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
          A major contributor to the Internet's success is the fact 
          that there is no single, centralized, point of control or 
          promulgator of policy for the entire network.  This allows 
          individual constituents of the network to tailor their own 
          networks, environments, and policies to suit their own needs.  
          The individual constituents must cooperate only to the degree 
          necessary to ensure that they interoperate. 

        This decentralization, called "cooperative anarchy", is still a 
        key feature of the Internet today.  The new routing 
        architecture MUST retain this feature.  There can be no 
        centralized point of control or promulgator of policy for the 
        entire Internet. 


     3.25    Network Layer Protocols and Forwarding Model 


        For the purposes of backward compatibility, any new routing and 
        addressing architecture and protocols MUST work with IPv4 and 
        IPv6 using the traditional "hop by hop" forwarding and packet-
        based multiplex/demultiplex models.  However, the architecture 
        need not be restricted to these models.  Additional forwarding 
        and multiplex/demultiplex models MAY be added. 


     3.26     Routing Algorithm 


        The architecture SHOULD NOT require a particular routing 
        algorithm family.  That is to say, the architecture should be 
        agnostic with regard to using link-state, distance-vector, or 
        path-vector routing algorithms. 


     3.27     Positive Benefit 


        Finally, the architecture must show benefits, in terms of 
        increased stability, decreased operational costs, and increased 
        functionality and lifetime over the current schemes.  This 
        benefit must remain even after the inevitable costs of 
        developing and debugging the new protocols, enduring the 
        inevitable instabilities as things get shaken out, and so on. 


     3.28    Administrative Entities and the IGP/EGP Split 


        We explicitly recognize that the Internet consists of resources 
        under control of multiple administrative entities.  Each entity 
        MUST be able to manage its own portion of the Internet as it 
        sees fit.  Moreover, the constraints that can be imposed on 
        routing and addressing on the portion of the Internet under the 
        control of one administration may not be feasibly extended to 
        cover multiple administrations.  Therefore, we recognize a 
        natural and inevitable split between routing and addressing 
        that is under a single administrative control and routing and 
        addressing that involves multiple administrative entities.  
        Moreover, while there may be multiple administrative 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 20 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        authorities, the administrative authority boundaries may be 
        complex and overlapping, rather than being a strict hierarchy. 

        Furthermore, there may be multiple levels of administration, 
        each with its own level of policy and control.  For example, a 
        large network might have "continental-level" administrations 
        covering its European and Asian operations, respectively.  
        There would also be that network's "inter-continental" 
        administration covering the Europe-to-Asia links.  Finally, 
        there would be the "Internet" level in the administrative 
        structure (analogous to the "exterior" concept in the current 
        routing architecture). 

        Thus, we believe that the administrative structure of the 
        Internet must be extensible to many levels (more than the two 
        provided by the current IGP/EGP split).  The interior/exterior 
        property is not absolute.  The interior/exterior property of 
        any point in the network is relative; a point on the network is 
        interior with respect to some points on the network and 
        exterior with respect to others. 

        Administrative entities may not trust each other; some may be 
        almost actively hostile towards each other.  The architecture 
        MUST accommodate these models.  Furthermore, the architecture 
        MUST NOT require any particular level of trust among 
        administrative entities. 



     4  Non-Requirements 


        The following are not required or are non-goals.  This should 
        not be taken to mean that these issues must not be addressed by 
        a new architecture.  Rather, addressing these issues or not is 
        purely a matter for the architects. 


     4.1 Forwarding Table Optimization 


        We believe that it is not necessary for the architecture to 
        minimize the size of the forwarding tables (FIBS).  Current 
        memory sizes, speeds, and prices, along with processor and ASIC 
        capabilities allow forwarding tables to be very large, O(E6), 
        and fast (100M lookups/second) tables to be built with little 
        difficulty. 


     4.2 Traffic Engineering 


        Traffic Engineering is one of those terms that has become 
        terribly overloaded.  If you ask N people what traffic 
        engineering is, you get something like N! disjoint answers.  
        Therefore, we elect not to require "traffic engineering", per 
        se.  Instead, we have endeavored to determine what the ultimate 


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 21 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        intent is when operators "traffic engineer" their networks and 
        then make those capabilities an inherent part of the system. 


     4.3 Multicast 


        The new architecture is not designed explicitly to be an inter-
        domain multicast routing architecture.  However, given the 
        notable lack of a viable, robust, and widely deployed inter-
        domain multicast routing architecture, the architecture should 
        not hinder the development and deployment of inter-domain 
        multicast routing without adverse effect on meeting the other 
        requirements. 

        We do note however that one respected network sage has said 
        (roughly) 
               When you see a bunch of engineers standing around 
               congratulating themselves for solving some particularly 
               ugly problem in networking, go up to them, whisper 
               "multicast", jump back, and watch the fun begin... 


     4.4 QOS 


        The Architecture concerns itself primarily with disseminating 
        network topology information so that routers may select paths 
        to destinations and build appropriate forwarding tables.  QOS 
        is not a part of this function and we make no requirements with 
        respect to QOS. 

        However, QOS is an area of great and evolving interest.  It is 
        reasonable to expect that in the not too distant future, 
        sophisticated QOS facilities will be deployed in the Internet.  
        Any new architecture and protocols should be developed with an 
        eye towards these future evolutions.  Extensibility mechanisms, 
        allowing future QOS routing and signaling protocols to "piggy-
        back" on top of the basic routing system are desired. 

        We do require the ability to assign attributes to entities and 
        then do path generation and selection based on those 
        attributes.  Some may call this QOS. 


     4.5 IP Prefix Aggregation 


        There is no specific requirement that CIDR-style IP Prefix 
        aggregation be done by the new architecture.  Address 
        allocation policies, societal pressure, and the random growth 
        and structure of the Internet have all conspired to make prefix 
        aggregation extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible.  This 
        means that large numbers of prefixes will be sloshing about in 
        the routing system and that forwarding tables will grow quite 
        big.  This is a cost that we believe must be borne. 



       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 22 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        Nothing in this non-requirement should be interpreted as saying 
        that prefix aggregation is explicitly prohibited.  CIDR-style 
        IP Prefix aggregation might be used as a mechanism to meet 
        other requirements, such as scaling.   


     4.6 Perfect Safety 


        Making the system impossible to misconfigure is, we believe, 
        not required.  The checking, constraints, and controls 
        necessary to achieve this could, we believe, prevent operators 
        from performing necessary tasks in the face of unforeseen 
        circumstances. 

        However, safety is always a "good thing", and any results from 
        research in this area should certainly be taken into 
        consideration and, where practical, incorporated into the new 
        routing architecture. 


     4.7 Dynamic Load Balancing 


        Past history has shown that using the routing system to perform 
        highly dynamic load balancing among multiple more-or-less-equal 
        paths usually ends up causing all kinds of instability, etc, in 
        the network.  Thus, we do not require such a capability. 

        However, this is an area that is ripe for additional research, 
        and some believe that the capability will be necessary in the 
        future. Thus, the architecture and protocols should be 
        "malleable" enough to allow development and deployment of 
        dynamic load balancing capabilities, should we ever figure out 
        how to do it. 


     4.8 Renumbering of hosts and routers 


        We believe that the routing system is not required to "do 
        renumbering" of hosts and routers.  That's an IP issue. 

        Of course, the routing and addressing architecture must be able 
        to deal with renumbering when it happens. 


     4.9 Host Mobility 


        In the Internet Architecture, host-mobility is handled on a 
        per-host basis by a dedicated, Mobile-IP protocol [6].  Traffic 
        destined for a mobile-host is explicitly forwarded by dedicated 
        relay agents.  Mobile-IP [6] adequately solves the host-
        mobility problem and we do not see a need for any additional 
        requirements in this area.  Of course, the new architecture 
        MUST NOT impede or conflict with Mobile-IP. 




       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 23 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     4.10    Clean Slate 


        For the purposes of development of the architecture, we assume 
        that there is a 'clean slate'.  Unless specified in section 3, 
        we have no explicit requirements that elements, concepts or 
        mechanisms of the current routing architecture are carried 
        forward into the new one. 



     5  Discussion of other Inter-Domain Routing Requirements documents 


        Recently, two other Internet Drafts have been published that 
        set out some requirements for a new Inter-Domain routing 
        architecture.  These drafts are "Future Domain Routing 
        Requirements" by Elwyn Davies, et al [3], and "Architectural 
        Requirements for Inter-Domain Routing in the Internet" by Geoff 
        Huston [4]. 

        Rather than use these documents, we decided to develop our own 
        set of requirements for a future inter-domain routing 
        architecture.  The reasons are 

        1.   There are requirements in [3] and [4] with which we do not 
             agree, plus we have additional requirements that are not 
             in those documents. 

        2.   We do not agree with the methodology in [3] and [4].  In 
             particular, [3]'s list of requirements seems to us like an 
             exhaustive list of things, falling dangerously close to 
             the "My Layer MUST solve all of networking's problems" 
             disease.  One of the hardest parts of setting requirements 
             is to determine what problems will NOT be solved. 

        [3] and [4] each provide excellent historical background 
        information.  Rather than repeat the information here, readers 
        are encouraged to consult those documents. 

        Discussions and commentary on each internet-draft follow. 


     5.1 Comments on "Architectural Requirements for Inter-Domain 

         Routing in the Internet" 


        The IAB have developed an internet-draft titled "Architectural 
        Requirements for Inter-Domain Routing in the Internet" [4].  
        Rather than using [4], we have produced our own document.  

        A good part of [4] is a detailed explanation of the current 
        problems in routing and addressing.  This work is valuable.  We 
        chose not to replicate it in this note. 

        The main reason we decided not to use [4] is that it is too 
        rooted in the current BGP/AS model.  We believe that the 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 24 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        charter for the Routing Research Group is to work on longer-
        term futures, including the possibility of replacing that 
        model.  We wish to develop our requirements in a forward-
        looking manner and using requirements rooted in the old model 
        may cause us to unwittingly constrain our thinking.  

        [4] Enumerates four requirements for a new routing 
        architecture.  These requirements are fairly broad and loose. 
        They are:  

        Scalability 
            We agree.  The new architecture must be scalable.  We have 
            included a requirement for scalability. 

        Stability and Predictability  
            Yes, the routing and addressing architecture should be 
            stable and predictable.  However, we are not sure that 
            overall this is possible. 

        Convergence 
            Fast convergence would be nice.  However, the size and 
            complexity of the Internet are such that we do not believe 
            that the entire net can ever converge.  Changes with global 
            impact will always be happening and their effects will be 
            constantly propagating through the network.  We expect that 
            any routing system will, at best, be able to converge 
            incrementally.  That is, in any one place, convergence with 
            respect to one change can occur, but before the entire net 
            converges, another change will occur, requiring a new set 
            of calculations and a "new" convergence.  

            We prefer to believe that convergence at any single point 
            and after any single change must occur quickly.  Also, 
            since we expect that the network will constantly by (re-
            converging, so the load of those attempts must be minimal.  

        Routing Overhead  
            Routing overhead should be minimized.  True. 


     5.2 Comments on "Future Domain Routing Requirements" 


        A separate group is developing a document titled "Future Domain 
        Routing Requirements" [3].  

        Rather than using [3], we have produced our own document.  As 
        with [4] we believe that this document is too rooted in the 
        current BGP/AS model, which is not a useful context for 
        developing long-term future architectures.  

        We have a number of observations on [3], in no particular 
        order:  


       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 25 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
          1. The introductory/historical/background is fine.  In fact, 
             that material should be considered "required reading" to 
             understand the background and current problems of Internet 
             Routing.  We commend the authors of [3] for putting this 
             material together.  

          2. The "goals" section (1.2) seems to be heavily oriented to 
             specific issues and tasks that network designers and 
             administrators face today.  Our charter calls for us to 
             consider the very long term.  Thus, it is hard to say what 
             specific tasks the operations community needs to perform.  
             Therefore, we prefer to take a broader view of what 
             routing should do and have written our document 
             accordingly. 

          3. [3] Seems still wedded to the old BGP/AS model of doing 
             inter-domain routing.  That may well be an adequate model.  
             However, the Routing Research Group's charter is to 
             consider and develop long-term future directions in 
             routing.  We prefer to develop our own document, trying to 
             avoid falling into the "traps" of the past.  

          4. The document seems to be an exhaustive wish list of 
             things.  The hardest part of doing requirements is to 
             figure out what not to require.  Coincident with that 
             observation, there were a couple of "would be nice" and 
             "might be needed" sorts of things.  The fear is that they 
             fell into the trap of "All problems must be solved in our 
             layer", which leads to very poor architectures and 
             designs.  

          5. They call for "support for NATs and other mid-boxes".  If 
             the Routing and Addressing architecture is "right" then 
             there is no need for them, at least as far as Routing and 
             Addressing are concerned. 

             Also, we are confused as to what "support for NATs..." 
             actually means. 

          6. The authors of [3] talk a fair bit about some low-level 
             things they want.  Our opinion is that we are looking "too 
             far out" to talk about detailed, low-level requirements.  
             We  don't know what the operators of 2007 will want.  
             Besides solving the basic problem of getting topological 
             and addressing information "around", we need to think more 
             about how to keep the architecture (and design and 
             implementation) flexible and open so that in 2006 when 
             someone says "We need a gonkulator!" we can say "Easy, it 
             gets plugged in here..."  

          7. Multicast/Anycast 
             We do not believe that multicast routing is a part of our 
             charter.  
       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 26 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
             Anycast is a fairly nebulous technology.  To require that 
             routing "support" it at this stage in its development is 
             premature.  To require that routing support anycast means, 
             in effect, that we first define what it is.  

          8. Support for renumbering 
             We take this to mean either that 
               o The routing-and-addressing system actually does the 
                  renumbering, to which we reply "Is this really 
                  something for routing to do?", or 
               o The routing-and-addressing system must continue to 
                  operate when elements of the network are renumbered.  
                  We have a requirement for this 

          9. Statistics support 
             This seems to us to be a low-level protocol issue.  Yes 
             the protocol needs a MIB.  But we do not believe that this 
             is an architectural or requirements issue. 

             This also indicates to us that [3] is more concerned with 
             lower-level protocol and implementation issues rather than 
             taking the proverbial "step back" to look at "the big 
             picture". 

          10. There were some comments about convergence that 
             seemed to indicate that the authors of [3] are thinking of 
             global convergence.  We have observed that global 
             convergence is probably not doable anymore.  We believe 
             that "permanent change" is the order of the day...  

          11. One of their open-issues indicates that the 
             authors of [3] are thinking about whether the EGP/IGP 
             split is good or not.  It's good they are thinking about 
             it.  It's bad that they consider it open.  We consider 
             this split to be A Bad Thing -- there should be no such 
             split in the architecture.  

          12. One example of the too fine a level of detail they 
             are getting into is that in 7.2.2 they talk about having a 
             number of specific path attributes.  But, if say in 2007 
             we discover a need for a gonkulation attribute, it's not 
             in the list in [3].  Perhaps we are taking their document 
             too literally, but someone taking [3] and designing to it 
             would maybe make attributes TLV's and leave it at that.  
             They wouldn't consider the effects of unconsidered new 
             attributes.  We prefer to think of things in the reverse 
             order: 

                We know we need attributes, but we don't know what they 
                all are.  Therefore the attribute mechanism must be 
                flexible and allow growth in weird new directions 
                without causing problems on the rest of the system -- 
                so how do we do that. 
       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 27 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      

     6  Security Considerations 


        We address security issues in the individual requirements.  We 
        do require that the Architecture and protocols developed 
        against this set of requirements be "secure". 



     7  IANA Considerations 


        This document is a set of requirements from which a new routing 
        and addressing architecture will be developed.  From that 
        architecture, a new protocol, or set of protocols, may be 
        developed. 

        While this note poses no new tasks for IANA, the architecture 
        and protocols developed from this document probably will have 
        issues to be dealt with by IANA. 



     8  References 


        [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process  Revision 3", 
            BCP9, RFC2026, October 1996. 

        [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
            Requirements Levels", BCP 14 RFC 2119, March 1997. 

        [3] Davies, E., et al, "Future Domain Routing Requirements", 
            draft-davies-fdr-reqs-01.txt, July 2001, Work In Progress. 

        [4] Huston, G., "Architectural Requirements for Inter-Domain 
            Routing in the Internet" draft-iab-bgparch-01.txt, May 
            2001, Work In Progress. 

        [5] Partridge, C., and F. Kastenholz, "Technical Criteria for 
            Choosing IP The Next Generation (IPng)", RFC 1726. December 
            1994. 

        [6] Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support."  RFC2002, October 1996. 



     9  Acknowledgments 


        This originated in the  IRTF Routing Research Groups sub-group 
        on Inter-domain routing requirements.  The members of the group 
        are 

        Abha Ahuja                      Danny McPherson 
        J. Noel Chiappa                 David Meyer 
        Sean Doran                      Mike ODell 
        JJ Garcia-Luna-Aceves           Andrew Partan 
        Susan Hares                     Radia Perlman 

       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 28 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      
        Geoff Huston                    Yakov Rehkter 
        Frank Kastenholz                John Scudder 
        Dave Katz                       Curtis Villamizar 
        Tony Li                         Dave Ward 

        We also appreciate the comments and review received from Ran 
        Atkinson, Howard Berkowitz, Randy Bush, Avri Doria, Jeffery 
        Haas, Dmitri Krioukov, Russ White, and Alex Zinin.  Special 
        thanks to Yakov Rehkter for contributing text and to Noel 
        Chiappa. 



     10 Editor's Addresses 


        Frank Kastenholz 
        Unisphere Networks 
        10 Technology Park 
        Westford, MA, 01886, USA 

        Phone: +1 978 589 0286 
        Email: fkastenholz@unispherenetworks.com 
































       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 29 
                       Inter-domain Routing Requirements     March 2002 
      
      


     Full Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 

        This document and translations of it may be copied and 
        furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or 
        otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be 
        prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in 
        part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
        copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such 
        copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may 
        not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright 
        notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet 
        organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
        defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or 
        as required to translate it into languages other than English. 

        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will 
        not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
        assigns. 

        This document and the information contained herein is provided 
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
        IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE 
        OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY 
        IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

         




















       
     Kastenholz         Informational -- Expires 10/2002                 30 