




Network Working Group                                         Alex Zinin
Internet Draft                                                   Alcatel
Expiration Date: September 2004                               March 2004
File name: draft-zinin-icar-arts-00.txt




                         Area Review Teams for
                     Early Cross-functional Reviews

                      draft-zinin-icar-arts-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time. It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document contains a proposal for cross-functional IETF review
   process that can be initiated at early stages of a document life
   cycle. The approach is based on existing experience with area
   directorates and other expert groups within the IETF.

   Please send any comments on this document to the IESG (iesg@ietf.org)

1. Introduction

   Cross-functional (intra-area and cross-area) review are the
   properties of the IETF that are supposed to ensure high quality of



Zinin                                                           [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


   the produced technologies, their scalability and safety for the
   Internet as a whole. It has been widely acknowledged that these
   properties are among the core values of the IETF and have to be
   preserved in order for the IETF to continue being a successful
   engineering and standards organization.

   Currently, the AD review and IESG review processes are the only
   formal ways within the IETF to ensure cross-functional, and in
   particular cross-area reviews. Since these reviews happen only when
   the documents are submitted for final approval, issues are brought up
   late in the process, often when contributors have invested a lot of
   cycles into the document, the technology has possibly been
   implemented, and changes in direction or certain technical details
   are painful and frustrating. If interim cross-functional or cross-
   area review is needed, it is currently done informally, and this
   process is not necessarily coordinated with the following review by
   the IESG members.

   Creating a more formal and better described mechanism for cross-area
   review that would be coordinated with the IESG review process, and
   could be involved at any point within a life cycle of a document
   should substantially improve the quality of the documents submitted
   to the IESG and minimize the number of substantial issues identified
   late in the process. A straight-forward way to do this could be to
   request interim IESG review before the document is completed and
   submitted for final approval. However, if applied to a considerable
   number of documents (and we do want more documents to benefit from
   cross-area review), this would put additional load on the IESG and
   could impact document processing time.

   This document proposes a cross-area review process that should have
   better scaling characteristics. The method is based on delegation of
   the document review function from ADs to the area review teams,
   currently known as "area directorates" in some areas, or "doctor
   groups" in others. Note that the described process does not obviate
   the need for the cross-functional peer review performed by regular
   IETF participants (members of the review teams or not). On the other
   hand, the peer review process can be improved by directly (and
   informally) soliciting comments from the review teams.

   The proposed method is based on the experience several IETF Area
   Directors have with involving groups of experts in the process of
   early document review and during the IESG review cycle.

   More specifically:

     o    the Routing Area Directors have been using the Routing Area
          Directorate group (rtg-dir) for review of the documents coming



Zinin                                                           [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


          out of the WGs within the Routing Area before they are submit-
          ted for final approval to the IESG. The directorate is also
          asked to review certain documents appearing on the IESG agenda
          from time to time.

     o    Operations directorate (ops-dir) has also been used for early
          document review and during the IESG review period.

     o    The MIB-Doctors group is consistently involved in preparation
          of MIB documents before they are brought to the IESG

          <comment> Should add info on the Transport-Doctors group here
          </comment>

   At this point the process of document review by these expert groups
   is not described and has no formal standing with the IETF. Not all
   areas have similar expert groups and/or they are not publicly known
   to the wide community. There is also no described way for WG chairs
   to request review by experts groups in other areas and expect a guar-
   anteed follow-up.

   This proposal formalizes the notion of such expert review teams,
   describes how they are used for cross-functional review, the relation
   of this process to the final IESG review process, and how the cross-
   functional review can be requested and should be followed up on.

2. Proposal

 2.1 Overview

   Briefly, the cross-functional review process may be described as fol-
   lows.

   Each area has an area review team (ART) which ADs delegate the
   interim document review function to. When necessary (early in the
   process, or during the WG Last call, or both), the WG chairs request
   the review for a document by sending an e-mail to all required ARTs
   (at a minimum the ART of the area the WG belongs to). The IETF-wide
   Last Call announcement is cc'ed to all ARTs. Provided feedback is
   taken to the WG for discussion. Consistency with the later IESG
   review process is ensured through training of the reviewers by the
   ADs and reviewers communicating the recommendations wrt the documents
   to the ADs.

   The following sections provide more details regarding the proposed
   approach.

 2.2 Assumptions



Zinin                                                           [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


   The described proposal is predicated on certain assumptions that are
   worth spelling out:

     1.   The IESG remains the body responsible for final approval of
          the IETF documents.

          The implication of this assumption is that the documents will
          finally have to go through the IESG review process with indi-
          vidual IESG members checking the document. This implies that
          interim reviews performed before that stage should be coordi-
          nated with later IESG reviews. Otherwise it is possible that
          the issues discussed previously will be brought up again. The
          coordination is also need to usefully off-load (part of) the
          document review function from individual ADs.

     2.   The ADs remain to be trusted by the community (through the
          NomCom process) to function as final document reviewers and
          are responsible for the document quality.

          The implication here is that since the ADs are held responsi-
          ble for the results of the document review, they need to feel
          comfortable delegating this review function to the ART mem-
          bers, which will have bearings on the method of ART member
          selection.

   The reasoning behind using these assumptions is to use the existing
   mechanisms and tools (known running code) as much as possible and
   avoid extreme changes to the document approval process that may
   result in a DoS on it.

 2.3 Area Review Teams

   Each area creates an Area Review Team (ART) that is addressable
   through a well-known mailing list address (e.g.  "<area-
   name>-review@ietf.org"). At a minimum, the group includes the ADs,
   however it is expected that it will include technical experts, will-
   ing to contribute their time to reviewing the IETF documents from the
   same and other areas and providing consultation to the area direc-
   tors. The ADs will delegate the review function for some (or all)
   documents to ART members.

   Selection of the ART members is done personally by the ADs. Possible
   variations, however, may include open call for nominations, followed
   up by ADs interviewing the candidates and personally approving them.

   <comment>

   See assumption 2 in section 2.2 for the reasons



Zinin                                                           [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


   </comment>

   When a document needs to be reviewed by ART, the AD assigns two ART
   members as "token holders". All ART members are encouraged to review
   the document, however, the token holders are held responsible for
   providing comments within a 2-week time frame and following up on
   them with the document authors and/or the hosting WG. The token hold-
   ers will also provide the ADs with their recommendation including the
   summary of the discussion, the list of issues and how they have been
   addressed.

 2.4 Cross-Area Review Process

   This section describes the actual cross-functional review process
   that can be initiated at any point within the life cycle of a docu-
   ment. This process is automatically initiated whenever an IETF- wide
   Last Call is started for a document.

     1.   The set of area review teams engaged is determined by the ini-
          tiator of the review process in consultation with the respon-
          sible AD. At a minimum, this set includes the ART of the host-
          ing area. For the IETF Last Call, this set includes all ARTs.

          <comment>

          the stimulus behind choosing the right set of review teams is
          to get the review comments that are likely to be brought up
          during the final IESG review earlier in the process

          </comment>

          The set of review teams may also include the IAB review team
          (assuming this is a subset of IAB members, or the IAB itself
          otherwise).

     2.   An e-mail message with the review request is sent to the mail-
          ing lists of all ARTs that need to be engaged.

     3.   ADs for each engaged ART have the choice of either "signing
          off" on the referred document if they believe that the docu-
          ment does not need a detailed review from the perspective of
          that area, or assigning the token holders (2 persons) that
          will conduct the document review within a 2-week time frame.
          Other members of the review teams are strongly encouraged to
          provide feedback, but will not be held responsible for this by
          the ADs.





Zinin                                                           [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


     4.   Document reviewers bring their concerns to the attention of
          the document authors and/or the WG via e-mail communication on
          the WG mailing list and (if necessary) the mailing list of the
          ART they are members of.

     5.   Based on the discussion with the authors/within the WG, the
          reviewers provide their responsible AD with a recommendation
          regarding the document. The recommendation includes the sum-
          mary of the review, as well as the list of issues and their
          resolution.

     6.   The authors/WG treat the feedback as part of the WG or IETF-
          wide review process

          <comment>

          An important point here is that the discussion initiated by
          this review process is integrated within the normal WG
          process, rather than treated as a pronouncement from a higher
          authority.

          </comment>

     7.   If a document returns to an ART (e.g., the document is under
          the IETF Last Call and was reviewed during the WG Last Call),
          the same token holders will "own" the document whenever possi-
          ble. The token holders check that the new revision of the doc-
          ument reflects the previous discussion correctly. If no addi-
          tional concerns arise, the recommendation to the ADs of the
          ART remain the same.

     8.   The ADs have the power to bring up during the IESG review
          process the reviewers' comments that were not addressed by the
          authors/WG if they believe this is appropriate. The ADs also
          have the power to override the comments from their correspond-
          ing review teams.

          <comment>

          The above gives the ADs the ability to insist on fixing cer-
          tain comments that they believe represent serious issues if
          they were discarded while processing the cross-area review
          feedback during the WG process as described above. This also
          gives them the right to withdraw certain points from the con-
          sideration or change them if they believe this is appropriate
          for the progress of a document. This is consistent with the
          concept that the ADs are responsible for the final document
          approval and that the review teams provide their expert



Zinin                                                           [Page 6]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


          recommendations based on the discussions within the WG.

          </comment>


 2.5 Role of Cross-Area Review within the Standards Process

   The cross-function review process is integrated within the IETF Stan-
   dards Process as described below:

     1.   WG process:

          When initiated early within the life cycle of a document, the
          feedback from the cross-area review process is considered part
          of the WG discussion and consensus forming process.

     2.   WG Last Calls:

          It is expected that the cross-area review will also be
          requested during the WG LC period. Procedurally, this will
          have the same value as during the WG process, but would ensure
          that final cross-area checks are performed before the docu-
          ments comes to the IESG.

     3.   AD-review process

          It is expected that the ADs will use the review teams to dele-
          gate the review function and thus off-load a considerable part
          of this function when and as deemed appropriate. The ADs are
          expected to coordinate with the ART members to ensure that
          consistent review criteria is applied to documents so that
          most issues that would otherwise be brought up during the AD-
          review process are resolved earlier in the life cycle of the
          document.

          <comment>

          Note that ADs are given a tool they can use to off-load docu-
          ment review to the extent they believe is necessary, but they
          are not required to do so. It is then left to the ADs to make
          sure they are using this tool appropriately and sufficiently.

          </comment>

     4.   IETF Last Call

          As all ARTs are informed about IETF Last Calls, it is expected
          that by the time the documents is on the IESG agenda, it will



Zinin                                                           [Page 7]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


          have received adequate cross-functional review and all ADs
          will have some recommendation on the document from their ARTs.

     5.   IESG review process

          It is expected that individual ADs will organize the review
          process in the review teams in such a way that a positive rec-
          ommendation from the review team should be sufficient for the
          ADs to feel comfortable that most of the possible technical
          issues have been identified, followed up on, and resolved, and
          that the ADs only need to look for very high-level, architec-
          tural issues. This, in turn, should a) decrease the amount of
          time the ADs need to spend on the document review and follow
          up, and b) minimize the number of "late surprises" arising
          during the IESG review process.

 2.6 Initiation of Review Process

   The cross-functional review process can be initiated either by an AD
   or by a WG chair after consultation with the ADs.

   <comment>

   Consultation with the AD is a sanity check to make sure the set of
   engage ARTs is chosen right

   </comment>

   The review process may be initiated at an early stage of a document
   (e.g. when the WG is starting to consider an approach) to ensure
   architectural validity and correctness of the general direction

   The review process should be initiated as part of the WG LC to mini-
   mize late surprises during the IESG review process

   The review process must be initiated for all documents going through
   the IETF Last Call.

   The same process may be used by the ADs and the RFC-Editor to request
   cross-functional review for individual submissions they are shepherd-
   ing or checking for conflicts.

   A simplified version of this process (no token holders, no issue
   tracking within ARTs, etc.) can be used to inform ART members about
   technical discussions and solicit their comments.

 2.7 Documenting Results of Review




Zinin                                                           [Page 8]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


   It is important that the feedback from ARTs and the results of the
   discussion with the authors/WG are documented for later reference
   during the IESG review process.

   For WG documents this is ensures by the WG chairs who keep track of
   the issues (as part of the improved WG process) and summarize them
   when submitting the document to their ADs for IESG processing.

   For individual submissions this function is either performed by the
   review initiator (an AD) or delegated to a member of the review team
   with a consequent report to the ADs

   For ARTs in the other (non-hosting) area, token holders within the
   review team assigned to the documents are responsible for tracking
   the issues on their side and summarizing them in their recommendation
   to the ADs

 2.8 Trust, Responsibility, and Accountability

   An important aspect of the proposal documented here is that the mod-
   els of trust, responsibility, and accountability currently used and
   practiced within the IETF are not changed.

   More specifically, the ADs, selected by the NomCom process as indi-
   viduals "trusted" by the community to perform the ultimate technical
   review and document approval functions, are still held responsible
   and accountable for these functions. In other words, the tool of del-
   egating the document review function to the review teams does not
   remove the responsibility of the ADs for the results of such review.
   The ADs are expected to personally ensure that the individuals
   selected by them as members of the review teams have appropriate
   qualification (through required training if needed) to perform this
   function. It is also the AD's responsibility to adjust the list of
   members (hire more members or fire ill-performing ones) to maintain
   adequacy of the review process and require level of off-loading.

 2.10 Motivation and Credit

   The following methods are proposed to make the role of an ART member
   attractive and keep ART members motivated and acknowledged:

     1.   Formalization of the review team role.

          Formal introduction of ARTs within the IETF standard process
          should result in recognition of this role individual members
          and their employers.





Zinin                                                           [Page 9]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


     2.   Open area meetings (plenary)

          It is possible to give ART members public exposure by holding
          ART plenary during the open area meetings

     3.   Acknowledging reviewers

          Reviewers engaged in ARTs are acknowledged in the published
          RFCs.

     4.   Dots on the badges

          ART members are identified at the face-to-face meetings with
          dots on their badges

3. Problems being addressed

   The proposal described here addresses the following problems experi-
   enced within the IESG and IETF in general:

     1.   Low document quality

          It is expected that additional review of the documents should
          substantially improve the quality of the IETF documents.

     2.   Individual AD load

          It is expected that improved quality of the documents submit-
          ted to the ADs for AD-review, should decrease the amount of
          time spent on document review and follow-up on the issues.
          Delegation of the document review function should also result
          in considerable off-loading.

     3.   Overall IESG load

          Is is expected that improved quality of the documents submit-
          ted to the IESG should decrease the document review load on
          the IESG.  Reports from the ARTs on previously reviewed docu-
          ments should also make it easier for individual IESG members
          to assess the quality of incoming documents.

     4.   Late surprises

          Earlier cross-functional review coordinated with later IESG
          review should minimize the number of unexpected issues identi-
          fied at the later stages of a document life cycle.





Zinin                                                          [Page 10]





INTERNET DRAFT            Area Review Teams             March 2004


     5.   Lack of cross-area review

          This proposal directly encourages cross-area review

     6.   Lack of cross-functional expertise

          This proposal should encourage learning of technologies in
          different areas of IETF and should help growing cross-area
          expertise.

     7.   Growing future management

          Involvement of more IETF participants in the Standards Process
          should help increase the number of individuals capable of per-
          forming the tasks of WG chairs and IESG members.

4. Security Considerations

   This type of non-protocol document does not directly affect the secu-
   rity of the Internet. However, the cross-functional review process
   described here should improve the security aspects of specific
   approaches being reviewed.


5. References


6. Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Harald Alvestrand and Ted Hardie for
   their comments on the document.


7. Author's address

   Alex Zinin
   Alcatel
   E-mail: zinin@psg.com













Zinin                                                          [Page 11]



