

    Network Working Group                                   Greg Vaudreuil
    Internet Draft                                    Octel Communications
    Expires in six months                                    Glenn Parsons
    Obsoletes: RFC 1911                                  Nortel Technology
                                                          January 22, 1997


                                Content Duration
                             MIME Header Definition

                           <draft-ema-vpim-dur-00.txt>

      Status of this Memo

      This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
      documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
      and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
      working documents as Internet Drafts.

      Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
      updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It
      is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
      cite them other than as a "work in progress".

      To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
      "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
      Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
      munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
      ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

      Overview

      This document describes the MIME header Content-Duration that is
      intended for use with any timed media content (typically audio/* or
      video/*).


    Internet Draft             Content-Duration           January 22, 1997



      1.  Abstract

      This document describes the MIME header Content-Duration that is
      intended for use with any timed media content (typically audio/* or
      video/*).  The length of time is represented in seconds.


      2. Content-Duration Header Field

      Many media contents have an inherent time duration, for example a
      spoken message or a video clip.  Many audio and video encodings may
      include their length as header information or may allow accurate
      calculation based on the byte length of the data.  However, it may
      be useful to present the time duration of the content in a MIME
      header to allow its simple determination without dealing with the
      actual content.

      2.1 Syntax

      The Content-Duration field's value is a single number specifying the
      time duration in seconds of the content.  Formally:

      duration := "Content-Duration" ":" 1*10DIGIT

      Note that practically (though highly unlikely in MIME media), the
      upper bound on the numerical value of the superior time unit is
      (2^^31 - 1) or 2147483647.

      2.2 Semantics

      This field represents the time duration of the associated content.
      The time duration is noted in seconds with no units tag.  The time
      value should be exact, however the exact value of the time duration
      cannot be known without opening the content and playing it.  If an
      exact value must be known, then the latter method should be used.
      This mechanism simply allows placing a sender determined time
      duration value in the header for easy access.

      Though there are several ways to present this duration to the
      recipient (e.g. with the inbox headers, when audio attachment
      opened), the actual use of this field on reception is a local
      implementation issue.

      2.3 Example

      In this example the content duration represents 33 seconds:

              Content-Duration: 33





    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 7/22/97                    [Page 2]
    Internet Draft             Content-Duration           January 22, 1997


      3. VPIM Usage

      The Content-Duration header field for audio/32KADPCM sub-type is a
      useful component of the VPIM specification [VPIM2].  All VPIM
      Messages MUST contain this sub-type to carry the audio of a voice
      message.  It may be useful in some instances (e.g. viewing on a
      simple MIME or non-MIME desktop) to have the time duration of the
      voice message available without having to open the audio content.


      4. Security considerations:

      This defintion introduces the option of explicitly identifying the
      time duration of an audio/* or fax/* content outside of the binary
      data that forms the content.  In some environments (though likely
      not the majority), the identification of the actual time duration in
      a header field may be a security issue and as a result should not be
      noted.


      5. Authors' Addresses

      Glenn W. Parsons
      Nortel Technology
      P.O. Box 3511, Station C
      Ottawa, ON  K1Y 4H7
      Canada
      Phone: +1-613-763-7582
      Fax: +1-613-763-8385
      Glenn.Parsons@Nortel.ca

      Gregory M. Vaudreuil
      Octel Communications
      17080 Dallas Parkway
      Dallas, TX  75248-1905
      United States
      Phone/Fax: +1-972-733-2722
      Greg.Vaudreuil@Octel.Com


      6. References

      [MIME2] N. Freed and N. Borenstein,  "Multipurpose Internet Mail
           Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types ", RFC 2046, Innosoft,
           First Virtual, Nov 1996.

      [VPIM2] Greg Vaudreuil and Glenn Parsons, "Voice Profile for
           Internet Mail - version 2", Work in Progress, Jan 1997.







    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 7/22/97                    [Page 3]
