

NMRG                                                             A. Pras
Internet-Draft                                      University of Twente
Expires: March 4, 2003                                  J. Schoenwaelder
                                                University of Osnabrueck
                                                       September 3, 2002


      On the Difference between Information Models and Data Models
                      draft-irtf-nmrg-im-dm-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 4, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   There has been ongoing confusion about the differences between
   Information Models and Data Models.  This document explains the
   differences between these terms by analyzing how existing network
   management model specifications (from the IETF and other bodies such
   as the ITU or the DMTF) fit into the universe of Information Models
   and Data Models.

   This memo documents the main results of the 8th workshop of the
   Network Management Research Group (NMRG) of the Internet Research
   Task Force (IRTF) hosted by the University of Texas at Austin on



Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


   December 8-9 2000.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3. Information Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4. Data Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





































Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


1. Introduction

   Currently multiple "languages" exist to define "managed" objects.
   Examples of such languages are the "Structure of Management
   Information" (SMI) [1], the "Structure of Policy Provisioning
   Information" (SPPI) [2] and, within the DMTF, the "Managed Object
   Format" (MOF) [3].  Despite the fact that multiple languages exist,
   there are still some feelings that none of these languages really
   suits all needs.  To discuss these feelings, the IETF organized for
   example at its 48th meeting (summer 2000) a BoF meeting on "Network
   Information Modeling" (NIM).

   To understand the advantages and disadvantages, as well as the main
   differences between the various languages, there have been many
   discussions, also outside the IETF.  Unfortunately these discussions
   were not always fruitful, primarily because it appeared that people
   had different understanding of main terms.  In particular, the terms
   "Information Model" (IM) and "Data Model" (DM) turned out to be
   controversial.

   In an attempt to stop this controversy and harmonize terminology, the
   IRTF Network Management Research Group (NMRG) organized in December
   2000 a special workshop.  For this workshop the IRTF-NMRG invited
   leading experts from the IETF, DMTF, ITU as well as the academic
   world (see the acknowledgements section for a list of participants).
   The workshop was quite successful and its outcome, which is a better
   understanding of the terms "Information Model" and "Data Model", is
   presented in this document.

   Short definitions of both terms can also be found within other
   documents (see for example RFC 3198 [8]).  Compared to these other
   documents this document also provides background information and
   examples.

2. Overview

   One of the interesting observations at the IRTF-NMRG workshop was
   that IMs and DMs are different since they serve different purposes.
   The purpose of an IM is to model managed objects at a conceptual
   level as abstractions, independent of specific implementations or
   protocols used to transport the data.  The degree of specificity (or
   detail) of the IM is dependent on the modeling needs of its
   designers.  In order to present the overall design as clear as
   possible, IMs try to abstract from protocol and implementation
   specific details.  One important aspect of an IM is that it also
   focuses on the relationships between managed objects.

   Compared to IMs, DMs are defined at a lower level of abstraction and



Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


   with much more detail.  DMs are more intended for implementors, and
   include lower level and protocol specific constructs.

                   IM                --> conceptual / abstract model
                    |                    targeted to the designer and
         +----------+---------+          human manager
         |          |         |
         DM        DM         DM     --> concrete / detailed model
                                         targeted to the implementor

   The relationship between an IM and DM is shown in the Figure above.
   Since conceptual models can be implemented in several different ways,
   multiple DMs can be derived from the same IM.

   Although IMs and DMs serve different purposes, it is not possible to
   precisely define what details should be expressed in the IM and what
   in the DM.  Therefore no principle difference exists between both
   models; in fact there is a grey area between both which makes it in
   certain cases impossible to determine if something is an IM or a DM.

3. Information Models

   An IM is primarily useful for designers to describe the managed
   environment, for managers to understand the modeled objects, and for
   implementors as a guide to the functionality that must be described
   and coded in their DMs.  The terms "conceptual models" or "abstract
   models", which are often used in literature, relate to IMs.  An IM
   can be implemented in different ways and mapped upon different
   protocols; IMs are therefore protocol neutral.  An important
   characteristic of an IM is that it specifies the relationship between
   objects.  Organizations may use the contents of an information model
   to delimit the functionality that can be included in a data model.

   IMs can be defined in an informal way, using natural languages like
   English.  A good example of an IM is provided by RFC 3290: "An
   Informal Management Model for Diffserv Routers" [9].  This RFC
   describes a conceptual model of a Diffserv Router, including the
   relationship between the components of such a router that need to be
   managed.  Within the IETF it is quite exceptional that an IM is
   described within a separate RFC, however; in such cases the status of
   such documents is usually "Informational" and not "Standards Track"
   [4].  In general most RFCs that define a Management Information Base
   (MIB) module also include some kind of informal description
   explaining the model behind that MIB module.  Such a model can be
   considered as an IM.  A good example of this is RFC 2863, which
   defines "The Interfaces Group MIB" [10].  Note that most RFCs include
   just a rudimentary, incomplete description of the underlying IM.




Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


   Optionally IMs can also be defined "formally", using some kind of
   (semi) formal language.  One of the possibilities to "formally"
   specify IMs is to use UML class diagrams.  Although such diagrams are
   not standardized by the IETF, there are several other organizations
   that use UML class diagrams for their IMs.  Examples of such
   organizations are the DMTF, the ITU-T SG 4, 3GPP SA5, TeleManagement
   Forum, and the ATM Forum.  An important advantage of UML class
   diagrams is that they represent objects and the relationship between
   them in a graphical way.  Because of this graphical representation,
   designers and operators may find it easier to understand the
   underlying management model.  Although there are other techniques to
   graphically represent objects and the relationship between them
   (like, for example, entity-relationship diagrams), UML has the
   advantage that it is widely accepted by the industry and
   universities.  Because of this, there are also many tools that
   support the manipulation of UML diagrams.  UML itself is standardized
   by the Object Management Group (OMG) [5].

   In general, it seems advisable to use object-oriented techniques to
   describe an IM.  In particular the notions of abstraction and
   encapsulation, as well as the possibility that object definitions
   include methods are considered to be important.

4. Data Models

   Compared to IMs, DMs define managed objects at a lower level of
   abstraction.  They include implementation and protocol specific
   details like, for example, rules that explain how to map managed
   objects on lower level protocol constructs.

   The MIB modules defined within the IETF are in fact DMs.  The
   language (syntax) used to define these DMs is called the "Structure
   of Management Information" (SMI) [1], which in turn is based on ASN.1
   [6].

   Not only IETF MIB modules, but also most other standardized
   management models are DMs.  Examples are:

   o  Policy Information Base (PIB) modules, which are also developed
      within the IETF.  PIB modules use as syntax the "Structure of
      Policy Provisioning Information" (SPPI) [2], which is similar to
      the SMI and is also based on ASN.1.

   o  Management Information Base (MIB) modules, as originally defined
      by ISO and nowadays maintained and enhanced by the ITU-T.  These
      DMs use the syntax as defined by the "Guidelines for the
      Definition of Managed Objects" (GDMO) [7].  GDMO MIB modules make
      use of object-oriented principles.



Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


   o  CIM Schemas, as developed within the DMTF.  These DMs use the
      syntax as defined by the "Managed Object Formats (MOFs)" [3].  The
      DMTF publishes CIM Schemas in the form of graphical UML documents
      in addition to this MOF syntax.  Because of this graphical
      notation, designers and managers may find it easier to understand
      CIM Schemas than IETF MIB modules.  One could therefore argue that
      CIM Schemas are closer to IMs then IETF MIB modules, which lack
      such graphical notation.  The UML diagrams can be downloaded from
      the DMTF website in PDF as well as VISIO format.  (VISIO is one of
      the tools to draw UML class diagrams).  Note that, in contrast to
      IETF MIB modules, CIM Schemas make use of object-oriented
      principles.

   The Figure below shows these examples.  The languages that are used
   to define the DMs are shown between brackets.

                         IM                              --> IM
                          |
       +----------+-------+-------+--------------+
       |          |               |              |
      MIB        PIB          CIM schema      OSI-MIB    --> DM
     (SMI)      (SPPI)          (MOF)          (GDMO)

   To illustrate what details are included in a DM, let us consider the
   example of IETF MIB modules.  As opposed to IMs, IETF MIB modules
   include details like OID assignments and indexing structures.  The
   "relationships" that existed at the IM level are now "implemented" in
   terms of OID pointers and indexing relationships manifested in INDEX
   clauses.  Also many other implementation specific details are
   included, like for example MAX-ACCESS and STATUS clauses and
   conformance statements.

   A special kind of DM language is the SMIng language designed by the
   NMRG.  This language was particularly designed at a higher conceptual
   level then SMIv1/SMIv2 and SPPI.  In fact one of the intentions
   behind SMIng was to stop the proliferation of different DM languages
   and harmonize the various models.  As a result MIB/PIB modules
   defined in SMIng can be mapped on different underlying protocols;
   there is a mapping on SNMP and there is a mapping on COPS-PR.  SMIng
   is therefore more protocol neutral than other IETF approaches.  SMIng
   also supports some object-oriented principles and provides extension
   mechanisms allowing the addition of new features (such as support for
   methods).  New features can then be used when supported by underlying
   protocols, without breaking SMIng implementations.  Still SMIng
   should be considered as a DM; to express for example the relationship
   between managed objects, techniques like UML or ER diagrams give
   still better results since these diagrams are easier to understand.




Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


   It should be noted that the SMIng working group within the IETF
   decided to not adapt the SMIng language defined by the NMRG.  Instead
   the SMIng working group is developing a third version of the SMI
   (SMIv3) which is primarily targeted towards SNMP and which only
   incorporates some of the ideas developed within the NMRG.

5. Security Considerations

   This document discusses the terms Information Model and Data Model.
   These terms themself do not have any security impact on the Internet.

6. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank everyone who participated at the 8th
   IRTF-NMRG meeting (in alphabetic order): Szabolcs Boros, Marcus
   Brunner, David Durham, Dave Harrington, Jean-Philippe Martin-Flatin,
   George Pavlou, Robert Parhonyi, David Perkins, David Sidor, Andrea
   Westerinen and Bert Wijnen.

Normative References

   [1]  McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., Rose,
        M. and S. Waldbusser, "Structure of Management Information
        Version 2 (SMIv2)", RFC 2578, STD 59, April 1999.

   [2]  McCloghrie, K., Fine, M., Seligson, J., Chan, K., Hahn, S.,
        Sahita, R., Smith, A. and F. Reichmeyer, "Structure of Policy
        Provisioning Information (SPPI)", RFC 3159, August 2001.

   [3]  Distributed Management Task Force, "Common Information Model
        (CIM) Specification Version 2.2", DSP 0004, June 1999.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", RFC
        2026, October 1996.

   [5]  Object Management Group, "Unified Modeling Language (UML),
        Version 1.4", formal/2001-09-67, September 2001.

   [6]  International Organization for Standardization, "Information
        processing systems - Open Systems Interconnection -
        Specification of Abstract  Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)",
        International Standard 8824, December 1987.

   [7]  International Telecommunication Union, "Information technology -
        Open Systems Interconnection  - Structure of Management
        Information:  Guidelines for the Definition of Managed Objects",
        Recommendation X.722, 1992.




Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


Informative References

   [8]   Westerinen, A., Schnizlein, J., Strassner, J., Scherling, M.,
         Quinn, B., Herzog, S., Huynh, A., Carlson, M., Perry, J. and S.
         Waldbusser, "Terminology for Policy-Based Management", RFC
         3198, November 2001.

   [9]   Bernet, Y., Blake, S., Grossman, D. and A. Smith, "An Informal
         Management Model for Diffserv Routers", RFC 3290, May 2002.

   [10]  McCloghrie, K. and F. Kastenholz, "The Interfaces Group MIB",
         RFC 2863, June 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Aiko Pras
   University of Twente
   PO Box 217
   7500 AE Enschede
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31 53 4893778
   EMail: pras@ctit.utwente.nl


   Juergen Schoenwaelder
   University of Osnabrueck
   Albrechtstr. 28
   49069 Osnabrueck
   Germany

   Phone: +49 541 969-2483
   EMail: schoenw@informatik.uni-osnabrueck.de

















Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Information Models vs. Data Models     September 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Pras & Schoenwaelder     Expires March 4, 2003                  [Page 9]

