



MPLS Working Group                                       C. Ramachandran
Internet-Draft                                                   T. Saad
Updates: 4090 (if approved)                       Juniper Networks, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                                I. Minei
Expires: December 22, 2019                                  Google, Inc.
                                                              D. Pacella
                                                           Verizon, Inc.
                                                           June 20, 2019


          Refresh-interval Independent FRR Facility Protection
                     draft-ietf-mpls-ri-rsvp-frr-06

Abstract

   RSVP-TE relies on periodic refresh of RSVP messages to synchronize
   and maintain the Label Switched Path (LSP) related states along the
   reserved path.  In the absence of refresh messages, the LSP-related
   states are automatically deleted.  Reliance on periodic refreshes and
   refresh timeouts are problematic from the scalability point of view.
   The number of RSVP-TE LSPs that a router needs to maintain has been
   growing in service provider networks and the implementations should
   be capable of handling increase in LSP scale.

   RFC 2961 specifies mechanisms to eliminate the reliance on periodic
   refresh and refresh timeout of RSVP messages, and enables a router to
   increase the message refresh interval to values much longer than the
   default 30 seconds defined in RFC 2205.  However, the protocol
   extensions defined in RFC 4090 for supporting Fast ReRoute (FRR)
   using bypass tunnels implicitly rely on short refresh timeouts to
   cleanup stale states.

   In order to eliminate the reliance on refresh timeouts, the routers
   should unambiguously determine when a particular LSP state should be
   deleted.  Coupling LSP state with the corresponding RSVP-TE signaling
   adjacencies as recommended in RFC 8370 will apply in scenarios other
   than RFC 4090 FRR using bypass tunnels.  In scenarios involving RFC
   4090 FRR using bypass tunnels, additional explicit tear down messages
   are necessary.  Refresh-interval Independent RSVP FRR (RI-RSVP-FRR)
   extensions specified in this document consists of procedures to
   enable LSP state cleanup that are essential in scenarios not covered
   by procedures defined in RSVP-TE Scaling Recommendations.  Hence,
   this document updates the procedures defined in RFC 4090 to support
   Refresh-interval Independent RSVP (RI-RSVP) capability specified in
   RFC 8370.






Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 22, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Solution Aspects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Requirement on RFC 4090 Capable Node to advertise RI-RSVP
           Capability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Signaling Handshake between PLR and MP  . . . . . . . . .   8



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


       4.2.1.  PLR Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.2.2.  Remote Signaling Adjacency  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.2.3.  MP Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.2.4.  "Remote" State on MP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.3.  Impact of Failures on LSP State . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       4.3.1.  Non-MP Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       4.3.2.  LP-MP Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       4.3.3.  NP-MP Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       4.3.4.  Behavior of a Router that is both LP-MP and NP-MP . .  14
     4.4.  Conditional PathTear  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       4.4.1.  Sending Conditional PathTear  . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       4.4.2.  Processing Conditional PathTear . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       4.4.3.  CONDITIONS Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.5.  Remote State Teardown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       4.5.1.  PLR Behavior on Local Repair Failure  . . . . . . . .  17
       4.5.2.  PLR Behavior on Resv RRO Change . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       4.5.3.  LSP Preemption during Local Repair  . . . . . . . . .  18
         4.5.3.1.  Preemption on LP-MP after Phop Link Failure . . .  18
         4.5.3.2.  Preemption on NP-MP after Phop Link Failure . . .  18
     4.6.  Backward Compatibility Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       4.6.1.  Detecting Support for Refresh interval Independent
               FRR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       4.6.2.  Procedures for Backward Compatibility . . . . . . . .  20
         4.6.2.1.  Lack of support on Downstream Node  . . . . . . .  20
         4.6.2.2.  Lack of support on Upstream Node  . . . . . . . .  20
         4.6.2.3.  Incremental Deployment  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.1.  New Object - CONDITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   8.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24

1.  Introduction

   RSVP-TE Fast ReRoute [RFC4090] defines two local repair techniques to
   reroute Label Switched Path (LSP) traffic over pre-established backup
   tunnel.  Facility backup method allows one or more LSPs traversing a
   connected link or node to be protected using a bypass tunnel.  The
   many-to-one nature of local repair technique is attractive from
   scalability point of view.  This document enumerates facility backup
   procedures in [RFC4090] that rely on refresh timeout and hence make
   facility backup method refresh-interval dependent.  The RSVP-TE
   extensions defined in this document will enhance the facility backup




Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   protection mechanism by making the corresponding procedures refresh-
   interval independent.

1.1.  Motivation

   Base RSVP [RFC2205] maintains state via the generation of RSVP Path/
   Resv refresh messages.  Refresh messages are used to both synchronize
   state between RSVP neighbors and to recover from lost RSVP messages.
   The use of Refresh messages to cover many possible failures has
   resulted in a number of operational problems.

   -  One problem relates to RSVP control plane scaling due to periodic
      refreshes of Path and Resv messages, another relates to the
      reliability and latency of RSVP signaling.

   -  An additional problem is the time to clean up the stale state
      after a tear message is lost.  For more on these problems see
      Section 1 of RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions [RFC2961].

   The problems listed above adversely affect RSVP control plane
   scalability and RSVP-TE [RFC3209] inherited these problems from
   standard RSVP.  Procedures specified in [RFC2961] address the above
   mentioned problems by eliminating dependency on refreshes for state
   synchronization and for recovering from lost RSVP messages, and by
   eliminating dependency on refresh timeout for stale state cleanup.
   Implementing these procedures allows implementations to improve RSVP-
   TE control plane scalability.  For more details on eliminating
   dependency on refresh timeout for stale state cleanup, refer to
   "Refresh-interval Independent RSVP" section 3 of RSVP-TE Scaling
   Techniques [RFC8370].

   However, the procedures specified in RSVP-TE Scaling Techniques
   [RFC8370] do not fully address stale state cleanup for facility
   backup protection [RFC4090], as facility backup protection still
   depends on refresh timeouts for stale state cleanup.

   The procedures specified in this document, in combination with RSVP-
   TE Scaling Techniques [RFC8370], eliminate facility backup protection
   dependency on refresh timeouts for stale state cleanup.  The document
   hence updates the semantics of Refresh-interval Independent RSVP (RI-
   RSVP) capability specified in Section 3 of RSVP-TE Scaling Techniques
   [RFC8370].

   The procedures specified in this document assume reliable delivery of
   RSVP messages, as specified in [RFC2961].  Therefore this document
   makes support for [RFC2961] a pre-requisite.





Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


2.  Terminology

   The reader is expected to be familiar with the terminology in
   [RFC2205], [RFC3209], [RFC4090] and [RFC4558].

   Phop node: Previous-hop router along the label switched path

   PPhop node: Previous-Previous-hop router along the label switched
   path

   Nhop node: Next-hop router along the label switched path

   PPhop node: Next-Next-hop router along the label switched path

   PLR: Point of Local Repair router as defined in [RFC4090]

   MP: Merge Point router as defined in [RFC4090]

   LP-MP node: Merge Point router at the tail of Link-Protecting bypass
   tunnel

   NP-MP node: Merge Point router at the tail of Node-Protecting bypass
   tunnel

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database

   LSP state: The combination of "path state" maintained as Path State
   Block (PSB) and "reservation state" maintained as Reservation State
   Block (RSB) forms an individual LSP state on an RSVP-TE speaker

   B-SFRR-Ready: Bypass Summary FRR Ready Extended Association object
   defined in Summary FRR extensions [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte]
   and is added by the PLR for each protected LSP.

   Conditional PathTear: A PathTear message containing a suggestion to a
   receiving downstream router to retain the path state if the receiving
   router is an NP-MP

   Remote PathTear: A PathTear message sent from a Point of Local Repair
   (PLR) to the MP to delete LSP state on the MP if PLR had not reliably
   sent the backup Path state before

3.  Problem Description








Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


                                 E
                               /   \
                              /     \
                             /       \
                            /         \
                           /           \
                          /             \
                         A ----- B ----- C ----- D
                                 \             /
                                  \           /
                                   \         /
                                    \       /
                                     \     /
                                      \   /
                                        F

                        Figure 1: Example Topology

   In the topology in Figure 1, let us consider a large number of LSPs
   from A to D transiting B and C.  Assume that refresh interval has
   been configured to be long of the order of minutes and refresh
   reduction extensions are enabled on all routers.

   Also let us assume that node protection has been configured for the
   LSPs and the LSPs are protected by each router in the following way

   -  A has made node protection available using bypass LSP A -> E -> C;
      A is the PLR and C is the NP-MP

   -  B has made node protection available using bypass LSP B -> F -> D;
      B is the PLR and D is the NP-MP

   -  C has made link protection available using bypass LSP C -> B -> F
      -> D; C is the PLR and D is the LP-MP

   In the above condition, assume that B-C link fails.  The following is
   the sequence of events that is expected to occur for all protected
   LSPs under normal conditions.

   1. B performs local repair and re-directs LSP traffic over the bypass
      LSP B -> F -> D.

   2. B also creates backup state for the LSP and triggers sending of
      backup LSP state to D over the bypass LSP B -> F -> D.

   3. D receives backup LSP states and merges the backups with the
      protected LSPs.




Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   4. As the link on C, over which the LSP states are refreshed, has
      failed, C will no longer receive state refreshes.  Consequently
      the protected LSP states on C will time out and C will send the
      tear down messages for all LSPs.  As each router should consider
      itself as an MP, C will time out the state only after waiting for
      an additional duration equal to refresh timeout.

   While the above sequence of events has been described in [RFC4090],
   there are a few problems for which no mechanism has been specified
   explicitly.

   -  If the protected LSP on C times out before D receives signaling
      for the backup LSP, then D would receive a PathTear from C prior
      to receiving signaling for the backup LSP, thus resulting in
      deleting the LSP state.  This would be possible at scale even with
      default refresh time.

   -  If upon the link failure C is to keep state until its timeout,
      then with long refresh interval this may result in a large amount
      of stale state on C.  Alternatively, if upon the link failure C is
      to delete the state and send a PathTear to D, this would result in
      deleting the state on D, thus deleting the LSP.  D needs a
      reliable mechanism to determine whether it is an MP or not to
      overcome this problem.

   -  If head-end A attempts to tear down LSP after step 1 but before
      step 2 of the above sequence, then B may receive the tear down
      message before step 2 and delete the LSP state from its state
      database.  If B deletes its state without informing D, with long
      refresh interval this could cause (large) buildup of stale state
      on D.

   -  If B fails to perform local repair in step 1, then B will delete
      the LSP state from its state database without informing D.  As B
      deletes its state without informing D, with long refresh interval
      this could cause (large) buildup of stale state on D.

   The purpose of this document is to provide solutions to the above
   problems which will then make it practical to scale up to a large
   number of protected LSPs in the network.

4.  Solution Aspects

   The solution consists of five parts.

   -  Utilize MP determination mechanism specified in RSVP-TE Summary
      FRR [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte] that enables the PLR to
      signal the availability of local protection to the MP.  In



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


      addition, introduce PLR and MP procedures to establish Node-ID
      based hello session between the PLR and the MP to detect router
      failures and to determine capability.  See section 4.2 for more
      details.  This part of the solution re-uses some of the extensions
      defined in RSVP-TE Summary FRR [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte]
      and RSVP-TE Scaling Techniques [RFC8370], and the subsequent sub-
      sections will list the extensions in these drafts that are
      utilized in this document.

   -  Handle upstream link or node failures by cleaning up LSP states if
      the node has not found itself as an MP through the MP
      determination mechanism.  See section 4.3 for more details.

   -  Introduce extensions to enable a router to send a tear down
      message to the downstream router that enables the receiving router
      to conditionally delete its local LSP state.  See section 4.4 for
      more details.

   -  Enhance facility protection by allowing a PLR to directly send a
      tear down message to the MP without requiring the PLR to either
      have a working bypass LSP or have already signaled backup LSP
      state.  See section 4.5 for more details.

   -  Introduce extensions to enable the above procedures to be backward
      compatible with routers along the LSP path running implementation
      that do not support these procedures.  See section 4.6 for more
      details.

4.1.  Requirement on RFC 4090 Capable Node to advertise RI-RSVP
      Capability

   A node supporting [RFC4090] facility protection FRR MAY set the RI-
   RSVP capability (I bit) defined in Section 3 of RSVP-TE Scaling
   Techniques [RFC8370] only if it supports all the extensions specified
   in the rest of this document.  A node supporting [RFC4090] facility
   bypass FRR but not supporting the extensions specified in this
   document MUST reset the RI-RSVP capability (I bit) in the outgoing
   Node-ID based Hello messages.  Hence, this document updates [RFC4090]
   by defining extensions and additional procedures over facility
   protection FRR defined in [RFC4090] in order to advertise RI-RSVP
   capability [RFC8370].

4.2.  Signaling Handshake between PLR and MP








Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


4.2.1.  PLR Behavior

   As per the procedures specified in [RFC4090], when a protected LSP
   comes up and if the "local protection desired" flag is set in the
   SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object, each node along the LSP path attempts to
   make local protection available for the LSP.

   -  If the "node protection desired" flag is set, then the node tries
      to become a PLR by attempting to create a NP-bypass LSP to the
      NNhop node avoiding the Nhop node on protected LSP path.  In case
      node protection could not be made available, the node attempts to
      create an LP-bypass LSP to the Nhop node avoiding only the link
      that the protected LSP takes to reach Nhop

   -  If the "node protection desired" flag is not set, then the PLR
      attempts to create an LP-bypass LSP to the Nhop node avoiding the
      link that the protected LSP takes to reach the Nhop

   With regard to the PLR procedures described above and that are
   specified in [RFC4090], this document specifies the following
   additional procedures to support RI-RSVP defined in [RFC8370].

   -  While selecting the destination address of the bypass LSP, the PLR
      SHOULD select the router ID of the NNhop or Nhop node from the
      Node-ID sub-object included in the RRO object carried in the Resv
      message.  If the MP has not included a Node-ID sub-object in the
      Resv RRO and if the PLR and the MP are in the same area, then the
      PLR may utilize the TED to determine the router ID corresponding
      to the interface address included by the MP in the RRO object.  If
      the NP-MP in a different IGP area has not included a Node-ID sub-
      object in RRO object, then the PLR MUST execute backward
      compatibility procedures as if the downstream nodes along the LSP
      do not support the extensions defined in the document (see
      Section 4.6.2.1).

   -  The PLR MUST also include its router ID in a Node-ID sub-object in
      RRO object carried in a Path message.  While including its router
      ID in the Node-ID sub-object carried in the outgoing Path message,
      the PLR MUST include the Node-ID sub-object after including its
      IPv4/IPv6 address or unnumbered interface ID sub-object.

   -  In parallel to the attempt made to create NP-bypass or LP-bypass,
      the PLR MUST initiate a Node-ID based Hello session to the NNhop
      or Nhop node respectively to establish the RSVP-TE signaling
      adjacency.  This Hello session is used to detect MP node failure
      as well as determine the capability of the MP node.  If the MP has
      set the I-bit in the CAPABILITY object [RFC8370] carried in Hello
      message corresponding to the Node-ID based Hello session, then the



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


      PLR SHOULD conclude that the MP supports refresh-interval
      independent FRR procedures defined in this document.  If the MP
      has not sent Node-ID based Hello messages or has not set the I-bit
      in CAPABILITY object [RFC8370], then the PLR MUST execute backward
      compatibility procedures defined in Section 4.6.2.1 of this
      document.

   -  If the bypass LSP comes up and the PLR has made local protection
      available for one or more LSPs, then [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-
      rsvpte] applies: the PLR MUST include B-SFRR-Ready Extended
      Association object and trigger a Path message to be sent for those
      LSPs.  If a B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object is included
      in the Path message, then the encoding and object ordering rules
      specified in RSVP-TE Summary FRR
      [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte] MUST be followed.

4.2.2.  Remote Signaling Adjacency

   A Node-ID based RSVP-TE Hello session is one in which Node-ID is used
   in the source and the destination address fields of RSVP Hello
   messages [RFC4558].  This document extends Node-ID based RSVP Hello
   session to track the state of any RSVP-TE neighbor that is not
   directly connected by at least one interface.  In order to apply
   Node-ID based RSVP-TE Hello session between any two routers that are
   not immediate neighbors, the router that supports the extensions
   defined in the document MUST set TTL to 255 in all outgoing Node-ID
   based Hello messages exchanged between the PLR and the MP.  The
   default hello interval for this Node-ID hello session SHOULD be set
   to the default specified in RSVP-TE Scaling Techniques [RFC8370].

   In the rest of the document the term "signaling adjacency", or
   "remote signaling adjacency" refers specifically to the RSVP-TE
   signaling adjacency.

4.2.3.  MP Behavior

   With regard to the MP procedures that are defined in [RFC4090], this
   document specifies the following additional procedures to support RI-
   RSVP defined in [RFC8370].

   Each node along an LSP path supporting the extensions defined in this
   document MUST also include its router ID in the Node-ID sub-object of
   the RRO object carried in the Resv message of the LSPs.  If the PLR
   has not included a Node-ID sub-object in the RRO object carried in
   the Path message and if the PLR is in a different IGP area, then the
   router MUST NOT execute the MP procedures specified in this document
   for those LSPs.  Instead, the node MUST execute backward
   compatibility procedures defined in Section 4.6.2.2 as if the



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   upstream nodes along the LSP do not support the extensions defined in
   this document.

   A node receiving Path messages should determine whether they contain
   a B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object with the Node-ID address
   of the PLR as the source and its own Node-ID as the destination.  In
   addition the node should determine whether it has an operational
   remote Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PLR.  If either the PLR
   has not included the B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object or if
   there is no operational Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PLR or
   if the PLR has not advertised RI-RSVP capability in its Node-ID based
   Hello messages, then the node MUST execute backward compatibility
   procedures defined in Section 4.6.2.2.

   If a matching B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object is found in
   the Path message and if there is an operational remote signaling
   adjacency with the PLR that has advertised RI-RSVP capability (I-bit)
   [RFC8370] in its Node-ID based Hello messages, then the node SHOULD
   consider itself as the MP for the corresponding PLR.  The matching
   and ordering rules for Bypass Summary FRR Extended Association
   specified in RSVP-TE Summary FRR [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte]
   MUST be followed by the implementations supporting this document.

   -  If a matching Bypass Summary FRR Extended Association object is
      included by the PPhop node of an LSP and if a corresponding Node-
      ID signaling adjacency exists with the PPhop node, then the router
      SHOULD conclude it is the NP-MP.

   -  If a matching Bypass Summary FRR Extended Association object is
      included by the Phop node of an LSP and if a corresponding Node-ID
      signaling adjacency exists with the Phop node, then the router
      SHOULD conclude it is the LP-MP.

4.2.4.  "Remote" State on MP

   Once a router concludes it is the MP for a PLR running refresh-
   interval independent FRR procedures, it SHOULD create a remote path
   state for the LSP.  The only difference between the "remote" path
   state and the LSP state is the RSVP_HOP object.  The RSVP_HOP object
   in a "remote" path state contains the address that the PLR uses to
   send Node-ID hello messages to the MP.

   The MP SHOULD consider the "remote" path state automatically deleted
   if:

   -  The MP later receives a Path with no matching B-SFRR-Ready
      Extended Association object corresponding to the PLR's IP address
      contained in the Path RRO, or



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   -  The Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PLR goes down, or

   -  The MP receives backup LSP signaling from the PLR or

   -  The MP receives a PathTear, or

   -  The MP deletes the LSP state on local policy or exception event

   Unlike the normal path state that is either locally generated on the
   ingress or created by a Path message from the Phop node, the "remote"
   path state is not signaled explicitly from the PLR.  The purpose of
   "remote" path state is to enable the PLR to explicitly tear down the
   path and reservation states corresponding to the LSP by sending a
   tear message for the "remote" path state.  Such a message tearing
   down "remote" path state is called "Remote" PathTear.

   The scenarios in which a "Remote" PathTear is applied are described
   in Section 4.5.

4.3.  Impact of Failures on LSP State

   This section describes the procedures for routers on the LSP path for
   different kinds of failures.  The procedures described on detecting
   RSVP control plane adjacency failures do not impact the RSVP-TE
   graceful restart mechanisms ([RFC3473], [RFC5063]).  If the router
   executing these procedures act as helper for neighboring router, then
   the control plane adjacency will be declared as having failed after
   taking into account the grace period extended for neighbor by the
   helper.

   Node failures are detected from the state of Node-ID hello sessions
   established with immediate neighbors.  RSVP-TE Scaling Techniques
   [RFC8370] recommends each router to establish Node-ID hello sessions
   with all its immediate neighbors.  PLR or MP node failure is detected
   from the state of remote signaling adjacency established according to
   Section 4.2.2 of this document.

4.3.1.  Non-MP Behavior

   When a router detects Phop link or Phop node failure and the router
   is not an MP for the LSP, then it SHOULD send a Conditional PathTear
   (refer to Section 4.4 "Conditional PathTear" below) and delete the
   PSB and RSB states corresponding to the LSP.








Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


4.3.2.  LP-MP Behavior

   When the Phop link for an LSP fails on a router that is an LP-MP for
   the LSP, the LP-MP MUST retain the PSB and RSB states corresponding
   to the LSP till the occurrence of any of the following events.

   -  The Node-ID signaling adjacency with the Phop PLR goes down, or

   -  The MP receives a normal or "Remote" PathTear for its PSB, or

   -  The MP receives a ResvTear for its RSB.

   When a router that is an LP-MP for an LSP detects Phop node failure
   from the Node-ID signaling adjacency state, the LP-MP SHOULD send a
   normal PathTear and delete the PSB and RSB states corresponding to
   the LSP.

4.3.3.  NP-MP Behavior

   When a router that is an NP-MP for an LSP detects Phop link failure,
   or Phop node failure from the Node-ID signaling adjacency, the router
   MUST retain the PSB and RSB states corresponding to the LSP till the
   occurrence of any of the following events.

   -  The remote Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PPhop PLR goes
      down, or

   -  The MP receives a normal or "Remote" PathTear for its PSB, or

   -  The MP receives a ResvTear for its RSB.

   When a router that is an NP-MP does not detect Phop link or node
   failure, but receives a Conditional PathTear from the Phop node, then
   the router MUST retain the PSB and RSB states corresponding to the
   LSP till the occurrence of any of the following events.

   -  The remote Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PPhop PLR goes
      down, or

   -  The MP receives a normal or "Remote" PathTear for its PSB, or

   -  The MP receives a ResvTear for its RSB.

   Receiving a Conditional PathTear from the Phop node will not impact
   the "remote" state from the PPhop PLR.  Note that Phop node would
   send a Conditional PathTear if it was not an MP.





Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   In the example topology in Figure 1, we assume C & D are the NP-MPs
   for the PLRs A & B respectively.  Now when A-B link fails, as B is
   not an MP and its Phop link has failed, B will delete LSP state (this
   behavior is required for unprotected LSPs - Section 4.3.1).  In the
   data plane, that would require B to delete the label forwarding entry
   corresponding to the LSP.  So if B's downstream nodes C and D
   continue to retain state, it would not be correct for D to continue
   to assume itself as the NP-MP for the PLR B.

   The mechanism that enables D to stop considering itself as the NP-MP
   for B and delete the corresponding "remote" path state is given
   below.

   1. When C receives a Conditional PathTear from B, it decides to
      retain LSP state as it is the NP-MP of the PLR A.  C also SHOULD
      check whether Phop B had previously signaled availability of node
      protection.  As B had previously signaled NP availability by
      including B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object, C SHOULD
      remove the B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object containing
      Association Source set to B from the Path message and trigger a
      Path to D.

   2. When D receives a triggered Path, it realizes that it is no longer
      the NP-MP for B and so it deletes the corresponding "remote" path
      state.  D does not propagate the Path further down because the
      only change is that the B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object
      corresponding to Association Source B is no longer present in the
      Path message.

4.3.4.  Behavior of a Router that is both LP-MP and NP-MP

   A router may be simultaneously the LP-MP as well as the NP-MP for the
   Phop and the PPhop nodes respectively of an LSP.  If Phop link fails
   on such node, the node MUST retain the PSB and RSB states
   corresponding to the LSP till the occurrence of any of the following
   events.

   -  Both Node-ID signaling adjacencies with Phop and PPhop nodes go
      down, or

   -  The MP receives a normal or "Remote" PathTear for its PSB, or

   -  The MP receives a ResvTear for its RSB.

   If a router that is both LP-MP and NP-MP detects Phop node failure,
   then the node MUST retain the PSB and RSB states corresponding to the
   LSP till the occurrence of any of the following events.




Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   -  The remote Node-ID signaling adjacency with the PPhop PLR goes
      down, or

   -  The MP receives a normal or "Remote" PathTear for its PSB, or

   -  The MP receives a ResvTear for its RSB.

4.4.  Conditional PathTear

   In the example provided in the Section 4.3.3, B deletes the PSB and
   RSB states corresponding to the LSP once B detects its link to Phop
   went down as B is not an MP.  If B were to send a PathTear normally,
   then C would delete LSP state immediately.  In order to avoid this,
   there should be some mechanism by which B can indicate to C that B
   does not require the receiving node to unconditionally delete the LSP
   state immediately.  For this, B SHOULD add a new optional CONDITIONS
   object in the PathTear.  The CONDITIONS object is defined in
   Section 4.4.3.  If node C also understands the new object, then C
   SHOULD delete LSP state only if it is not an NP-MP - in other words C
   SHOULD delete LSP state if there is no "remote" PLR path state on C.

4.4.1.  Sending Conditional PathTear

   A router that is not an MP for an LSP SHOULD delete the PSB and RSB
   states corresponding to the LSP if the Phop link or the Phop Node-ID
   signaling adjacency goes down (Section 4.3.1).  The router SHOULD
   send a Conditional PathTear if the following are also true.

   -  The ingress has requested node protection for the LSP, and

   -  No PathTear is received from the upstream node

4.4.2.  Processing Conditional PathTear

   When a router that is not an NP-MP receives a Conditional PathTear,
   the node SHOULD delete the PSB and RSB states corresponding to the
   LSP, and process the Conditional PathTear by considering it as a
   normal PathTear.  Specifically, the node MUST NOT propagate the
   Conditional PathTear downstream but remove the optional object and
   send a normal PathTear downstream.

   When a node that is an NP-MP receives a Conditional PathTear, it MUST
   NOT delete LSP state.  The node SHOULD check whether the Phop node
   had previously included the B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association object
   in the Path.  If the object had been included previously by the Phop,
   then the node processing the Conditional PathTear from the Phop
   SHOULD remove the corresponding object and trigger a Path downstream.




Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   If a Conditional PathTear is received from a neighbor that has not
   advertised support (refer to Section 4.6) for the new procedures
   defined in this document, then the node SHOULD consider the message
   as a normal PathTear.  The node SHOULD propagate the normal PathTear
   downstream and delete the LSP state.

4.4.3.  CONDITIONS Object

   As any implementation that does not support Conditional PathTear
   SHOULD ignore the new object but process the message as a normal
   PathTear without generating any error, the Class-Num of the new
   object MUST be 10bbbbbb where 'b' represents a bit (from Section 3.10
   of [RFC2205]).

   The new object is called as "CONDITIONS" object that will specify the
   conditions under which default processing rules of the RSVP-TE
   message MUST be invoked.

   The object has the following format:


      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |          Length               |  Class        |     C-type    |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                         Reserved                            |M|
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


                        Figure 2: CONDITIONS Object

      Length: This contains the size of the object in bytes and should
      be set to eight.

      Class: To be assigned

      C-type: 1

      M bit: If the M bit is set to 1, then the PathTear message SHOULD
      be processed according to the receiver router role, i.e. if it is
      an MP or not.
      If M-bit is set to 0, then the PathTear message SHOULD be
      processed as a normal PathTear message.

4.5.  Remote State Teardown

   If the ingress wants to tear down the LSP because of a management
   event while the LSP is being locally repaired at a transit PLR, it
   would not be desirable to wait till the completion of backup LSP



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   signaling to perform state cleanup.  To enable LSP state cleanup when
   the LSP is being locally repaired, the PLR SHOULD send a "Remote"
   PathTear message instructing the MP to delete the PSB and RSB states
   corresponding to the LSP.  The TTL in the "Remote" PathTear message
   SHOULD be set to 255.

   Let us consider that node C, in example topology (Figure 1), has gone
   down and B locally repairs the LSP.

   1. Ingress A receives a management event to tear down the LSP.

   2. A sends a normal PathTear to B.

   3. Assume B has not initiated backup signaling for the LSR.  To
      enable LSP state cleanup, B SHOULD send a "Remote" PathTear with
      destination IP address set to that of D used in the Node-ID
      signaling adjacency with D, and RSVP_HOP object containing local
      address used in the Node-ID signaling adjacency.

   4. B then deletes the PSB and RSB states corresponding to the LSP.

   5. On D there would be a remote signaling adjacency with B and so D
      SHOULD accept the "Remote" PathTear and delete the PSB and RSB
      states corresponding to the LSP.

4.5.1.  PLR Behavior on Local Repair Failure

   If local repair fails on the PLR after a failure, then this should be
   considered as a case for cleaning up LSP state from the PLR to the
   Egress.  The PLR would achieve this using "Remote" PathTear to clean
   up the state from the MP.  If the MP has retained the LSP state, then
   it would propagate the PathTear downstream thereby achieving state
   cleanup.  Note that in the case of link protection, the PathTear
   would be directed to the LP-MP node's IP address rather than the Nhop
   interface address.

4.5.2.  PLR Behavior on Resv RRO Change

   When a PLR router that has already made NP available detects a change
   in the RRO carried in the Resv message indicating that the router's
   former NP-MP is no longer present in the LSP path, then the router
   SHOULD send a "Remote" PathTear directly to its former NP-MP.

   In the example topology in Figure 1, let us assume A has made node
   protection available and C has concluded it is the NP-MP for PLR A.
   When the B-C link fails then C, implementing the procedure specified
   in Section 4.3.4 of this document, will retain state till: the remote
   Node-ID signaling adjacency with A goes down, or a PathTear or a



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   ResvTear is received for its PSB or RSB respectively.  If B also has
   made node protection available, B will eventually complete backup LSP
   signaling with its NP-MP D and trigger a Resv to A with RRO changed.
   The new RRO of the LSP carried in the Resv will not contain C.  When
   A processes the Resv with a new RRO not containing C - its former NP-
   MP, A SHOULD send a "Remote" PathTear to C.  When C receives the
   "Remote" PathTear for its PSB state, C will send a normal PathTear
   downstream to D and delete both the PSB and RSB states corresponding
   to the LSP.  As D has already received backup LSP signaling from B, D
   will retain control plane and forwarding states corresponding to the
   LSP.

4.5.3.  LSP Preemption during Local Repair

4.5.3.1.  Preemption on LP-MP after Phop Link Failure

   If an LSP is preempted on an LP-MP after its Phop or incoming link
   has already failed but the backup LSP has not been signaled yet, then
   the node SHOULD send a normal PathTear and delete both the PSB and
   RSB states corresponding to the LSP.  As the LP-MP has retained LSP
   state expecting the PLR to perform backup LSP signaling, preemption
   would bring down the LSP and the node would not be LP-MP any more
   requiring the node to clean up LSP state.

4.5.3.2.  Preemption on NP-MP after Phop Link Failure

   If an LSP is preempted on an NP-MP after its Phop link has already
   failed but the backup LSP has not been signaled yet, then the node
   SHOULD send a normal PathTear and delete the PSB and RSB states
   corresponding to the LSP.  As the NP-MP has retained LSP state
   expecting the PLR to perform backup LSP signaling, preemption would
   bring down the LSP and the node would not be NP-MP any more requiring
   the node to clean up LSP state.

   Let us consider that B-C link goes down on the same example topology
   (Figure 1).  As C is the NP-MP for the PLR A, C will retain LSP
   state.

   1. The LSP is preempted on C.

   2. C will delete the RSB state corresponding to the LSP.  But C
      cannot send a PathErr or a ResvTear to the PLR A because the
      backup LSP has not been signaled yet.

   3. As the only reason for C having retained state after Phop node
      failure was that it was an NP-MP, C SHOULD send a normal PathTear
      to D and delete its PSB state also.  D would also delete the PSB
      and RSB states on receiving a PathTear from C.



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   4. B starts backup LSP signaling to D.  But as D does not have the
      LSP state, it will reject the backup LSP Path and send a PathErr
      to B.

   5. B will delete its reservation and send a ResvTear to A.

4.6.  Backward Compatibility Procedures

   The "Refresh interval Independent FRR" or RI-RSVP-FRR referred below
   in this section refers to the changes that have been defined in
   previous sections.  Any implementation that does not support them has
   been termed as "non-RI-RSVP-FRR implementation".  The extensions
   proposed in RSVP-TE Summary FRR [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte]
   are applicable to implementations that do not support RI-RSVP-FRR.
   On the other hand, changes proposed relating to LSP state cleanup
   namely Conditional and "Remote" PathTear require support from one-hop
   and two-hop neighboring nodes along the LSP path.  So procedures that
   fall under LSP state cleanup category SHOULD be turned on only if all
   nodes involved in the node protection FRR i.e. the PLR, the MP and
   the intermediate node in the case of NP, support the extensions.
   Note that for LSPs requesting only link protection, the PLR and the
   LP-MP need to support the extensions.

4.6.1.  Detecting Support for Refresh interval Independent FRR

   An implementation supporting the extensions specified in previous
   sections (called RI-RSVP-FRR here after) SHOULD set the flag "Refresh
   interval Independent RSVP" or RI-RSVP flag in the CAPABILITY object
   carried in Hello messages.  The RI-RSVP flag is specified in RSVP-TE
   Scaling Techniques [RFC8370].

   -  As nodes supporting the extensions SHOULD initiate Node Hellos
      with adjacent nodes, a node on the path of protected LSP can
      determine whether its Phop or Nhop neighbor supports RI-RSVP-FRR
      enhancements from the Hello messages sent by the neighbor.

   -  If a node attempts to make node protection available, then the PLR
      SHOULD initiate a remote Node-ID signaling adjacency with its
      NNhop.  If the NNhop (a) does not reply to remote node Hello
      message or (b) does not set the RI-RSVP flag in the CAPABILITY
      object carried in its Node-ID Hello messages, then the PLR can
      conclude that NNhop does not support RI-RSVP-FRR extensions.

   -  If node protection is requested for an LSP and if (a) the PPhop
      node has not included a matching B-SFRR-Ready Extended Association
      object in its Path messages or (b) the PPhop node has not
      initiated remote node Hello messages or (c) the PPhop node does
      not set the RI-RSVP flag in the CAPABILITY object carried in its



Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


      Node-ID Hello messages, then the node MUST conclude that the PLR
      does not support RI-RSVP-FRR extensions.  The details are
      described in the "Procedures for Backward Compatibility" section
      below.

4.6.2.  Procedures for Backward Compatibility

   The procedures defined hereafter are performed on a subset of LSPs
   that traverse a node, rather than on all LSPs that traverse a node.
   This behavior is required to support backward compatibility for a
   subset of LSPs traversing nodes running non-RI-RSVP-FRR
   implementations.

4.6.2.1.  Lack of support on Downstream Node

   The procedures on the downstream direction are as follows.

   -  If the Nhop does not support the RI-RSVP-FRR extensions, then the
      node SHOULD reduce the "refresh period" in the TIME_VALUES object
      carried in the Path to the default short refresh interval.

   -  If node protection is requested and the NNhop node does not
      support the enhancements, then the node SHOULD reduce the "refresh
      period" in the TIME_VALUES object carried in the Path to the
      default short refresh interval.

   If the node reduces the refresh time from the above procedures, it
   MUST NOT send any "Remote" PathTear or Conditional PathTear messages.

   Consider the example topology in Figure 1.  If C does not support the
   RI-RSVP-FRR extensions, then:

   -  A and B SHOULD reduce the refresh time to default short refresh
      interval of 30 seconds and trigger a Path

   -  If B is not an MP and if Phop link of B fails, B cannot send
      Conditional PathTear to C but MUST time out the PSB state from A
      normally.  This would be accomplished if A would also reduce the
      refresh time to default value.  So if C does not support the RI-
      RSVP-FRR extensions, then Phop B and the PPhop A SHOULD reduce the
      refresh period to the default short refresh interval.

4.6.2.2.  Lack of support on Upstream Node

   The procedures on the upstream direction are as follows.






Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   -  If Phop node does not support the RI-RSVP-FRR extensions, then the
      node SHOULD reduce the "refresh period" in the TIME_VALUES object
      carried in the Resv to the default short refresh interval.

   -  If node protection is requested and the Phop node does not support
      the RI-RSVP-FRR extensions, then the node SHOULD reduce the
      "refresh period" in the TIME_VALUES object carried in the Path to
      the default short refresh interval.

   -  If node protection is requested and the PPhop node does not
      support the RI-RSVP-FRR extensions, then the node SHOULD reduce
      the "refresh period" in the TIME_VALUES object carried in the Resv
      to the default short refresh interval.

   -  If the node reduces the refresh time from the above procedures, it
      SHOULD also not execute MP procedures specified in Section 4.3 of
      this document.

4.6.2.3.  Incremental Deployment

   The backward compatibility procedures described in the previous sub-
   sections imply that a router supporting the RI-RSVP-FRR extensions
   specified in this document can apply the procedures specified in the
   document either in the downstream or upstream direction of an LSP,
   depending on the capability of the routers downstream or upstream in
   the LSP path.

   -  RI-RSVP-FRR extensions and procedures are enabled for downstream
      Path, PathTear and ResvErr messages corresponding to an LSP if
      link protection is requested for the LSP and the Nhop node
      supports the extensions

   -  RI-RSVP-FRR extensions and procedures are enabled for downstream
      Path, PathTear and ResvErr messages corresponding to an LSP if
      node protection is requested for the LSP and both Nhop & NNhop
      nodes support the extensions

   -  RI-RSVP-FRR extensions and procedures are enabled for upstream
      PathErr, Resv and ResvTear messages corresponding to an LSP if
      link protection is requested for the LSP and the Phop node
      supports the extensions

   -  RI-RSVP-FRR extensions and procedures are enabled for upstream
      PathErr, Resv and ResvTear messages corresponding to an LSP if
      node protection is requested for the LSP and both Phop and the
      PPhop support the extensions





Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   For example, if an implementation supporting the RI-RSVP-FRR
   extensions specified in this document is deployed on all routers in
   particular region of the network and if all the LSPs in the network
   request node protection, then the FRR extensions will only be applied
   for the LSP segments that traverse the particular region.  This will
   aid incremental deployment of these extensions and also allow reaping
   the benefits of the extensions in portions of the network where it is
   supported.

5.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations pertaining to the original RSVP protocol
   [RFC2205], [RFC3209] and [RFC5920] remain relevant.

   This document extends the applicability of Node-ID based Hello
   session between immediate neighbors.  The Node-ID based Hello session
   between the PLR and the NP-MP may require the two routers to exchange
   Hello messages with non-immediate neighbor.  So, the implementations
   SHOULD provide the option to configure Node-ID neighbor specific or
   global authentication key to authentication messages received from
   Node-ID neighbors.  The network administrator MAY utilize this option
   to enable RSVP-TE routers to authenticate Node-ID Hello messages
   received with TTL greater than 1.  Implementations SHOULD also
   provide the option to specify a limit on the number of Node-ID based
   Hello sessions that can be established on a router supporting the
   extensions defined in this document.

6.  IANA Considerations

6.1.  New Object - CONDITIONS

   RSVP Change Guidelines [RFC3936] defines the Class-Number name space
   for RSVP objects.  The name space is managed by IANA.

   IANA registry: RSVP Parameters
   Subsection: Class Names, Class Numbers, and Class Types

   A new RSVP object using a Class-Number from 128-183 range called the
   "CONDITIONS" object is defined in Section 4.4 of this document.  The
   Class-Number from 128-183 range will be allocated by IANA.

7.  Acknowledgements

   We are very grateful to Yakov Rekhter for his contributions to the
   development of the idea and thorough review of content of the draft.
   Thanks to Raveendra Torvi and Yimin Shen for their comments and
   inputs.




Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


8.  Contributors

   Markus Jork
   128 Technology
   Email: mjork@128technology.net

   Harish Sitaraman
   Individual Contributor
   Email: harish.ietf@gmail.com

   Vishnu Pavan Beeram
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   Email: vbeeram@juniper.net

   Ebben Aries
   Arrcus, Inc.
   Email: exa@arrcus.com

   Mike Taillon
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Email: mtaillon@cisco.com

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte]
              Taillon, M., Saad, T., Gandhi, R., Deshmukh, A., Jork, M.,
              and V. Beeram, "RSVP-TE Summary Fast Reroute Extensions
              for LSP Tunnels", draft-ietf-mpls-summary-frr-rsvpte-04
              (work in progress), May 2019.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, R., Ed., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, DOI 10.17487/RFC2205,
              September 1997, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2205>.

   [RFC2961]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F.,
              and S. Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction
              Extensions", RFC 2961, DOI 10.17487/RFC2961, April 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2961>.





Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, DOI 10.17487/RFC3209, December 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3209>.

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
              Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-
              Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3473, January 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3473>.

   [RFC3936]  Kompella, K. and J. Lang, "Procedures for Modifying the
              Resource reSerVation Protocol (RSVP)", BCP 96, RFC 3936,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3936, October 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3936>.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Ed., Swallow, G., Ed., and A. Atlas, Ed., "Fast
              Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4090, May 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4090>.

   [RFC4558]  Ali, Z., Rahman, R., Prairie, D., and D. Papadimitriou,
              "Node-ID Based Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) Hello:
              A Clarification Statement", RFC 4558,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4558, June 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4558>.

   [RFC5063]  Satyanarayana, A., Ed. and R. Rahman, Ed., "Extensions to
              GMPLS Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) Graceful
              Restart", RFC 5063, DOI 10.17487/RFC5063, October 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5063>.

   [RFC8370]  Beeram, V., Ed., Minei, I., Shakir, R., Pacella, D., and
              T. Saad, "Techniques to Improve the Scalability of RSVP-TE
              Deployments", RFC 8370, DOI 10.17487/RFC8370, May 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8370>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC5920]  Fang, L., Ed., "Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS
              Networks", RFC 5920, DOI 10.17487/RFC5920, July 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5920>.

Authors' Addresses







Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft             RI-RSVP FRR Bypass                  June 2019


   Chandra Ramachandran
   Juniper Networks, Inc.

   Email: csekar@juniper.net


   Tarek Saad
   Juniper Networks, Inc.

   Email: tsaad@juniper.net


   Ina Minei
   Google, Inc.

   Email: inaminei@google.com


   Dante Pacella
   Verizon, Inc.

   Email: dante.j.pacella@verizon.com





























Ramachandran, et al.    Expires December 22, 2019              [Page 25]
