





	    INTERNET-DRAFT		      Nathaniel	Borenstein
	    draft-cpsr-one-net-01.txt	      Harry Hochheiser
					      Andy Oram

					      Computer Professionals for
						  Social Responsibility

	    Expires: 03	Oct 1998	      03 Apr 1998



	    Status of This Document

	    This draft,	file name draft-cpsr-one-net-01.txt, is	intended
	    to	be  become  an	Informational RFC.  Distribution of this
	    document is	 unlimited.  Comments  should  be  sent	 to  the
	    authors  at	 <onenet-comments@cpsr.org>  or	 to  the onenet-
	    discuss@cpsr.org mailing list.

	    This document is  an  Internet-Draft.   Internet-Drafts  are
	    working  documents	of  the	 Internet Engineering Task Force
	    (IETF), its	areas, and its working groups.	Note that  other
	    groups  may	 also  distribute working documents as Internet-
	    Drafts.

	    Internet-Drafts are	draft documents	valid for a  maximum  of
	    six	 months	 and  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
	    other documents at any time.  It  is  inappropriate	 to  use
	    Internet-Drafts  as	reference material or to cite them other
	    than as "work in progress."

            To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
            the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
            Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
            (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
            (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
            (US West Coast).

	    Abstract

	    This document presents a suggested set of  basic  principles
	    that  the authors believe should underlie all future work in
	    the	area  of  Internet  governance.	  The  purpose	of  this
	    document  is  to  work  towards  as	 broad	a  consensus  as
	    possible,  in  the	 diverse   Internet   community,   about
	    principles	that  should  inform  the  way	the  Internet is









				       - 2 -


	    administered for the benefit of all	humanity.

	    The	principles have	 been  drafted	under  the  auspices  of
	    Computer   Professionals  for  Social  Responsibility,  with
	    several iterations internal	to that	organization.	However,
	    they  are  still  very  much  seen	as  a  work in progress.
	    Comments are solicited from	all interested parties.	  Future
	    versions  will  be	refined	 based	on  these  comments  and
	    published  as  future  Internet-Drafts,  with  a   goal   of
	    publication	 of a finalized	version	of the declaration as an
	    Internet RFC in summer, 1998.

	    All	comments on this document are welcome; please send  them
	    to	 onenet-comments@cpsr.org.    Open  discussion	of  this
	    document is	encouraged on the onenet-discuss list, which  is
	    archived	 at    http://www.findmail.com/listsaver/onenet-
	    discuss.
	    ================================


	    One	Planet,	One Net: Principles for	the Internet Era

	    The	  emergence   of   the	 Internet   presents	enormous
	    opportunities  and	challenges  to	humanity.  If we work to
	    preserve its openness and diversity, we can	ensure that  the
	    Net	 will  be  used	 to  change  the human condition for the
	    better, and	can  prevent  or  mitigate  its	 less  desirable
	    consequences.

	    The	 Internet  is  more  than  wires,  computers,  software,
	    modems,  routers,  standards,  and the applications	that use
	    them. It even encompasses more than	text and  pictures,  and
	    the	 audio	and  video that	are rapidly joining those media.
	    The	Net is also the	collective knowledge and  experience  of
	    countless	communities,   each   with   its  own  modes  of
	    interaction, languages of discourse, and forms  of	cultural
	    expression.

	    Certain principles must be understood and  respected  as  we
	    consider the more detailed daily questions that arise in the
	    administration or governance of the	 Net.  We  believe  that
	    among these	principles are the following:

	    1. The Net links us	all together.











				       - 3 -


	    2. The Net must be open and	available to all.
	    3. Net users have the right	to communicate.
	    4. Net users have the right	to privacy.
	    5. People are the Net's stewards, not its owners.
	    6. Administration of the Net should	be open	and inclusive.
	    7. The Net should reflect human  diversity,	 not  homogenize
	    it.

	    The	continuing  evolution  of  the	Internet  presents  both
	    opportunities  and	challenges.  We	must work to counter the
	    political, economic, social, and technical forces that  work
	    against  these  principles	and threaten the promise of open
	    communication on the Internet.  Failure to do so may lead to
	    a	future	 in   which   the   Internet   is   homogenized,
	    commercialized, and	regulated to the extent	that it	fails to
	    meet  its  fundamental  mission  -	to serve as a medium for
	    maximizing human potential through communication.


	    1. The Net links us	all together.

	    The	nature of people and their use of  networking technology
	    provides	a   strong   natural   drive  towards  universal
	    interconnection.  Because the  flow	of  information	 on  the
	    Net	transcends national boundaries,	any  restrictions within
	    a single country may act to	limit the freedom of   those  in
	    other countries as well.

	    The	true value of the Internet is found in	people,	 not  in
	    technology.	 Since	each new user increases	the value of the
	    Net	for all, the potential of the Net will only  be	 reached
	    when all who desire	can openly and freely use the Net.

	    2. The Net must be open and	available to all.

	    The	Net should be available	to  all	 who  wish  to	use  it,
	    regardless	of  economic,  social, political, linguistic, or
	    cultural differences or abilities. We must	work  to  ensure
	    that   all	 people	 have  the  access  to	the  technology,
	    education, and support necessary  for  constructive,  active
	    participation.  People  in	all walks of life should have as
	    much right	to  send  and  receive	information  as	 do  the
	    affluent and powerful.

	    3. Net users have the right	to communicate.










				       - 4 -


	    Every use of the Net is inherently an exercise of freedom of
	    speech,  to	 be  restricted	 only  at  great  peril	to human
	    liberty.  The right	to communicate	includes  the  right  to
	    participate	   in	 communication	  through   interacting,
	    organizing,	    petitioning,     mobilizing,     assembling,
	    collaborating, buying and selling, sharing,	and publishing.

	    The	Net offers great promise as a means of increasing global
	    commerce	 and   collaboration   among   businesses,   but
	    restrictions on information	 exchange would	eviscerate  that
	    promise.

	    4. Net users have the right	to privacy.

	    Without assurances of appropriate privacy, users of	the  Net
	    will not communicate and participate in a meaningful manner.
	    The	right to privacy includes at least three forms:

	    - Individual Network users should  control	the  collection,
	    use,  and  dissemination  of personal data about themselves,
	    including  financial and demographic information.

	    -  Network	users  should  be  free	 to  use  any  available
	    technical measures to help ensure the privacy of all aspects
	    of their communications.

	    - Individuals have the right to control who	they communicate
	    with,  and	how they conduct that communication. The privacy
	    implied  by	 the  decision	to  not	 communicate   must   be
	    respected.

	    5. People are the Net's stewards, not its owners.

	    Those who want to reap the benefits	of the shared global Net
	    are	 obliged to respect the	rights of others who may wish to
	    use	the Net	in different ways. We must work	to preserve  the
	    free  and  open  nature of the current Internet as a fragile
	    resource  that  must  be  enriched	and  passed  on	 to  our
	    children.

	    Individual pieces of the Net, such as  wires,  routers,  and
	    servers,  have  owners  whose  economic rights and interests
	    must be respected. However,	just as	the ecosystem  in  which
	    we	live  cannot  be  owned,  the Net itself is not	owned by
	    anyone.










				       - 5 -


	    6. Administration of the Net should	be open	and inclusive.

	    The	Net should be administered in an  open,	 inclusive,  and
	    democratic manner for the betterment of humanity.  The needs
	    of all who are affected by the Internet - including	 current
	    users,  future  users, and those who are unable to or choose
	    not	to be users - must be considered when making  technical,
	    social,  political,	 and  economic	decisions  regarding the
	    operations of the Internet.

	    Although administration of the Net should aim to enhance its
	    efficiency,	 availability, and security, it	should not do so
	    at the  cost of discouraging use of	the Net.  Administration
	    should  facilitate	and encourage greater use of the Net for
	    communication, rather than	inhibit	it in any way.

	    7. The Net should reflect human  diversity,	 not  homogenize
	    it.

	    The	Net has	the potential to be as varied and multi-cultural
	    as	 life	itself.	  It  can  facilitate  dialogue	 between
	    communities	and individuals	that might previously  not  have
	    encountered	 each  other in	a dozen	lifetimes.  However, the
	    Net	could also  become  a  homogenizing  force,  working  to
	    suppress diversity in favor	of a bland globalism.

	    Individuals	and communities	should not be forced  to  forego
	    local cultures and traditions in order to participate in the
	    Net. In order to preserve the vitality  that  comes	 with  a
	    diversity  of  viewpoints, we should work toward helping the
	    whole world	participate as equals.






















