



IETF RUN Working Group                                   Sally Hambridge
draft-ietf-run-spew-00.txt                                   Intel Corp.


                               DON'T SPEW
                A Set of Guidelines for Mass Unsolicited
                         Mailings and Postings


Abstract

   This document provides explains why mass unsolicited electronic mail
   messages are not useful in the Internetworking community.  It gives a
   set of guidelines for dealing with unsolicited mail for users, for
   system administrators, news administrators, and mailing list
   managers.  It also makes suggestions Internet Service Providers might
   follow.


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  Comments on this draft should
   be sent to ietf-run@mailbag.intel.com.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


1. Introduction

   The Internet's origins in the Research and Education communities
   played an important role in the foundation and formation of Internet
   culture.  This culture defined rules for network etiquette
   (netiquette) and communication based on the Internet's being
   relatively off-limits to commercial enterprise.





Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft                 DON'T SPEW                     March 1997


   As we know, this all changed when US Government was no longer the
   primary funding body for the US Internet, when the Internet truly
   went global, and when all commercial enterprises were allowed to
   obtain Fully Qualified Domain Names.  Internet culture had become
   deeply embedded in the protocols the network used.  Although the
   social context has changed, the technical limits of the Internet
   protocols still require a person to enforce certain limits on
   resource usage for the 'Net to function effectively.  Strong
   authentication was not built into the News and Mail protocols.  There
   was no end-to-end cost accounting and/or cost recovery.  Bandwidth is
   shared among all traffic without resource reservation (although this
   is changing).

   Unfortunately for all of us, the culture so carefully nurtured
   through the early years of the Internet was not fully transferred to
   all those new entities hooking into the bandwidth.  Many of those
   entities believe they have found a paradise of thousands of potential
   customers each of whom is desparate to learn about stunning new
   business opportunities.  Alternatively, some of the new netizens
   believe all people should at least hear about the one true religion
   or political party or process.

   While there may be thousands of folks desparate for any potential
   message, mass mailings or Netnews postings are not at all appropriate
   on the 'Net.  This document explains why mass unsolicited email and
   Netnews posting (aka spam*) is bad, what to do if you get it, what
   webmasters, postmasters, and news admins can do about it, and how an
   Internet Service Provider might respond to it.


2. Why Mass Mailing Is Bad

   In the world of paper mail we're all used to receiving unsolicited
   circulars, advertisements, and catalogs.  Generally we don't object
   to this - we look at what we find of interest, and we discard/recycle
   the rest.  Why should receiving unsolicited email be any different?

   The answer is that the cost model is different.  In the paper world,
   the cost of mailing is borne by the sender.  The sender must pay for
   the privilege of creating the ad and the cost of mailing it to the
   recipient.  In the world of electronic communications, the recipient
   bears the majority of the cost.  Yes, the sender still has to compose
   the message and the sender also has to pay for Internet connectivity.
   However, the receipient ALSO has to pay for Internet connectivity and
   possibly also connect time charges, so for electronic mailings the
   recipient is expected to help share the cost of the mailing.





Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft                 DON'T SPEW                     March 1997


   Of course, this cost model is very popular with those looking for
   cheap methods to get their message out.  By the same token, it's very
   unpopular with people who have to pay for their messages just to find
   that their mailbox is full of junk mail.  Consider this: if you had
   to pay for receiving paper mail would you pay for junk mail?

   But what about free speech?  Doesn't the US Constitution guarantee
   the ability to say whatever one likes?  First, the US Constitution is
   law only in the US, and the Internet is global.  There are places
   your mail will reach where free speech is not a given.  Second, the
   US Constitution does NOT guarantee one the right to say whatever one
   likes.  The example of yelling "FIRE" in a crowded theater comes to
   mind.  Finally, there are laws which govern other areas of electronic
   communication, namely the "junk fax" laws.  Although these have yet
   to be applied to electronic mail they are still an example of the
   "curbing" of "free speech."  Free speech does not, in general,
   require other people to spend their money and resources to deliver
   your message.

   The crux of sending large amounts of unsolicited mail and news is not
   a legal issue so much as an ethical one.  If you are tempted to send
   unsolicited "information," ask yourself these questions: "Whose
   resources is this using?", "Did they consent in advance?", "What
   would happen if everybody (or a very large number of people) did
   this?", "How would I feel if 90% of the mail I received was
   advertisements for stuff I didn't want?"

   Finally, sending large volumes of unsolicited email or posting
   voluminous numbers of Netnews postings is just plain rude.  Consider
   the following analogy: suppose you discovered a large party going on
   in a house on your block.  Uninvited, you appear, then join each
   group in conversation, force your way in, SHOUT YOUR OPINION of
   whatever you happen to be thinking about at the time, drown out all
   other conversaion, then scream "discrimination" when folks tell you
   you're being rude.  The rules are simple: Don't Spew.           To
   continue the party analogy, if instead of forcing your way into each
   group you stood on the outskirts a while and listened to the
   conversation.  Then you gradually began to add comments relevant to
   the discussion.  Then you began to tell people your opinion of the
   issues they were discussng, they would probably be less inclined to
   look badly on your intrusion.  Note that you are still intruding.
   And that it would still be considered rude to offer to sell products
   or services to the guests even if the products and services were
   relevant to the discussion.  You are in the wrong venue and you need
   to find the right one.






Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft                 DON'T SPEW                     March 1997


3. ACK!  I've Been Spammed - Now What?

   It's unpleasant to receive mail which you do not want.  It's even
   more unpleasant if you're paying for connect time to download it.
   And it's really unpleasant to receive mail on topics which you find
   offensive.  Now that you're good and mad, what's an appropriate
   response?

   First, send the mail back to the originator objecting to your being
   on the mailing-list.  (Check the headers carefully to find this
   information.  Get your system administrator to help you if you do not
   know how to do this.)  Be aware, though, that many folks who develop
   these lists take "Please desist" messages and throw them away.
   Alternatively, they take these messages and create mailing-lists to
   sell to others.  Still, it is a way to register your disapproval.

   Second, be sure to carbon copy the postmaster of the offending site.
   You can do this by sending mail to: postmaster@offending-site.domain.
   Again, many organizations which send unsolicited mail have this
   address aliased to go nowhere.  But it can't hurt.

   Third, cc your own postmaster.  Your organization may have the
   ability to block incoming unwanted mail, so it doesn't hurt to let
   your postmaster know you're getting unwanted mail.  This is
   especially true if the mail is offensive.

   Fourth, if your personal mailer allows you to write rules, write a
   rule which sends mail from the originator of the unwanted mail to the
   trash.  That way, although you still have to pay to download it, you
   won't have to read it!


4. Help For Beleaguered Admins

   As a system administrator, news administrator, local Postmaster, or
   mailing-list administrator, your users will come to you for help in
   dealing with unwanted mail and posts.  First, find out what your
   institution's policy is regarding unwanted/unsolicited mail.  It is
   possible that it won't do anything for you, but it is also possible
   to use it to justify blocking a domain which is sending particularly
   offensive mail to your users.  If you don't have a clear policy, it
   would be really useful to create one.  If you are a mailing-list
   administrator, make sure your mailing-list charter forbids off-topic
   posts which advertise scams and unsolicited ads.

   If you have the capability (are running a mail transfer agent which
   allows it) consider blocking well known offending sites from ever
   getting mail into your site.  However, it is a well-known problem



Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft                 DON'T SPEW                     March 1997


   that offenders create domains more quickly than postmasters can block
   them.  Also, help your users learn enough about their mailers so that
   they can write rules to filter their own mail.

   Use well-known Internet tools, such as whois and traceroute to find
   which ISP is serving your problem site.  Notify the postmaster/abuse
   address that they have an offender.  Be sure to pass on all header
   information in your messages to help them with tracing down the
   offender.  If they have a policy against using their service to post
   unsolicited mail they will need more than just your say-so that there
   is a problem.  Also, the "originating" site may be a victim of the
   offender as well.  It's not unknown for those sending this kind of
   mail to bounce their mail through dial-up accounts, or off
   unprotected mail servers at other sites.  Use caution in your
   approach to those who look like the offender.

   Participate in mailing lists and news groups which discuss
   unsolicited mail/posts and the problems associated with it.
   News.admin.net-abuse.announce is probably the most well-known of
   these.


5. What's an ISP To Do

   As an ISP, you first and foremost should decide what your stance
   against unsolicited mail and posts should be.  If you decide not to
   tolerate unsolicited mail, write a clear acceptable use policy which
   states your position and deliniates consequences for abuse.  If you
   state that you will not tolerate use of your resource for unsolicited
   mail/posts, and that the consequence will be loss of service, you
   should be able to cancel offending accounts relatively quickly.
   (after verifying that the account really IS being mis-used).  If you
   have downstreaming arrangements with other providers, you should make
   sure they are aware of any policy you set.  Likewise, you should be
   aware of your upstream providers' policies.

   Consider limiting access for dialup accounts so they cannot be used
   by those who spew.  Make sure your mail servers aren't open for mail
   to be bounced off them.  Make sure your mail transfer agents are the
   most up-to-date version (which passes security audits) of the
   software.

   Educate your users about how to react to spew and spewers.  Make sure
   instructions for writing rules for mailers are clear and available.
   Support their efforts to deal with unwanted mail at the local level
   to take some of the burden from your sys admins.





Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft                 DON'T SPEW                     March 1997


   Make sure you have an address for abuse complaints.  If complainers
   can routinely send mail to "abuse@BigISP.com" and you have someone
   assigned to read that mail, workflow will be much smoother.  You'll
   also be counted as good Internetworking citizens.


6. Security

   There are no security considerations.


7. Acknowledgements

   Thanks for help from the IETF-RUN working group, and also to all the
   spew-fighters.  Specific thanks are due to J.D. Falk, whose very
   helpful Anti-spam FAQ proved helpful.  Thanks are also do to the
   vigilence of Scott Hazelton Mueller and Paul Vixie, who run
   www.vix.com/spam, the Anti-spam* web site.

   * Spam (R) is a registered trademark of a meat product made by
   Hormel.


Author Information

   Sally Hambridge
   Intel Corp, SC11-321
   2200 Mission College blvd
   Santa Clara, CA 95052
   sallyh@ludwig.sc.intel.com





















Hambridge                   Expires: 17Jun97                    [Page 6]
