INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Paul Traina

                                             Danny McPherson
                                              Arbor Networks
                                                John Scudder
                                               Cisco Systems
Expires: April 2004                             October 2003


                Autonomous System Confederations for BGP
                   <draft-ietf-idr-rfc3065bis-01.txt>



Status of this Document

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   The key words "MUST"", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].


   This document is a product of the .  Comments should be addressed to
   the authors, or the mailing list at

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.





Traina, McPherson, Scudder                                      [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


                                Abstract


   The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is an inter-autonomous system
   routing protocol designed for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
   Protocol (TCP/IP) networks.  BGP requires that all BGP speakers
   within a single autonomous system (AS) must be fully meshed.  This
   represents a serious scaling problem that has been well documented in
   a number of proposals.

   This document describes an extension to BGP which may be used to
   create a confederation of autonomous systems that is represented as a
   single autonomous system to BGP peers external to the confederation,
   thereby removing the "full mesh" requirement.  The intention of this
   extension is to aid in policy administration and reduce the
   management complexity of maintaining a large autonomous system.



































Traina, McPherson, Scudder                                      [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


                           Table of Contents


   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3. Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4. AS_CONFED Segement Type Extension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5. Operation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
    5.1. AS_PATH Modification Rules. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6. Error Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7. Common Administration Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    7.1. MED and LOCAL_PREF Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    7.2. AS_PATH and Path Selection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8. Compatability Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9. Deployment Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. Intellectual Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   12. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   13. References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   14. Authors' Addresses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   15. Full Copyright Statement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14






























Traina, McPherson, Scudder                                      [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


1.  Introduction


   As currently defined, BGP requires that all BGP speakers within a
   single AS must be fully meshed.  The result is that for n BGP
   speakers within an AS n*(n-1)/2 unique IBGP sessions are required.
   This "full mesh" requirement clearly does not scale when there are a
   large number of IBGP speakers within the autonomous system, as is
   common in many networks today.

   This scaling problem has been well documented and a number of
   proposals have been made to alleviate this [3,6].  This document
   presents another alternative alleviating the need for a "full mesh"
   and is known as "Autonomous System Confederations for BGP", or
   simply, "BGP Confederations".  It has also been observed that BGP
   Confederations may provide improvements in routing policy control.

   This document is a revision of RFC 3065 [5], which is itself a
   revision to RFC 1965 [4].  It includes editorial changes,
   clarifications and corrections based on deployment experience with
   BGP Confederations.  These revisions are summarized in Appendices A
   and B.



2.  Terminology


   AS Confederation

     A collection of autonomous systems advertised as a single AS
     number to BGP speakers that are not members of the
     confederation.

   AS Confederation Identifier

     An externally visible autonomous system number that identifies
     the confederation as a whole.

   Member Autonomous System (Member-AS)

     An autonomous system that is contained in a given AS
     confederation.  Note that "Member Autonomous System" and
     "Member-AS" are used entirely interchangeably throughout
     this document.

   Member-AS Number




Traina, McPherson, Scudder                          Section 2.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


     An autonomous system number visible only within a BGP
     confederation.



3.  Discussion


   It may be useful to subdivide autonomous systems with a very large
   number of BGP speakers into smaller domains for purposes of
   controlling routing policy via information contained in the BGP
   AS_PATH attribute.  For example, one may choose to consider all BGP
   speakers in a geographic region as a single entity.

   In addition to potential improvements in routing policy control, if
   techniques such as those presented here or in [6] are not employed,
   [1] requires BGP speakers in the same autonomous system to establish
   a full mesh of TCP connections among all speakers for the purpose of
   exchanging exterior routing information.  In autonomous systems the
   number of intra-domain connections that need to be maintained by each
   border router can become significant.

   Subdividing a large autonomous system allows a significant reduction
   in the total number of intra-domain BGP connections, as the
   connectivity requirements simplify to the model used for inter-domain
   connections.

   Unfortunately, subdividing an autonomous system may increase the
   complexity of routing policy based on AS_PATH information for all
   members of the Internet.  Additionally, this division increases the
   maintenance overhead of coordinating external peering when the
   internal topology of this collection of autonomous systems is
   modified.

   Therefore, division of an autonomous system into separate systems may
   adversely affect optimal routing of packets through the Internet.

   However, there is usually no need to expose the internal topology of
   this divided autonomous system, which means it is possible to regard
   a collection of autonomous systems under a common administration as a
   single entity or autonomous system, when viewed from outside the
   confines of the confederation of autonomous systems itself.









Traina, McPherson, Scudder                          Section 3.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


4.  AS_CONFED Segement Type Extension


   Currently, BGP specifies that the AS_PATH attribute is a well-known
   mandatory attribute that is composed of a sequence of AS path
   segments.  Each AS path segment is represented by a triple <path
   segment type, path segment length, path segment value>.

   In [1], the path segment type is a 1-octet long field with the two
   following values defined:

   Value     Segment Type

     1       AS_SET: unordered set of autonomous systems a route in
             the UPDATE message has traversed

     2       AS_SEQUENCE: ordered set of autonomous systems a route
             in the UPDATE message has traversed

   This document specifies two additional segment types:

     3       AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE: ordered set of Member Autonomous
             Systems in the local confederation that the UPDATE message
             has traversed

     4       AS_CONFED_SET: unordered set of Member Autonomous Systems
             in the local confederation that the UPDATE message has
             traversed



5.  Operation


   A member of a BGP confederation will use its AS Confederation
   Identifier in all transactions with peers that are not members of its
   confederation.  This confederation identifier is the "externally
   visible" AS number and this number is used in OPEN messages and
   advertised in the AS_PATH attribute.

   A member of a BGP confederation will use its Member-AS Number in all
   transactions with peers that are members of the same confederation as
   the given BGP speaker.

   A BGP speaker receiving an AS_PATH attribute containing an autonomous
   system matching its own AS Confederation Identifier shall treat the
   path in the same fashion as if it had received a path containing its
   own AS number.



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                          Section 5.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


   A BGP speaker receiving an AS_PATH attribute containing an
   AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE or AS_CONFED_SET which contains its own Member-AS
   Number shall treat the path in the same fashion as if it had received
   a path containing its own AS number.



5.1.  AS_PATH Modification Rules


   When implementing BGP Confederations Section 5.1.2 of [1] is replaced
   with the following text:

   When a BGP speaker propagates a route which it has learned from
   another BGP speaker's UPDATE message, it shall modify the route's
   AS_PATH attribute based on the location of the BGP speaker to which
   the route will be sent:

   a) When a given BGP speaker advertises the route to another BGP
      speaker located in its own autonomous system, the advertising
      speaker shall not modify the AS_PATH attribute associated with the
      route.

   b) When a given BGP speaker advertises the route to a BGP speaker
      located in a neighboring autonomous system that is a member of
      the local confederation, the advertising speaker shall update the
      AS_PATH attribute as follows:

      1) if the first path segment of the AS_PATH is of type
         AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE, the local system shall prepend its own
         Member-AS Number as the last element of the sequence (put
         it in the leftmost position).

      2) if the first path segment of the AS_PATH is not of type
         AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE the local system shall prepend a new path
         segment of type AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE to the AS_PATH, including
         its own Member-AS Number in that segment.

   c) When a given BGP speaker advertises the route to a BGP speaker
      located in a neighboring autonomous system that is not a member of
      the local confederation, the advertising speaker shall update the
      AS_PATH attribute as follows:

      1) if any path segments of the AS_PATH are of the type
         AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE or AS_CONFED_SET, those segments shall
         be removed from the AS_PATH attribute, leaving the sanitized
         AS_PATH attribute to be operated on by steps 2 or 3.




Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 5.1.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


      2) if the first path segment of the remaining AS_PATH is of type
         AS_SEQUENCE, the local system shall prepend its own
         AS Confederation Identifier as the last element of the sequence
         (put it in the leftmost position).

      3) if there are no path segments following the removal of the
         first AS_CONFED_SET/AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE segments, or if the
         first path segment of the remaining AS_PATH is not of type
         AS_SEQUENCE the local system shall prepend a new path segment
         of type AS_SEQUENCE to the AS_PATH, including its own AS
         Confederation Identifier in that segment.

   When a BGP speaker originates a route:

   a) the originating speaker shall include an empty AS_PATH attribute
      in all UPDATE messages sent to BGP speakers residing within the
      same Member-AS.  (An empty AS_PATH attribute is one whose length
      field contains the value zero).

   b) the originating speaker shall include its own Member-AS Number in
      an AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE segment of the AS_PATH attribute of all
      UPDATE messages sent to BGP speakers located in neighboring
      Member Autonomous Systems that are members of the local
      confederation (i.e., the originating speaker's Member-AS Number
      will be the only entry in the AS_PATH attribute).

   c) the originating speaker shall include its own AS Confederation
      Identifier in an AS_SEQUENCE segment of the AS_PATH attribute of
      all UPDATE messages sent to BGP speakers located in neighboring
      autonomous systems that are not members of the local
      confederation.  (In this case, the originating speaker's AS
      Confederation Identifier will be the only entry in the AS_PATH
      attribute).



6.  Error Handling


   A BGP speaker MUST NOT transmit updates containing AS_CONFED_SET or
   AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE attributes to peers that are not members of the
   local confederation.

   It is an error for a BGP speaker to receive an update message with an
   AS_PATH attribute which contains AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE or AS_CONFED_SET
   segments from a neighbor which is not located in the same
   confederation.  If a BGP speaker receives such an update message, it
   SHALL treat the message as having a malformed AS_PATH according to



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                          Section 6.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


   the procedures of [1] Section 6.3 ("UPDATE message error handling").

   It is a error for a BGP speaker to receive an update message from a
   confederation peer which does not have AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE as the
   first segment.  If a BGP speaker receives such an update message, it
   SHALL treat the message as having a malformed AS_PATH according to
   the procedures of [1] Section 6.3 ("Update message error handling").



7.  Common Administration Issues


   It is reasonable for Member Autonomous Systems of a confederation to
   share a common administration and IGP information for the entire
   confederation.



7.1.  MED and LOCAL_PREF Handling


   It shall be legal for a BGP speaker to advertise an unchanged
   NEXT_HOP and MULTI_EXIT_DISC (MED) attribute to peers in a
   neighboring Member-AS of the local confederation.

   An implementation MAY compare MEDs received from a Member-AS via
   multiple paths.  An implementation MAY compare MEDs from different
   Member Autonomous Systems of the same confederation.

   In addition, the restriction against sending the LOCAL_PREF attribute
   to peers in a neighboring AS within the same confederation is
   removed.



7.2.  AS_PATH and Path Selection


   Path selection criteria for information received from members inside
   a confederation MUST follow the same rules used for information
   received from members inside the same autonomous system, as specified
   in [1].

   In addition, the following rules SHALL be applied:

   1) If the AS_PATH is internal to the local confederation (i.e., there
      are only AS_CONFED_* segments) consider the neighbor AS to be the



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 7.2.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


      local AS.

   2) Otherwise, if the first segment in the path which is not an
      AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE or AS_CONFED_SET is an AS_SEQUENCE, consider
      the neighbor AS to be the leftmost AS_SEQUENCE AS.



8.  Compatability Considerations


   All BGP speakers participating as member of a confederation MUST
   recognize the AS_CONFED_SET and AS_CONFED_SEQUENCE segment type
   extensions to the AS_PATH attribute.

   Any BGP speaker not supporting these extensions will generate a
   NOTIFICATION message specifying an "UPDATE Message Error" and a sub-
   code of "Malformed AS_PATH".

   This compatibility issue implies that all BGP speakers participating
   in a confederation MUST support BGP confederations.  However, BGP
   speakers outside the confederation need not support these extensions.



9.  Deployment Considerations


   BGP confederations have been widely deployed throughout the Internet
   for a number of years and are supported by multiple vendors.

   Improper configuration of BGP confederations can cause routing
   information within an AS to be duplicated unnecessarily.  This
   duplication of information will waste system resources, cause
   unnecessary route flaps, and delay convergence.

   Care should be taken to manually filter duplicate advertisements
   caused by reachability information being relayed through multiple
   Member Autonomous Systems based upon the topology and redundancy
   requirements of the confederation.

   Additionally, confederations (as well as route reflectors), by
   excluding different reachability information from consideration at
   different locations in a confederation, have been shown to cause
   permanent oscillation between candidate routes when using the tie
   breaking rules required by BGP [1].  Care must be taken when
   selecting MED values and tie breaking policy to avoid these
   situations.



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                         Section 9.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


   One potential way to avoid this is by configuring inter-Member-AS IGP
   metrics higher than intra-Member-AS IGP metrics and/or using other
   tie breaking policies to avoid BGP route selection based on
   incomparable MEDs.


10.  Intellectual Property


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



11.  Acknowledgments


   The general concept of BGP confederations was taken from IDRP's
   Routing Domain Confederations [2].  Some of the introductory text in
   this document was taken from [6].

   The authors would like to acknowledge Bruce Cole for his
   implementation feedback and extensive analysis of the limitations of
   the protocol extensions described in this document and [5].  We would
   also like to acknowledge Srihari Ramachandra, Alex Zinin, Naresh
   Kumar Paliwal, Jeffrey Haas and Bruno Rijsman for their feedback and
   suggestions.

   Finally, we'd like to acknowledge Ravi Chandra and Yakov Rekhter for
   providing constructive and valuable feedback on earlier versions of
   this specification.



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 11.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


12.  Security Considerations


   This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues
   inherent in the existing BGP, such as those defined in [7].














































Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 12.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


13.  References


   [1] Rekhter, Y. and T. Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC
       1771, March 1995.

   [2] Kunzinger, C., Editor, "Inter-Domain Routing Protocol", ISO/IEC
       10747, October 1993.

   [3] Haskin, D., "A BGP/IDRP Route Server alternative to a full mesh
       routing", RFC 1863, October 1995.

   [4] Traina, P. "Autonomous System Confederations for BGP", RFC 1965,
       June 1996.

   [5] Traina, P., McPherson, D. and Scudder, J., "Autonomous System
       Confederations for BGP", RFC 3065, February 2001.

   [6] Bates, T., Chandra, R. and E. Chen, "BGP Route Reflection An
       Alternative to Full Mesh IBGP", RFC 2796, April 2000.

   [7] Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
       Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998.

   [8] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

























Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 13.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003


14.  Authors' Addresses


   Paul Traina
   EMail: pst+confed@spamcatcher.bogus.com


   Danny McPherson
   Arbor Networks
   EMail:  danny@arbor.net


   John G. Scudder
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA 95134
   Phone: +1 734.302.4128
   EMail: jgs@cisco.com



15.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 15.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2004              October 2003





















































Traina, McPherson, Scudder                        Section 15.  [Page 15]
