
CCAMP Working Group                             Wesam Alanqar (Sprint)
Internet Draft                                  Deborah Brungard (ATT)
Category: Informational                     Dave Meyer (Cisco Systems)
                                                    Lyndon Ong (Ciena)
Expiration Date: July 2004             Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
                                             Jonathan Sadler (Tellabs)
                                                 Stephen Shew (Nortel)

                                                         February 2004



             Requirements for Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Routing
             for Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)

             draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC-2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   The Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) suite of protocols has been defined to
   control different switching technologies as well as different
   applications. These include support for requesting TDM connections
   including SONET/SDH and Optical Transport Networks (OTNs).

   This document concentrates on the routing requirements on the GMPLS
   suite of protocols to support the capabilities and functionalities
   for an Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) as defined by
   ITU-T.




W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 1

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


1. Contributors

   This document is the result of the CCAMP Working Group ASON Routing
   Requirements design team joint effort.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.

3. Introduction

   The GMPLS suite of protocols provides among other capability support
   for controlling different switching technologies. These include
   support for requesting TDM connections utilizing SONET/SDH (see ANSI
   T1.105/ITU-T G.707) as well as Optical Transport Networks (see ITU-T
   G.709). However, there are certain capabilities that are needed to
   support the ITU-T G.8080 control plane architecture for the
   Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON). Therefore, it is
   desirable to understand the corresponding requirements for the GMPLS
   protocol suite. The ASON control plane architecture is defined in
   [G.8080] and ASON routing requirements are identified in [G.7715]
   and refined in [G.7715.1] for link state architectures. These
   recommendations provide functional requirements and architecture,
   they provide a protocol neutral approach.

   This document focuses on the routing requirements for the GMPLS
   suite of protocols to support the capabilities and functionality of
   ASON control planes. It discusses the requirements for GMPLS routing
   that MAY subsequently lead to additional backward compatible
   extensions to support the capabilities specified in the above
   referenced documents. A description of backward compatibility
   considerations is provided in Section 5. Nonetheless, any protocol
   (in particular, routing) design or suggested protocol extensions is
   strictly outside the scope of this document. An ASON (Routing)
   terminology section is provided in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.

   The ASON model distinguishes reference points (representing points
   of information exchange) defined (1) between an administrative
   domain and a user (user-network interface or UNI), (2) between
   administrative domains or within an administrative domain between
   different control domains (external network-network interface or E-
   NNI) and, (3) within the same administrative domain between control
   components (or simply controllers) of the same control domain
   (internal network-network interface or I-NNI). The ASON model allows
   for the protocols used within different control domains to be
   different; and for the protocol used between control domains to be
   different than the protocols used within control domains. I-NNI
   control interfaces are located between protocol controllers within a
   control domain. E-NNI control interfaces are located on protocol
   controllers between control domains.


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 2

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


   The term routing information refers to the abstract representation
   of network routing related information such as node and link
   attributes (see Section 4.5). No routing information is passed over
   the UNI. Routing information exchanged over the NNI is subject to
   the policy constraints at individual NNIs. The routing information
   exchanged over the E-NNI encapsulates the common semantics of the
   individual domain information while allowing different
   representation within each domain.

   The ASON routing architecture is based on the following assumptions:
   - A carrier's network is subdivided as Routing Areas (RAs). Each RA
     shall be uniquely identifiable within a carrier's network (i.e.
     administrative domain). RAs partitioning provide for routing
     information abstraction, thereby enabling scalable routing.
   - Routing Controllers (RC) provide for the exchange of routing
     information between and within a RA. The routing information
     exchanged between RCs is subject to policy constraints imposed at
     reference points (E-NNI and I-NNI).
   - For a RA, the set of RCs is referred to as a routing (control)
     domain. The RC MAY support more than one routing protocol (i.e. an
     RC MAY support multiple Protocol Controller (PCs)). There SHOULD
     NOT be any dependencies on the different routing protocols used.
   - The routing information exchanged between routing domains (i.e.
     inter-domain) is independent of both the intra-domain routing
     protocol and the intra-domain control distribution choice(s), e.g.
     centralized, fully distributed.
   - The routing adjacency topology (i.e. the associated PC
     connectivity topology) and the transport network topology SHALL
     NOT be assumed to be congruent.

   The following functionality is expected from GMPLS routing to
   instantiate ASON routing realization (see [G.7715] and [G.7715.1]):
   - support multiple hierarchical levels of RAs; the number of
     hierarchical levels to be supported is routing protocol
     implementation specific.
   - support hierarchical routing information dissemination including
     summarized routing information
   - support for multiple links between nodes (and between RAs) and for
     link and node diversity
   - support architectural evolution in terms of the number of levels
     of hierarchies, aggregation and segmentation of RAs
   - support routing information based on a common set of information
     elements as defined in [G.7715] and [G.7715.1], divided between
     attributes pertaining to links and abstract nodes (each
     representing either a sub-network or simply a node). [G.7715]
     recognizes that the manner in which the routing information is
     represented and exchanged will vary with the routing protocol
     used.

   Also, the behaviour of GMPLS routing is expected to be such that:
   - it is scalable with respect to the number of links, nodes and RAs
   - in response to a routing event (e.g. topology update, reachability


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 3

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


     update), it delivers convergence and damping against flapping
   - it fulfils the operational security objectives where required

4. ASON Requirements for GMPLS Routing

   The description of the ASON routing components (see Appendix 2) is
   provided in terms of routing functionality. This description is only
   conceptual: no physical partitioning of these functions is implied.

   The Routing Controller (RC) components receive routing information
   from their associated Link Resource Manager(s) (LRMs) regarding TE
   links and store this information in the Routing Information Database
   (RDB). The RDB is replicated at each RC within the same Routing Area
   (RA), and MAY contain information about multiple transport plane
   network layers. Whenever the state of a TE link (or component link)
   changes, the LRM informs the corresponding RC, which in turn updates
   its associated RDB. In order to assure RDB synchronization, the RCs
   co-operate and exchange routing information. In this context,
   communication between RCs is realized using a particular routing
   protocol represented by the protocol controller (PC) component and
   the protocol messages are conveyed over the Signaling Control
   Network (SCN). The PC MAY convey information for one or more
   transport network layers. Moreover, as [G7715.1] states and
   illustrates in its Figure 1, ASON routing protocol requirements
   deals exclusively with the PC to PC communication of the (RC)
   routing information; therefore any other communication between any
   other functional component(s) (e.g. SC, LRM) is also outside the
   scope of this document.

   Note: the RC can be thought of as the function processing the TE
   database populated by the link local/remote component and TE links
   (LRM) and by the network wide TE links through the PC which
   processes the protocol specific routing exchanges. The SCN
   corresponds to the IP control plane topology enabling routing
   exchanges between GMPLS controllers (i.e. the routing adjacencies).

4.1 Multiple Hierarchical Levels

   [G.8080] introduces the concept of Routing Area (RA). RAs provide
   for routing information abstraction, thereby enabling scalable
   routing information representation. Except for the single RA case,
   RAs are hierarchically contained: a higher level (parent) RA
   contains lower level (child) RAs that in turn MAY also contain RAs,
   etc. Thus, RAs contain RAs that recursively define successive
   hierarchical routing levels.

   However, the RA containment relationship describes only an
   architectural hierarchical organization of RAs. It does not restrict
   the routing protocol realization (e.g. OSPF multi-areas, path
   computation, etc.). Moreover, the realization of the routing
   paradigm to support hierarchical routing and the number of



W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 4

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


   hierarchical levels to be supported is routing protocol specific and
   outside the scope of this document.

   ASON routing components are identified by values that MAY be drawn
   from several identifier spaces (see [G.7715.1]). The use of
   identifiers in a routing protocol realization is implementation
   specific and outside the scope of this document.

   In a multi-level routing hierarchy, it is necessary to distinguish
   among RCs within a level and RCs at different levels of the routing
   hierarchy. Before any pair of RCs establishes communication, they
   MUST verify they belong to the same RA (see Section 4.2). A RA
   identifier (RA ID) is required to provide the scope within which the
   RCs can communicate. To distinguish between RCs within the same RA,
   an RC identifier (RC ID) is required; the RC ID must be unique
   within its containing RA.

   A RA represents a partition of the data plane and its identifier
   (i.e. RA ID) is used within the control plane as a reference to the
   data plane partition. RA IDs MAY be associated with a transport
   plane name space whereas RC IDs are associated with a control plane
   name space.

4.2 Hierarchical Routing Information Dissemination

   Routing information can be exchanged between adjacent levels of the
   routing hierarchy i.e. Level N+1 and N, where Level N represents the
   RAs contained by Level N+1. The links connecting RAs MAY be viewed
   as external links, and the links representing connectivity within an
   RA MAY be viewed as internal links.

   The physical location of RCs at adjacent levels, their relationship
   and their communication protocol are outside the scope of this
   document. No assumption is made regarding how RCs communicate
   between levels. If routing information is exchanged between a RC,
   its parent, and its child RCs, it SHOULD include reachability and
   MAY include (upon policy decision) node and link topology.

   Multiple RCs within a RA MAY transform (filter, summarize, etc.) and
   then forward information to RCs at different levels. However in this
   case the resulting information at the receiving level must be self-
   consistent; this MAY be achieved using a number of mechanisms.

   Note: there is no relationship between multi-layer and multi-level
   routing. The former implies a single routing protocol instance for
   multiple transport switching layers whereas the latter implies a
   hierarchical routing topology for one transport switching layer.

4.2.1 Communication between Adjacent Routing Levels

   1. Type of Information Exchanged



W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 5

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


      The type of information flowing upward (i.e. Level N to Level
      N+1) and the information flowing downward (i.e. Level N+1 to
      Level N) are used for similar purposes, namely, the exchange of
      reachability information and summarized topology information to
      allow routing across multiple RAs. The summarization of topology
      information may impact the accuracy of routing and MAY require
      additional path calculation.

      The following information exchange are expected:
      - Level N+1 visibility to Level N reachability and topology (or
        upward information communication) allowing RC(s) at level N+1
        to determine the reachable endpoints from Level N.
      - Level N visibility to Level N+1 reachability and topology (or
        downward information communication) allowing RC(s) in an RA at
        Level N to develop paths to reachable endpoints outside of the
        RA.

   2. Interactions between Upward and Downward Communication

      When both upward and downward information exchanges contain
      endpoint reachability information, a feedback loop could
      potentially be created. Consequently, the routing protocol MUST
      include a method to:
      - prevent information propagated from a Level N+1 RA into the
        Level N RA to be re-introduced into the Level N+1 RA, and
      - prevent information propagated from a Level N-1 RA into the
        Level N RA to be re-introduced into the Level N-1 RA.

      The routing protocol is required to differentiate the routing
      information originated at a given level RA from the one derived
      using the routing information received from its external RAs
      (regardless of the level of the corresponding RCs). This is a
      necessary condition to be fulfilled by routing protocols to be
      loop free.

      Also, for ASON, the routing information exchange may generate
      transient loops at the data plane if no route recording is used
      during signaling. So, at the data plane, it is not the routing
      exchange that guarantees (transient) loop avoidance but the
      signaling protocol by recording the route until the node where
      computation occurs (by excluding segments already traversed).

   3. Method of Communication

      Two approaches exist for communication between Level N and N+1.

      - The first approach places an instance of a Level N routing
        function and an instance of a Level N+1 routing function in the
        same system. The communications interface is within a single
        system and is thus not an open interface subject to
        standardization.



W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 6

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


      - The second approach places the Level N routing function on a
        separate system from the Level N+1 routing function. In this
        case, a communication interface must be used between the
        systems containing the routing functions for different levels.
        This communication interface and mechanisms are outside the
        scope of this document.

4.2.2 Configuring the Routing Hierarchy

   The RC MUST support static (i.e. operator assisted) and MAY support
   automated configuration of the information describing its
   relationship to parent and its child within the hierarchical routing
   structure (including RA ID and RC ID). When applied recursively, the
   whole hierarchy is thus configured.

4.2.3 Configuring RC Adjacencies

   The RC MUST support static (i.e. operator assisted) and MAY support
   automated configuration of the information describing its control
   adjacencies to other RCs within a RA. The routing protocol SHOULD
   support all the types of RC adjacencies described in Section 9 of
   [G.7715]. The latter includes congruent topology (with distributed
   RC) and hubbed topology (with designated RC).

4.3 Evolution

   The containment relationships of RAs MAY change, motivated by events
   such as mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures.

   The routing protocol SHOULD be capable of supporting architectural
   evolution in terms of number of hierarchical levels, as well as
   aggregation and segmentation of RAs. RA IDs uniqueness within an
   administrative domain MAY facilitate these operations. The routing
   protocol is not expected to automatically initiate and/or execute
   these operations.

4.4 Multiple Links between Nodes and RAs

   See Section 4.5.1

4.5 Routing Attributes

   Routing for transport networks is performed on a per layer basis,
   where the routing paradigms MAY differ among layers and within a
   layer. Not all equipment support the same set of transport layers or
   the same degree of connection flexibility at any given layer. A
   server layer trail may support various clients, involving different
   adaptation functions. Additionally, equipment may support variable
   adaptation functionality, whereby a single server layer trail
   dynamically supports different multiplexing structures. As a result,
   routing information MAY include layer specific, layer independent,
   and client/server adaptation information.


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 7

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


4.5.1 Taxonomy of Attributes

   Attributes can be organized according to the following categories:

   - Node related or link related

   - Provisioned, negotiated or automatically configured

   - Inherited or layer specific (client layers can inherit some
     attributes from the server layer while other attributes like
     Link Capacity are specified by layer).

   (Component) link attributes can be statically or automatically
   configured for each transport network layer. This may lead to
   unnecessary repetition. Hence, the inheritance property of
   attributes can also be used to optimize the configuration process.

   TE links are configured through grouping of component links.
   Grouping MAY be based on different link attributes (e.g., SRLG
   information, link weight, etc).

   Two RAs may be linked by one or more TE links. Multiple TE links may
   be required when component links are not equivalent for routing
   purposes with respect to the RAs they are attached to, or to the
   containing RA, or when smaller groupings are required.

4.5.2 Commonly Advertised Information

   Advertisements MAY contain the following common set of information
   regardless of whether they are link or node related:
   - RA ID of which the advertisement is bounded
   - RC ID of the entity generating the advertisement
   - Information to uniquely identify advertisements
   - Information to determine whether an advertisement has been updated
   - Information to indicate when an advertisement has been derived
     from a source external to the routing area

4.5.3 Node Attributes

   All nodes belong to a RA, hence the RA ID can be considered an
   attribute of all nodes. Given that no distinction is made between
   abstract nodes and those that cannot be decomposed any further, the
   same attributes MAY be used for their advertisement.

   The following Node Attributes are defined:

       Attribute        Capability      Usage
       -----------      -----------     ---------
       Node ID          REQUIRED        REQUIRED
       Reachability     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL

                Table 1. Node Attributes


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 8

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


   Reachability information describes the set of endpoints that are
   reachable by the associated node. It MAY be advertised as a set of
   associated address prefixes or a set of associated TE link IDs,
   consistently assigned within an administrative domain.

   Note: no distinction is made between nodes that may have further
   internal details (i.e., abstract nodes) and those that cannot be
   decomposed any further.

4.5.4 Link Attributes

   The following Link Attributes are defined:

       Link Attribute                   Capability      Usage
       ---------------                  -----------     ---------
       Local TE link ID                 REQUIRED        REQUIRED
       Remote TE link ID                REQUIRED        REQUIRED
       TE Link Characteristics          Table 3

                Table 2. Link Attributes

   The TE link ID must be sufficient to uniquely identify the
   corresponding transport plane resource taking into account
   separation of data and control planes. The TE link ID format is
   routing protocol specific.

   Note: when the remote end of a TE link is located outside of the RA,
   the remote TE link ID is OPTIONAL.

   The following TE link characteristic attributes are defined:

   - Signal Type: This identifies the characteristic information of the
     layer network.

   - Link Weight: The metric indicating the relative desirability of a
     particular link over another e.g. during path computation.

   - Resource Class: This corresponds to the set of administrative
     groups assigned by the operator to this link. A link MAY belong to
     zero, one or more administrative groups.

   - Connection Types: This allows identification of whether the local
     component link is at a border or within an LSP region (see [HIER])

   - Link Capacity: This provides the sum of the available and
     potential bandwidth capacity for a particular network transport
     layer. Other capacity measures MAY be further considered.

   - Link Availability: This represents the survivability capability
     such as the protection type associated with the link.

   - Diversity Support: This represents diversity information such as


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                 9

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


     the SRLG information associated with the link.

   - Local Adaptation Support: This indicates the set of client layer
     adaptations supported by the local component link associated to
     the local TE link. This can only exist when the "Local Connection
     Type" indicates crossing of an LSP Region or can be flexibly
     assigned to be at a border or within an LSP region (see [HIER]).

        TE link Characteristics         Capability      Usage
        -----------------------         ----------      ---------
        Signal Type                     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
        Link Weight                     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
        Resource Class                  REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
        Local Connection Types          REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
        Link Capacity                   REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
        Link Availability               OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL
        Diversity Support               OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL
        Local Adaptation support        OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL

               Table 3. TE link Characteristics

   Note: separate advertisements of layer specific attributes MAY be
   chosen. However this may lead to unnecessary duplication. This can
   be avoided using the inheritance property, so that attributes
   derivable from the local adaptation information do not need to be
   advertised.

5. Backward Compatibility

   Any particular realization of the ASON routing requirements MUST be
   backward compatible with the considered routing protocol(s).

   Backward compatibility means that at any level of the routing
   hierarchy, nodes, some of which support the requirements described
   in this document, and some of which do not, MUST still be capable to
   operate as mandated by the OSPF, IS-IS, and/or IDR IETF WG and their
   corresponding GMPLS extensions (as mandated by the CCAMP IETF WG).

   Additionally, nodes (that do not support these requirements and) are
   made part of a multi-level routing hierarchy from their containing
   RA(s), must be capable of:
   - rejecting (or ignoring) any incoming routing information that
     would be addressed to them in a way that is not detrimental to the
     network as a whole
   - communicating (at a given level) with any other node located
     at the same level and that implements these requirements
   This assumes that such nodes do not communicate directly either with
   lower or upper level nodes.

   Note: backward compatibility with routing protocols is a protocol
   requirement defined in the IETF context.



W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                10

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


6. Security Considerations

   ASON routing protocol MUST deliver the operational security
   objectives where required.

7. Conclusions

   This section captures from the identified ASON routing requirements
   the missing capabilities from the GMPLS routing protocols (e.g.
   OSPF, IS-IS).

   The GMPLS routing protocol is required to support multiple
   hierarchical levels of RAs and hierarchical routing information
   dissemination including summarized routing information. However, the
   number of hierarchical levels to be supported is routing protocol
   implementation specific. This implies that the GMPLS routing
   protocol must deliver:
   - processing of routing information exchanged between adjacent
     levels of the routing hierarchy (i.e. Level N+1 and N) including
     reachability and upon policy decision summarized topology
     information
   - when multiple RCs within a RA transform (filter, summarize, etc.)
     and then forward information to RC(s) at different levels that the
     resulting information at the receiving level is self-consistent
   - a mechanism to prevent re-introduction of information propagated
     into the Level N RA back to the external level RA from which this
     information has been initially received. It is thus expected that
     advertisements will include information when they have been
     derived from a source external to the RA. Note that existing
     routing protocols support mechanisms to identify advertisements of
     externally derived information and therefore an analysis of their
     applicability has to be considered on a per-protocol basis.

   In order to support operator assisted changes in the containment
   relationships of RAs, the GMPLS routing protocol is expected to
   support evolution in terms of number of hierarchical levels of RAs
   (adding and removing RAs at the top/bottom of the hierarchy), as
   well as aggregation and segmentation of RAs. These GMPLS routing
   capabilities are considered of lower priority as they are
   implementation specific and their method of support should be
   evaluated on per-protocol basis e.g. OSPF vs IS-IS. In addition,
   support of non-disruptive operations such as adding or removing a
   hierarchical level of RAs in or from the middle of the routing
   hierarchy are considered as the lowest priority requirements. Note
   also that the number of hierarchical levels to be supported is
   implementation specific, and reflects a containment relationship
   e.g. a RA insertion involves supporting a different routing protocol
   domain in a portion of the network.

   Note: some members of the Design Team question if the ASON
   requirement for supporting architecture evolution is a requirement
   on the routing protocol (protocol-specific capability) vs. a


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                11

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


   capability to be provided by the architecture. For example, ASON
   allows for supporting multiple protocols within each RA. The
   multiple protocols share a common routing information database
   (RDB), and the RDB is the component, which needs to support
   architecture evolution. The Design Team invites CCAMP input to
   understand the protocol-specific impacts.

   GMPLS routing currently covers all node attributes considered in
   [G.7715.1]. Assuming that the set of TE link IDs are numbered either
   from their component/TE links or from the node address that hosts
   these components/TE links, no additional extensions seem to be
   required in order to advertise reachable end-points within an ASON
   control plane. Advertisement of externally reachable prefixes is
   built in within any routing protocol independently of its usage
   in/outside GMPLS.

   Note: some members of the Design Team noted that reachability
   information (as described in Section 4.5.3) may be advertised as a
   set of UNI Transport Resource address prefixes (assigned and
   selected consistently in their applicability scope). These members
   of the Design Team raised a concern that existing methods of
   advertising reachability may need to be examined (on a per-protocol
   basis) to determine if they are also applicable for UNI Transport
   Resource addresses. They invite CCAMP discussion on this aspect.

   From the considered list of link attributes and characteristics, the
   Local Adaptation support information is missing as TE link
   attribute. GMPLS routing does not currently consider the use of
   dedicated TE link attribute(s) to describe the cross/inter-layer
   relationships. All other TE link attributes and characteristics are
   currently covered. The need for a "TE metric" per component link
   needs to be further assessed, in the sense that it can be currently
   implemented. Further consideration is here needed regarding impacts
   on TE link bundling capabilities and the increase of the routing
   advertisement overhead with potentially duplicated information.

   Note: ASON does not restrict the architecture choices used, either a
   co-located architecture or a physically separated architecture may
   be used. Some members of the Design Team are concerned that GMPLS's
   concept of the LSR requires a 1-to-1 relationship between the
   transport plane entity and the control plane entity (Router). They
   invite CCAMP input on GMPLS capabilities to support multiple
   architectures i.e. how routing protocols would identify the
   transport node ID vs. the router or routing controller ID when
   scoping Link IDs in a link advertisement.

   The inheritance property of link attributes used to optimize the
   component/TE link configuration process is built in within GMPLS.






W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                12

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


8. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Kireeti Kompella for having
   initiated the proposal of an ASON Routing Requirement Design Team.

9. Intellectual Property Considerations

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

10. References

10.1 Normative References

   [RFC 2026]   S.Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process --
                Revision 3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC 2119]   S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [G.7715]     ITU-T Rec. G.7715/Y.1306, "Architecture and
                Requirements for the Automatically Switched Optical
                Network (ASON)," June 2002.

   [G.7715.1]   ITU-T Draft Rec. G.7715.1/Y.1706.1, "ASON Routing
                Architecture and Requirements for Link State
                Protocols," November 2003.

   [G.8080]     ITU-T Rec. G.8080/Y.1304, "Architecture for the
                Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON),"
                November 2001 (and Revision, January 2003).

   [HIER]       K.Kompella and Y.Rekhter, "LSP Hierarchy with
                Generalized MPLS TE," Internet draft (work in
                progress), draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy, Sept'02.


W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                13

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004



11. Author's Addresses

   Wesam Alanqar (Sprint) 
   EMail: wesam.alanqar@mail.sprint.com

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Rm. D1-3C22 - 200 S. Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
   Phone: +1 732 4201573
   EMail: dbrungard@att.com

   David Meyer (Cisco Systems)
   EMail: dmm@1-4-5.net

   Lyndon Ong (Ciena Corporation)
   5965 Silver Creek Valley Rd,
   San Jose, CA 95128, USA
   Phone: +1 408 8347894
   EMail: lyong@ciena.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellensplein 1,
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 2408491
   EMail: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Jonathan Sadler
   1415 W. Diehl Rd
   Naperville, IL 60563
   EMail: jonathan.sadler@tellabs.com

   Stephen Shew (Nortel Networks)
   PO Box 3511 Station C
   Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA K1Y 4H7
   Phone: +1 613 7632462
   EMail: sdshew@nortelnetworks.com

















W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                14

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


Appendix 1 - ASON Terminology

   This document makes use of the following terms:

   Administrative domain: See Recommendation G.805.

   Control plane: performs the call control and connection control
   functions. Through signaling, the control plane sets up and releases
   connections, and may restore a connection in case of a failure.

   (Control) Domain: represents a collection of entities that are
   grouped for a particular purpose. G.8080 applies this G.805
   recommendation concept (that defines two particular forms, the
   administrative domain and the management domain) to the control
   plane in the form of a control domain. The entities that are grouped
   in a control domain are components of the control plane.

   External NNI (E-NNI): interfaces are located between protocol
   controllers between control domains.

   Internal NNI (I-NNI): interfaces are located between protocol
   controllers within control domains.

   Link: See Recommendation G.805.

   Management plane: performs management functions for the Transport
   Plane, the control plane and the system as a whole. It also provides
   coordination between all the planes. The following management
   functional areas are performed in the management plane: performance,
   fault, configuration, accounting and security management

   Management domain: See Recommendation G.805.

   Transport plane: provides bi-directional or unidirectional transfer
   of user information, from one location to another. It can also
   provide transfer of some control and network management information.
   The Transport Plane is layered; it is equivalent to the Transport
   Network defined in G.805.

   User Network Interface (UNI): interfaces are located between
   protocol controllers between a user and a control domain.













W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                15

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


Appendix 2 - ASON Routing Terminology

   This document makes use of the following terms:

   Routing Area (RA): a RA represents a partition of the data plane and
   its identifier is used within the control plane as the
   representation of this partition. Per [G.8080] a RA is defined by a
   set of sub-networks, the TE links that interconnect them, and the
   interfaces representing the ends of the TE links exiting that RA. A
   RA may contain smaller RAs inter-connected by TE links. The limit of
   subdivision results in a RA that contains two sub-networks and a TE
   link with a single component link.

   Routing Database (RDB): repository for the local topology, network
   topology, reachability, and other routing information that is
   updated as part of the routing information exchange and may
   additionally contain information that is configured. The RDB may
   contain routing information for more than one Routing Area (RA).

   Routing Components: ASON routing architecture functions. These
   functions can be classified as protocol independent (Link Resource
   Manager or LRM, Routing Controller or RC) and protocol specific
   (Protocol Controller or PC).

   Routing Controller (RC): handles (abstract) information needed for
   routing and the routing information exchange with peering RCs by
   operating on the RDB. The RC has access to a view of the RDB. The RC
   is protocol independent.

   Note: Since the RDB may contain routing information pertaining to
   multiple RAs (and hence possibly multiple layer networks), the RCs
   accessing the RDB may share the routing information.

   Link Resource Manager (LRM): supplies all the relevant component
   and TE link information to the RC. It informs the RC about any state
   changes of the link resources it controls.

   Protocol Controller (PC): handles protocol specific message
   exchanges according to the reference point over which the
   information is exchanged (e.g. E-NNI, I-NNI), and internal exchanges
   with the RC. The PC function is protocol dependent.













W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                16

draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-ason-routing-reqts-02.txt         February 2004


Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



























W.Alanqar et al. - Expires July 2004                                17


