


NAT Working Group                                           P. Srisuresh
INTERNET-DRAFT                              	     Lucent Technologies
Category: Informational                                    Matt Holdrege
Expire in six months                               Ascend Communications
                                                               July 1998


   IP Network Address Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations
	     <draft-ietf-nat-terminology-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
   (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
   (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
   (US West Coast).

Preface

   The motivation behind this document is to provide clarity to 
   the terms used in conjunction with Network Address Translators.
   The term "Network Address Translator" means different things in 
   different contexts. The intent of this document is to define the 
   various flavors of NAT and standardize the meaning of terms used.

   The authors listed are editors for this document and owe the 
   content to contributions from members of the working group. 
   Large chunks of the draft, titled "IP Network Address Translator 
   (NAT)" were extracted almost as is, to form the initial basis for 
   this document. The editors would like to thank the authors Pyda 
   Srisuresh and kjeld Egevang for the same. The editors would like 
   to thank Praveen Akkiraju for his contributions in describing 
   NAT deployment scenarios. The editors would also like to thank
   the ADs, Scott Bradner and Vern Paxson, for their detailed review 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 1]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   of the document.

Abstract

   Network Address Translation is a method by which IP addresses are 
   mapped from one realm to another, providing transparent routing to 
   users. Traditionally, NATs are used to connect an isolated routing 
   realm with private unregistered addresses to an external routing 
   realm with globally unique registered addresses. This document 
   attempts to describe the operation of NATs in general and to 
   define the terminology used to identify various flavors of NAT.


1. Introduction and Overview

   The need for IP Address translation arises when a network's internal 
   IP addresses cannot be used outside the network either for security 
   reasons or because they are invalid for use outside the network. 

   Address translation would allow hosts in a private network to 
   transparently access an external network and vice versa. There 
   are a variety of flavors of NAT and terms to match them.  This 
   document attempts to define the terminology used and to identify 
   various flavors of NAT.  The document also attempts to describe 
   other considerations applicable to NATs in general.

   Note, however, this document is not intended to describe the 
   operations of individual NAT variations or the applicability 
   of NATs. 
   
   NATs provide transparent routing solution to end hosts trying to 
   communicate from disparate routing realms. This transparent routing 
   is achieved by modifying end node addresses en-route and 
   maintaining state for these updates so that datagrams pertaining 
   to a session are transparently routed to the right end-node in 
   either realm. This solution works best when the end user identifier 
   (such as host name) is different from the address used to locate 
   the end user. IPsec techniques which are intended to guarantee the 
   end-to-end security of an IP packet cannot be assumed to transit NAT.
   Techniques such as AH and ESP secure IP header address contents of 
   the end host packets. Yet, NAT's fundamental role is to alter the 
   addresses in the IP header of a packet. 
   
   NATs cannot by themselves support all applications transparently 
   and often must co-exist with application level gateways(ALGs)
   for this reason. People looking to deploy NAT based solutions need 
   to determine their application requirements first and assess the 
   NAT extensions (i.e., ALGs) necessary to provide application 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 2]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   transparency for their environment.
   

2. Terminology and concepts used

2.1. NAT terminology 
   
   Terms most frequently used in the context of NATs are defined here
   for reference.

2.1.1. Session flow vs. Packet flow

   Connection or session flows are different from packet flows. 
   A session flow  indicates the direction in which the session was 
   initiated with reference to a network interface. Packet flow is 
   the direction in which the packet has traveled with reference to 
   a network interface. Take for example, an outbound telnet session. 
   The telnet session consists of packet flows in both inbound and 
   outbound directions. Outbound telnet packets carry terminal 
   keystrokes and inbound telnet packets carry screen displays from 
   the telnet server.

   For purposes of discussion in this document, packets belonging to a 
   TCP/UDP  session are uniquely identified by the tuple of (source IP 
   address, source TCP/UDP port, target IP address, target TCP/UDP 
   port). ICMP query sessions are identified by the tuple of (source
   IP address, ICMP query ID, target IP address). All other sessions 
   are characterized by the tuple of (source IP address, target IP 
   address, IP protocol). 
   
   Address translations performed by NAT are session based and
   would include translation of incoming as well as outgoing packets 
   belonging to that session. Session direction is identified by the 
   direction of the first packet of that session (see sec 2.1.3).

2.1.2. TU ports, Server ports, Client ports

   For the reminder of this document, we will refer TCP/UDP ports 
   associated with an IP address simply as "TU ports".

   For most TCP/IP hosts, TU port range 0-1023 is used by servers 
   listening for incoming connections. Clients trying to initiate 
   a connection typically select a TU port in the range of 1024-65535. 
   However, this convention is not universal and not always followed. 
   Some client stations initiate connections using a TU port number 
   in the range of 0-1023, and there are servers  listening on TU 
   port numbers in the range of 1024-65535.




Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 3]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   A list of assigned TU port services may be found in [Ref 2].

2.1.3. Start of session for TCP, UDP and others

   The first packet of every TCP session tries to establish a session 
   and contains connection startup information. The first packet of a 
   TCP session may be recognized by the presence of SYN bit and 
   absence of ACK bit in the TCP flags. All TCP packets, with the 
   exception of the first packet, must have the ACK bit set.

   However, there is no deterministic way of recognizing the start of 
   a UDP based session or any non-TCP session. 

2.1.4. End of session for TCP, UDP and others

   The end of a TCP session is detected when FIN is acknowledged by 
   both halves of the session or when either half sets RST bit in 
   TCP flags field. Within a short period (say, a couple of seconds)
   after one of the session partners sets RST bit, the session can 
   be safely assumed to have been terminated. However, it is 
   possible to have TCP sessions hung forever. As for non-TCP 
   sessions, there is no deterministic way of identifying session 
   end unless you know the application protocol.
   
   Many heuristic approaches are used to terminate sessions. You can 
   make the assumption that TCP sessions that have not been used for 
   say, 24 hours, and non-TCP sessions that have not been used for 
   say, 1 minute, are terminated. Often this assumption works, but 
   sometimes it doesn't. These idle period session timeouts may vary 
   considerably across the board and may be made user configurable. 
   
   Another way to handle session terminations is to timestamp entries 
   and keep them as long as possible and retire the longest idle 
   session when it becomes necessary. 

2.1.5. Routing realm
 
   A routing realm is a network domain in which the network addresses 
   are uniquely assigned to entities such that datagrams can be 
   routed to them. Routing protocols used within the network domain 
   are responsible for finding routes to entities given their network 
   addresses. Although NATs may be used with IPv6, this document is 
   limited to describing NATs in a IPv4 environment.

2.1.6. Private/Local network

   A private network is a routing realm that connects to an external 
   network by means of a NAT device. Private network may also be 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 4]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   referred to as Local Network. 

   RFC 1918 [Ref 1] has recommendations on address space allocation 
   for private networks. Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) 
   has three blocks of IP address space, namely 10/8, 172.16/12, and 
   192.168/16 set aside for private internets. In pre-CIDR notation, 
   the first block is nothing but a single class A network number, 
   while the second block is a set of 16 contiguous class B networks, 
   and the third block is a set of 256 contiguous class C networks.

   An organization that decides to use IP addresses in the address 
   space defined above can do so without coordination with IANA 
   or any other Internet registry such as APNIC, RIPE and ARIN. 
   The address space can thus be used privately by many independent 
   organizations at the same time, with NAT enabled on their 
   border routers.

2.1.7. Public/Global/External network

   A Global or Public Network is a routing realm with unique network
   addresses assigned by Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) 
   or an equivalent address registry.

2.1.8. Application Level gateway (ALG)

   Not all applications lend themselves easily to translation by NATs;
   especially those that include IP addresses and TCP/UDP ports in the
   payload. Application Level Gateways (ALGs) are application specific 
   translation agents that allow an application on a host in one 
   routing realm to connect to its counterpart running on a host in 
   different realm. An ALG may interact with NAT to set up state,
   use NAT state information, modify application specific payload and
   perform whatever else is required to get the application running 
   across disparate routing realms. 
   
   ALGs may not always utilize NAT state information. They may glean 
   application payload and simply notify NAT to add additional state 
   information in some cases. ALGs are similar to Proxies, in that, 
   both ALGs and proxies facilitate Application specific 
   communication between clients and servers. Just as with proxies, 
   ALGs could be transparent as well as non-transparent. Proxies 
   relay client data to servers and vice versa, by using a special 
   protocol to communicate with proxy clients. Unlike Proxies, ALGs 
   do not use a special protocol to communicate with application
   clients and do not require changes to application clients.


3. What is NAT?



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 5]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998



   Network Address Translation is a method by which IP addresses are 
   mapped from one routing realm to another, providing transparent 
   routing to end hosts. There are many variations of address 
   translation that lend themselves to different applications. However, 
   all flavors of NATs should share the following characteristics.

          a) Transparent Address assignment.
	  b) Transparent routing through address translation.
	     (routing here refers to forwarding packets, and not 
	     exchanging routing information)
	  c) ICMP error packet payload translation.

   Below is a diagram illustrating a scenario in which NAT is enabled
   on a stub domain border router, connected to the Internet through a 
   regional router made available by a service provider. 


        \ | /                 .                                /
   +---------------+  WAN     .           +-----------------+/
   |Regional Router|----------------------|Stub Router w/NAT|---
   +---------------+          .           +-----------------+\
                              .                      |         \
                              .                      |  LAN
                              .               ---------------
                        Stub border

        Figure 1: A typical NAT operation scenario

3.1. Transparent Address Assignment

   NAT binds addresses in private network with addresses in global 
   network and vice versa to provide transparent routing for 
   the datagrams traversing between routing realms. The binding in some 
   cases may extend to transport level identifiers (such as TCP/UDP 
   ports). Address binding is done at the start of a session. The 
   following sub-sections describe two types of address assignments.

3.1.1. Static Address assignment

   In the case of static address assignment, there is one-to-one 
   address mapping for hosts between a private network address and 
   an external network address for the lifetime of NAT operation. 
   Static address assignment ensures that NAT does not have to 
   administer address management with session flows.
   
3.1.2. Dynamic Address assignment




Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 6]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   In this case, external addresses are assigned to private network
   hosts or vice versa, dynamically based on usage requirements and 
   session flow detected by NAT. When the last session using an address
   binding is terminated, NAT would free the binding so that the global
   address could be recycled for later use. The exact nature of address 
   assignment is specific to individual NAT implementations.  
   
3.2. Transparent routing

   NATs translate addresses in IP header to contain routable addresses, 
   so that each routing realm can use routing protocols appropriate to 
   the realm to route datagrams.  NATs should be careful to not 
   advertise networks in a routing realm, where such an advertisement 
   would be deemed unacceptable. 

   There are three phases to Address translation, as follows. Together 
   these phases result in creation, maintenance and terminations of 
   soft state for sessions passing through NATs. 

3.2.1. Address binding:

   Address binding is the phase in which a local node IP address is 
   associated with an external address or vice versa, for purposes of 
   translation. Address binding is fixed with static address 
   assignments and dynamic at session startup time with dynamic 
   address assignments. Once the binding between two addresses is in
   place, all subsequent sessions originating from or to this host 
   will use the same binding for session based packet translation. 

   New address bindings are made at the start of a new session, if
   such an address bind didn't already exist. Once a local address is 
   bound to an external address, all subsequent sessions originating 
   from the same local address or directed to the same local address 
   will use the same binding.

   Start of each new session will result in the creation of a state 
   to facilitate translation of datagrams pertaining to the session. 
   There can be many simultaneous sessions originating from the same 
   host, based on a single address binding. 

3.2.2. Address lookup and translation:

   Once a state is established for a session, all packets belonging
   to the session will be subject to address lookup (and transport 
   identifier lookup, in some cases) and translation.

   Address or transport identifier translation for a datagram will 
   result in the datagram forwarding from the origin routing realm 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 7]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   to the destination routing realm with network addresses 
   appropriately updated.
   
3.2.3. Address unbinding:

   Address unbinding is the phase in which a private address is no 
   longer associated with a global address for purposes of 
   translation. When the last session using an address bind is 
   terminated, it is safe to do the address unbinding. Refer section 
   2.1 for some heuristic ways to handle session terminations. 

3.3. ICMP error packet translation

   All ICMP error messages (with the exception of Redirect message 
   type) will need to be modified, when passed through NAT. The ICMP 
   error message types needing NAT modification would include 
   Destination-Unreachable, Source-Quench, Time-Exceeded and 
   Parameter-Problem.  NAT should not attempt to modify a Redirect 
   message type.

   Changes to ICMP error message will include changes to the 
   original IP packet (or portions thereof) embedded in the payload
   of the ICMP error message. In order for NAT to be completely 
   transparent to end hosts, the IP address of the IP header embedded 
   in the payload of the ICMP packet must be modified, the checksum 
   field of the same IP header must correspondingly be modified, and 
   the accompanying transport header. The ICMP header checksum must 
   also be modified to reflect changes made to the IP and transport 
   headers in the payload. Furthermore, the normal IP header must 
   also be modified. 
   

4.0. Various flavors of NAT

   There are many variations of address translation that lend 
   themselves to different applications. The following list of NAT 
   flavors are by no means exhaustive, but they do capture the 
   significant differences that abound.

4.1. Traditional NAT

   Traditional NAT would allow hosts within a private network to 
   transparently access hosts in the external network.  In a 
   traditional NAT, sessions are uni-directional, outbound from 
   the private network. Sessions in the opposite direction may be 
   allowed on an exceptional basis using static address maps for 
   pre-selected hosts.




Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 8]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   In this setup, network address of hosts in external network
   are unique and valid in external as well as private networks. 
   However, network address of hosts in private network are unique 
   only within the private network. In other words, NAT would not 
   be allowed to advertise private networks to the external realm. 
   But, networks from the external realm may be advertised within 
   the private network. The addresses used within private network 
   must not overlap with the external addresses. Any given address 
   must either be a private address or an external address; not 
   both. 

   Traditional NAT is primarily used to connect to the Internet sites 
   which are RFC1918 addressed or sites with addresses that have
   private enterprise significance. This is also used to avoid address 
   renumbering when changing service providers, even as the addressing
   within the private network is IANA assigned.

   There are two variations to traditional NAT, namely Basic NAT and 
   NAPT (Network Address Port Translation). These are discussed in the 
   following sub-sections. 

4.1.1. Basic NAT

   With Basic NAT, a block of external addresses are set aside for
   translating addresses of hosts in a private domain as they originate
   sessions to the external domain. For packets outbound from the 
   private network, the source IP address and related fields such as 
   IP, TCP, UDP and ICMP header checksums are translated. For inbound 
   packets, the destination IP address and the checksums as listed 
   above are translated.

4.1.2. Network Address Port Translation (NAPT)

   With NAPT, a single external address is set aside for translating 
   sessions originated by hosts in a private domain. This is made 
   possible by multiplexing transport level identifiers of multiple
   private hosts simultaneously into the transport identifiers of 
   a single assigned external address. For this reason, only the 
   applications supported by transport protocols TCP and UDP are 
   supported by NAPT. TCP and UDP protocols contain source and 
   destination port numbers. ICMP query based applications are also 
   supported as the queries contain a Query Identifier used to 
   corelate responses with requests. 
   
   For packets outbound from the private network, NAPT would translate 
   the source IP address, source transport identifier and related 
   fields such as IP, TCP, UDP and ICMP header checksums. Transport 
   identifier can be one of TCP/UDP port or ICMP query ID. For inbound 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                            [Page 9]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   packets, the destination IP address, destination transport 
   identifier and the IP and transport header checksums are 
   translated.

4.2. Two-Way NAT or Bi-directional NAT

   With a Bi-directional NAT, sessions can be initiated from hosts in 
   the public network as well as the private network. Private network 
   addresses are bound to globally unique addresses, statically or 
   dynamically as connections are established in either direction. 
   The name space (i.e., their Fully Qualified Domain Names) between 
   hosts in private and external networks is assumed to be unique. 
   
   The address space requirements outlined for traditional NATs are
   applicable here as well. 

4.3. Twice NAT

   Twice NAT is a variation of NAT in that both the source and 
   destination addresses are modified by NAT as a datagram crosses 
   routing realms. Typically, twice NAT would be deployed on an
   interface that attempts to "address isolate" private space from
   the public Internet. 

   In this setup, the network address of hosts in external network are 
   unique in external networks, but not within private network. 
   Likewise, the network address of hosts in private network are 
   unique only within the private network. In other words, the address 
   space used in private network to locate hosts in private and public 
   networks is unrelated to the address space used in public network 
   to locate hosts in private and public networks.  Twice NAT would  
   not be allowed to advertise local networks to the external network 
   or vice versa. 

   Sessions are allowed to be initiated from hosts in private network 
   to hosts in public network or vice versa. The name space (i.e., 
   Fully Qualified Domain Names) between hosts in private and external 
   networks is assumed to be unique. 

   Twice NAT is typically used when address space used in a Private 
   network overlaps with addresses used in the Public space. 
   For example, say a private site uses the 200.200.200.0/24 address 
   space which is officially assigned to another site in the public 
   internet. Host_A (200.200.200.1) in Private space seeks to connect 
   to Host_X (200.200.200.100) in Public space. In order to make this 
   connection work, Host_X's address is mapped to a different address
   for Host_A and vice versa. The twice NAT located at the Private site 
   border may be configured as follows :



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 10]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998



       Private to Public : 200.200.200.0/24 -> 138.76.28.0/24
       Public to Private : 200.200.200.0/24 -> 172.16.1.0/24

       Datagram flow  : Host_A(Private) ->  Host_X(Public) 

       a) Within private network

          DA: 172.16.1.100	SA: 200.200.200.1

       b) After twice-NAT translation 

	 DA: 200.200.200.100	SA: 138.76.28.1

       Datagram flow Host_X (Public) -> Host_A (Private) 

       a) Within Public network

	  DA: 138.76.28.1	SA: 200.200.200.100

       b) After twice-NAT translation, in private network

          SA: 200.200.200.1 	DA: 172.16.1.100

	    
4.4. Multihomed NAT

   There are limitations to using NAT. For example, requests and 
   responses pertaining to a session must be routed via the same 
   NAT router, as a NAT router maintains state information for 
   sessions established through it. For this reason, it is often 
   suggested that NATs be operated on a border router unique to a 
   stub domain, where all IP packets are either originated from the 
   domain or destined to the domain. However, such a configuration
   would turn a NAT box into a single point of failure.
   
   In order for a private network to ensure that connectivity with
   external networks is retained even as one of the NAT links fail, 
   it is often desirable to multihome the private network to same 
   or multiple service providers with multiple connections from the 
   private domain, be it from same or different NAT boxes. 

   For example, a private network could have links to two different 
   providers and the sessions from private hosts could flow through 
   the NAT router with the best metric for a destination. When one 
   of NATs fail, the other could route traffic for all connections.
  
   Multiple NAT boxes or multiple links on the same NAT box, sharing 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 11]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   the same NAT configuration can provide fail-safe backup for each
   other. In such a case, it would be desirable for backup NATs to 
   exchange state information so that a backup NAT can take on 
   session load transparently when the primary NAT fails. NAT backup
   becomes simpler, when configuration is based on static maps.

5.0. Private Networks and Tunnels

   Let us consider the case where your private network is connected
   to the external world via tunnels. In such a case, tunnel
   encapsulated traffic may or may not contain translated packets
   depending upon the characteristics of routing realms a tunnel is 
   bridging.

   The following subsections discuss two scenarios where tunnels are
   used (a) in conjunction with Address translation, and (b) without
   translation. 

5.1. Tunneling translated packets

   All variations of  address translations discussed in the previous 
   section can be applicable to direct connected links as well as 
   tunnels and virtual private networks (VPNs). 
   
   For example, a private network connected to a business partner 
   through a VPN could employ traditional NAT to communicate with 
   the partner. Likewise, it is possible to employ twice NAT,
   if the partner's address space overlapped with the private
   network.  There could be a NAT device on one end of the tunnel 
   or on both ends of the tunnel. In all cases, traffic across the 
   VPN can be encrypted for security purposes. Security here refers
   to security for traffic across VPNs alone. End-to-end security
   requires trusting NATs within private network.
   
5.2. Backbone partitioned private Networks 

   There are many instances where a private network (such as a 
   corporate network) is spread over different locations and use
   public backbone for communications between those locations. In 
   such cases, it is not desirable to do address translation, both 
   because large numbers of hosts may want to communicate across the 
   backbone, thus requiring large address tables, and because there 
   will be more applications that depend on configured addresses, 
   as opposed to going to a name server. We call such a private 
   network a backbone-partitioned private network.

   Backbone-partitioned stubs should behave as though they were a 
   non-partitioned stub. That is, the routers in all partitions 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 12]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   should maintain routes to the local address spaces of all 
   partitions. Of course, the (public) backbones do not maintain 
   routes to any local addresses. Therefore, the border routers must 
   tunnel (using VPNs) through the backbones using encapsulation. 
   To do this, each NAT box will set aside a global address for 
   tunneling. 
   
   When a NAT box x in stub partition X wishes to deliver a packet 
   to stub partition Y, it will encapsulate the packet in an IP 
   header with destination address set to the global address 
   of NAT box y that has been reserved for encapsulation. When NAT 
   box y receives a packet with that destination address, it 
   decapsulates the IP header and routes the packet internally.


6.0. NAT operational characteristics

   NATs are application independent in that the translations are 
   limited to IP/TCP/UDP/ICMP headers and ICMP error messages only. 
   NATs do not change the payload of the packets, as payloads tend 
   to be application specific.

   Due to their application independence, NATs are not considered 
   a hindrance to applications pursuing end-to-end transport and 
   application layer security. Applications that include IP 
   addresses in payload are an exception to this. However, 
   end-to-end IP network level security assured by current IPsec 
   techniques is not possible, as NATs modify the IP header 
   contents in transit.
			    
   IPsec assumes the traditional IP address as the globally unique 
   ID and requires IP addresses to be unique. Yet, NATs fundamentally 
   operate on the premise of modifying the IP addresses. This 
   strongly restricts the use of IPsec and any other protocol which 
   includes an IP address in an end-to-end security association.
   Thus, NATs also break the same fundamental assumption by IKE 
   (Session key negotiation protocol) and public key distribution 
   infrastructures such as secure DNS and X.509 certificates with
   signed public keys.  Integrity of a Security Association (SA), 
   identified by the tuple of (Destination Address, SPI, secure 
   protocol) is jeopardized by the manipulation of addresses by NAT. 
   Tampering of addresses along the way by NAT would break the 
   authenticity of signed data and the confidentiality of encrypted 
   data, vital to the security infrastructure of IPsec. 

   One of the most popular internet applications "FTP" would not work 
   with the definition of NAT as described. The following sub-section
   is devoted to describing how FTP is supported on NAT devices.  FTP 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 13]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   ALG is an integral part of most NAT implementations. Some vendors 
   may choose to include additional ALGs to custom support other 
   applications on the NAT device.

6.1. FTP support

   "PORT" command and "PASV" response in FTP control session payload 
   identify the IP address and TCP port that must be used for the 
   data session it supports. The arguments to the PORT command and 
   PASV response are an IP address and a TCP port in ASCII. An FTP 
   ALG is required to monitor and update the FTP control session 
   payload so that information contained in the payload is relevant 
   to end nodes. The ALG must also update NAT with appropriate data 
   session tuples and session orientation so that NAT could set up 
   state information for the FTP data sessions.  
   
   Because the address and TCP port are encoded in ASCII, this may 
   result in a change in the size of packet.  For instance, 
   10,18,177,42,64,87 is 18 ASCII characters, whereas 
   193,45,228,137,64,87 is 20 ASCII characters. If the new size is 
   same as the previous, only the TCP checksum needs adjustment as a 
   result of change of data. If the new size is less than or greater 
   than the previous, TCP sequence numbers must also be changed to 
   reflect the change in length of FTP control data portion.  A 
   special table may be used by the ALG to correct the TCP sequence 
   and acknowledge numbers.


7.0. NAT limitations

7.1. Applications with IP-address Content

   Not All applications lend themselves easily to address translation 
   by NATs. Especially, the applications that carry IP address 
   (and TU port, in case of NAPT) inside the payload. Application Level 
   Gateways, or ALGs must be used to perform translations on packets 
   pertaining to such applications. ALGs may optionally utilize address 
   (and TU port) assignments made by NAT and perform translations 
   specific to the application. The combination of NATs and ALGs will
   not provide end-to-end security assured by IPsec. However, tunnel
   mode IPsec can be accomplished with NAT serving as tunnel end point.

   SNMP is one such application with address content in payload. NAT 
   routers would not translate IP addresses within SNMP payloads. It 
   is not uncommon for an SNMP specific ALG to reside on a NAT router 
   to perform SNMP MIB translations proprietary to the private network.

7.2. Applications with inter-dependent control and data sessions



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 14]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998



   NATs operate on the assumption that each session is independent.
   Session characteristics like session orientation, source and 
   destination IP addresses, session protocol, and source and 
   destination transport level identifiers are determined 
   independently at the start of each new session. 
   
   However, there are applications such as H.323 that use one or 
   more control sessions to set the characteristics of the follow-on 
   sessions in their control session payload. Such applications
   require use of application specific ALGs that can interpret and
   translate the payload, if necessary. Payload interpretation 
   would help NAT be prepared for the follow-on data sessions.

7.3. Debugging Considerations

   NAT increases the probability of mis-addressing. For example, 
   same local address may be bound to different global address at 
   different times and vice versa. As a result, any traffic flow 
   study based purely on global addresses and TU ports could be 
   confused and might misinterpret the results.

   If a host is abusing the Internet in some way (such as trying to 
   attack another machine or even sending large amounts of junk mail
   or something) it is more difficult to pinpoint the source of the 
   trouble because the IP address of the host is hidden in a NAT 
   router.

7.4. Translation of fragmented FTP control packets

   Translation of fragmented FTP control packets is tricky when the 
   packets contain "PORT" command or response to "PASV" command. 
   Clearly, this is a pathological case. One option would be to drop
   the fragments and send an ICMP error message to packet 
   originator. Alternately, NAT router could attempt to assemble 
   fragments first and then translate prior to forwarding.

   Yet another case would be when each character of packets 
   containing "PORT" command or response to "PASV" is sent in a 
   separate datagram, unfragmented. In this case, NAT would simply 
   have to let the packets through, without translating the TCP 
   payload.

7.5. Compute intensive

   NAT is compute intensive even with the help of a clever checksum 
   adjustment algorithm, as each data packet is subject to NAT 
   lookup and modifications.  As a result, router forwarding 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 15]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   throughput could be slowed considerably. However, so long as the 
   processing capacity of the NAT device exceeds line processing 
   rate, this should not be a problem.


8.0. Security Considerations
 
   Many people view traditional NAT as a one-way (session) traffic 
   filter, restricting sessions from external hosts into their 
   machines. In addition, when address assignment in NAT is done 
   dynamically, that makes it harder for an attacker to point to 
   any specific host in the NAT domain. NATs may be used in 
   conjunction with firewalls to filter unwanted traffic.
  
   If NATs and ALGs are not in a trusted boundary, that is a major
   security problem, as ALGs could snoop end user traffic payload. 
   Session level payload could be encrypted end to end, so long as 
   the payload does not contain IP addresses and transport 
   identifiers. End-to-end IP network level security assured by 
   current IPsec techniques is not attainable with NATs in 
   between. One of the ends must be a NAT box. Refer section 6.0
   for a discussion on why end-to-end IPsec security cannot be
   assured with NAT devices along the route.
    
   The combination of NATs, ALGs and firewalls will provide a 
   transparent working environment for a private networking domain.
   But, end-to-end network security assured by IPsec cannot be 
   attained for end-hosts within the private network. If you want to
   use end-to-end IPsec, there cannot be any NATs in the path. If we 
   make the assumption that NATs are part of a trusted boundary, 
   tunnel mode IPsec can be accomplished with NAT (or a combination 
   of NAT, ALGs and firewall) serving as tunnel end point.
   
   NATs, when combined with ALGs, can ensure that the datagrams 
   injected into Internet have no private addresses in headers or 
   payload. Applications that do not meet these requirements may be 
   dropped using firewall filters. For this reason, it is not 
   uncommon to find that NATs, ALGs and firewalls co-exist to provide 
   security at the borders of a private network. NAT gateways can be 
   used as tunnel end points to provide secure VPN transport of packet 
   data across an external network domain.

   Below are some additional security considerations associated with 
   NAT routers.

   1. UDP sessions are inherently unsafe. Responses to a datagram
      could come from an address different from the target address 
      used by sender ([Ref 4]). NAT implementations that do not track 



Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 16]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


      datagrams on a per-session basis but lump states of multiple UDP 
      sessions into a single state could compromise the security even 
      further.

   2. Multicast sessions (UDP based) are another source for security
      weaknesses. 

      Say, a host on private network initiated a multicast session.
      Datagram sent by the private host could trigger responses in the 
      reverse direction from multiple external hosts. NAT 
      implementations that use a single state to track the multicast
      responses in a multicast session could potentially be the 
      target of security attacks. This multicast specific security 
      concern, however, is not unique to NAT implementations, and 
      exists across all hosts supporting multicast applications. 
 
   3. NATs can be a target for attacks.

      Since NATs are Internet hosts they can be the target of a 
      number of different attacks, such as SYN flood and ping flood
      attacks. NATs should employ the same sort of protection
      techniques as Internet-based servers do.


REFERENCES

   [1] Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, B., Karrenberg, D., G. de Groot, and, 
       Lear, E.  "Address Allocation for Private Internets", RFC 1918 

   [2] J. Reynolds and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", RFC 1700 

   [3] R. Braden, "Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Communication 
       Layers", RFC 1122

   [4] R. Braden, "Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Application   
       and Support", RFC 1123 

   [5] F. Baker, "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers",  RFC 1812 

   [6] J. Postel, J. Reynolds, "FILE TRANSFER PROTOCOL(FTP)", RFC 959 

   [7] "TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL (TCP) SPECIFICATION",  RFC 793

   [8] J. Postel, "INTERNET CONTROl MESSAGE PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION",  
       RFC 792 

   [9] J. Postel, "User Datagram Protocol (UDP)",  RFC 768 




Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 17]

Internet Draft     NAT Terminology and Considerations          July 1998


   [10] J. Mogul, J. Postel, "Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure",  
	RFC 950 

   [11] Brian carpenter, Jon Crowcroft, Yakov Rekhter, "IPv4 Address
	Behavior Today", RFC 2101

   [12] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
	Protocol", <draft-ietf-ipsec-arch-sec-05.txt> - Work in 
	progress.

   [13] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security Payload 
	(ESP)", <draft-ietf-ipsec-esp-v2-05.txt> - Work in progress.

   [14] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header",
        <draft-ietf-ipsec-auth-header-06.txt> - Work in progress.

   [15] D. Harkins, D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)", 
        <draft-ietf-ipsec-isakmp-oakley-08.txt> - Work in progress.

   [16] D. Piper, "The Internet IP Security Domain of Interpretation 
	for ISAKMP", <draft-ietf-ipsec-ipsec-doi-09.txt> - Work in 
	progress.


Authors' Addresses

   Pyda Srisuresh
   Lucent technologies
   4464 Willow Road
   Pleasanton, CA 94588-8519
   U.S.A.

   Voice: (925) 737-2153
   Fax:   (925) 737-2110 
   EMail: suresh@ra.lucent.com

   Matt Holdrege
   Ascend Communications, Inc.
   One Ascend Plaza
   1701 Harbor Bay Parkway
   Alameda, CA 94502

   Voice: (510) 769-6001
   Fax:   (510) 814-2300
   EMail: matt@ascend.com






Srisuresh & Holdrege                                           [Page 18]

