



NMRG                                                       LM. Contreras
Internet-Draft                                                Telefonica
Intended status: Informational                            P. Demestichas
Expires: July 15, 2022                                             WINGS
                                                             J. Tantsura
                                                               Microsoft
                                                        January 11, 2022


                       IETF Network Slice Intent
             draft-contreras-nmrg-transport-slice-intent-05

Abstract

   Slicing at the transport network is expected to be offered as part of
   end-to-end network slices, fostered by the introduction of new
   services such as 5G.  This document explores the usage of intent
   technologies for requesting IETF network slices.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 15, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  IETF network slice intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Foundation of IETF network slice intents  . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Mechanisms for translating IETF network slice intents . . . .   5
     4.1.  Translation approaches and interaction with the upper
           systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Intent-based system suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   Network slicing is emerging as the future model for service offering
   in telecom operator networks.  Conceptually, network slicing provides
   a customer with an apparent dedicated network built on top of logical
   (i.e. virtual) and/or physical functions and resources supported by a
   shared infrastructure, provided by one or more telecom operators.

   The concept of network slicing has been largely fostered by the
   advent of 5G services that are expected to be deployed on top of
   different kind of slices, each built to support specific
   characteristics (extreme low latency, high bandwidth, etc).

   As part of an end-to-end network slice it is expected to have a
   number of network slices at transport level (referred as IETF network
   slices) providing the necessary connectivity to the rest of
   components of the end-to-end slice, e.g., mobile packet core slice.

   For a definition of an IETF network slice refer to
   [I-D.ietf-teas-ietf-network-slices].  The following paragraph is
   directly taken from it: "An IETF Network Slice Service enables
   connectivity between a set of CEs with specific Service Level
   Objectives (SLOs) and Service Level Expectations (SLEs) over a common
   underlay network."

   Intent is a high-level, declarative goal that operates at the level
   of a network and services it provides, not individual devices.  It is
   used to define outcomes and high-level operational goals.




Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


   In consequence, it seems very convenient to apply the intent-based
   mechanisms for the provision of IETF network slices, providing the
   adequate level of abstraction towards the transport network control
   and management planes.

   This document leverages current industry trends in the definition of
   end-to-end network slices.  The final objective is to describe
   intents that can be used to flexibly declare the operational aspects
   and goals of an IETF network slice, meaning that the customer could
   declare what kind of IETF network slice is needed (the outcome) and
   not how to achieve the goals of the IETF network slice.

2.  IETF network slice intent

   As stated in [I-D.irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions], "Intent is a
   declaration of operational goals that a network is supposed to meet
   and outcomes that the network is supposed to deliver, without
   specifying how to achieve or how to implement them.  Those goals and
   outcomes are defined in a manner that is purely declarative - they
   specify what to accomplish, not how to achieve it."

   When applied to transport networks, this implies that an intent for
   IETF network slices should provide the necessary abstraction with
   respect to implementation details, including the final devices (or
   resources) involved, and be focused on the characteristics and
   performance expectations related to it.

   With that aim it can be expected that the intent based system can
   fulfill and assure the requested IETF network slice, triggering
   initial configurations at the time of initial provisioning and
   corrective actions during the IETF network slice lifetime.

   Regarding the corrective actions it is possible to differentiate two
   levels.  First, corrective actions that could be performed by the
   management and control capabilities of the network (i.e., by the IETF
   Network Slice Controller) to maintain the Service level Objectives
   (SLOs) as originally declared in the slice intent, so being these
   internal actions to the management and control elements of the
   network.  Second, corrective actions that could be necessary to
   perform due to incongruences between the SLOs expressed in the intent
   and the observed monitoring information, then requiring some
   adaptation to the intent itself in order to perform the corrective
   action.








Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


3.  Foundation of IETF network slice intents

   The industrial interest around 5G is accelerating network deployments
   and operational changes.

   With this respect, the GSMA has been developing a universal blueprint
   that can be used by any vertical customer to request the deployment
   of a network slice instance (NSI) based on a specific set of service
   requirements.  Such a blueprint is a network slice descriptor called
   Generic Slice Template (GST) [GSMA].  The GST contains multiple
   attributes that can be used to characterize a network slice.  A
   particular template filled with values generates a specific Network
   Slice Type(NEST).

   Such templates refer to the end-to-end network slice, including the
   transport part.  Despite the fact that some of the values would not
   have applicability for the transport network, others do.  An analysis
   of the relevant attributes is performed in
   [I-D.contreras-teas-slice-nbi].

   According to 3GPP propositions [TS28.541], an upper 3GPP Management
   System interacts with the transport network for establishing the
   necessary slices at the transport level.  Such interaction can be
   expected to happen using the IETF network slice intent, described to
   an intent-based system (IBS) in the transport network part.  Then,
   according to the intent lifecycle in
   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions], the IBS, after recognizing
   the intent, will proceed to translate it in order to interact with a
   IETF network slice controller by using a NBI as proposed in
   [I-D.contreras-teas-slice-nbi].

   Figure 1 captures the intent procedure for the fulfillment phase
   (assurance phase will be detailed in future versions of this draft).


















Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


          User Space   :       Translation / IBS       :  Network Ops
                       :            Space              :     Space
                       :                               :
         +----------+  :  +----------+   +-----------+ : +-----------+
 Fulfill |recognize/|---> |translate/|-->|  learn/   |-->| configure/|
         |generate  |     |          |   |  plan/    |   | provision |
         |intent    |<--- |  refine  |   |  render   | : |           |
         +----------+  :  +----------+   +-----------+ : +-----------+
                       :                               :
 .........................................................................

     Slice Customer    :                   Slice Provider
     --------------    :                   --------------
                       :
    - Customized Slice :  - Identification of IETF     : - Slice request
      Templates        :    network slice endpoints    :   to IETF NSC by
    - Service SLOs as  :    and connectivity pattern   :   using slice
      understood by    :  - Derivation of network SLOs :   NBI YANG model
      slice customer   :    and SLEs from high-level   :
                       :    Customer Service SLOs      :
                       :                               :


        Figure 1: Fulfillment phase of the Transport Slicing Intent

4.  Mechanisms for translating IETF network slice intents

   This section describes approaches for implementing mechanisms to
   translate IETF network slice intents.  As part of such translation it
   could be necessary to translate the slice needs expressed by the
   customer in terms of service-specific SLOs (e.g., high-resolution
   real-time video quality) to network- or connectivity-specific SLOs
   (e.g., a correspondent throughput and/or latency) which are the SLOs
   an IETF Network Slice Controller understands.  More on this can be
   found in [TMV].

4.1.  Translation approaches and interaction with the upper systems

   A suite of mechanisms will be required to allow instantiation of the
   user's intent into a IETF network slice.  In order to be able to
   deliver an end2end Intent driven slice - a well defined set of
   context aware attributes that allow unambiguous instantiation of the
   intent should be agreed upon.  A combination of a structured set of
   attributes communicated between an IBN and an upper layer system with
   user input would allow an IBN to have intent modeled and reason about
   its completeness/validity.  Translation approaches and interaction
   with the upper systems might benefit from Natural Language Processing
   (NLP) technics that are needed for enabling high level expression of



Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


   requirements found missing.  The goal would be to identify and
   classify the answers for as many fields as possible from the Generic
   Slice Template (GST), based on the free text / speech provided by the
   user.  As it is highly unlikely that the minimum set of fields to
   properly define an IETF network slice (geo-temporal characteristics,
   performance characteristics, SLO and SLA properties) will be
   fulfilled in this first step, a follow up two-step approach might
   need to be implemented.

   o  The minimum missing fields from the GST have to be identified and
      appropriate questions have to be generated (e.g. based on a pool
      of available questions correlated with each field, or based on AI
      approaches).

   o  An iterative interrogation phase will be initiated towards the
      user using the previously generated questions, until the user
      provides all the missing information, so the intent can be modeled
      accordingly.

   Interaction with the user and higher-up systems can potentially be
   further improved by utilizing Machine Learning techniques.

4.2.  Intent-based system suite

   In order to consolidate on the set of devices, technologies and
   resources to be used, a combination of deterministic or stochastic
   computation approaches will be needed.  Deterministic approaches will
   rely on mathematical models and respective algorithms.  Stochastic
   approaches will rely on technologies like machine learning.  Their
   goal will be to learn from experience, so as to optimize future
   decisions from the viewpoint of speed and reliability.  The target of
   learning will be related to the service behavior and to the
   anticipated network status in the area and time period of the service
   provision.

5.  Security Considerations

   To be done.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This draft does not include any IANA considerations

7.  References

   [GSMA]     "Generic Network Slice Template, version 5.0", NG.116 ,
              June 2021.




Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


   [I-D.contreras-teas-slice-nbi]
              Contreras, L. M., Homma, S., Ordonez-Lucena, J. A.,
              Tantsura, J., and K. Szarkowicz, "IETF Network Slice Use
              Cases and Attributes for Northbound Interface of IETF
              Network Slice Controllers", draft-contreras-teas-slice-
              nbi-05 (work in progress), July 2021.

   [I-D.ietf-teas-ietf-network-slices]
              Farrel, A., Gray, E., Drake, J., Rokui, R., Homma, S.,
              Makhijani, K., Contreras, L. M., and J. Tantsura,
              "Framework for IETF Network Slices", draft-ietf-teas-ietf-
              network-slices-05 (work in progress), October 2021.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions]
              Clemm, A., Ciavaglia, L., Granville, L. Z., and J.
              Tantsura, "Intent-Based Networking - Concepts and
              Definitions", draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions-06
              (work in progress), December 2021.

   [TMV]      "Service performance measurement methods over 5G
              experimental networks", 5G-PPP TMV , May 2021.

   [TS28.541]
              "TS 28.541 Management and orchestration; 5G Network
              Resource Model (NRM); Stage 2 and stage 3 (Release 16)
              V16.2.0.", 3GPP TS 28.541 V16.2.0 , September 2019.

Acknowledgments

   This work has been partly funded by the European Commission through
   the H2020 project 5G-EVE (Grant Agreement no. 815074).

Contributors

   Kostas Tsagkaris, Kostas Trichias, Vassilis Foteinos, and Thanasis
   Gkiolias (all from WINGS ICT Solutions) have also contributed to this
   work.

Authors' Addresses












Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          IETF Network Slice Intent           January 2022


   Luis M. Contreras
   Telefonica
   Ronda de la Comunicacion, s/n
   Sur-3 building, 3rd floor
   Madrid  28050
   Spain

   Email: luismiguel.contrerasmurillo@telefonica.com
   URI:   http://lmcontreras.com/


   Panagiotis Demestichas
   WINGS ICT Solutions
   Greece

   Email: pdemest@wings-ict-solutions.eu


   Jeff Tantsura
   Microsoft

   Email: jefftant.ietf@gmail.com





























Contreras, et al.         Expires July 15, 2022                 [Page 8]
