
INTERNET-DRAFT                                          Jean-Luc Richier
NGTRANS Working Group                                               IMAG
Expires August 2002                                       Octavio Medina
                                                         Laurent Toutain
                                                           ENST Bretagne

                         DSTM in a VPN Scenario

                    <draft-richier-dstm-vpn-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   In an implicit manner, the specification of DSTM focuses on a
   scenario where DSTM nodes are inside an IPv6-only intranet. This
   document describes a new usage for DSTM in which DSTM nodes are
   located outside the intranet: the VPN scenario.









Richier, Medina, Toutain  Expires August 2002                   [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT       draft-richier-dstm-vpn-00.txt         February 2002


1. Introduction

   In an implicit manner, the specification of DSTM[1] focuses on a
   scenario where DSTM nodes are inside an IPv6-only intranet. In this
   case, communication to IPv4 networks is assured by a Tunnel End Point
   (TEP) which also belongs to the intranet. This document describes a
   new usage for DSTM in which DSTM nodes are located outside the
   intranet: the VPN scenario.

   Note that the VPN scenario still considers the case where an IPv6
   host requests an IPv4 address. This document does not cover the case
   where an IPv4-only host wants to establish a communication with an
   IPv6 host.




2. Service Description

   DSTM[1] can be used to access IPv4 resources when only IPv6
   connectivity is available. This capacity is not be limited to the
   intranet scenario. For example, in wireless networks (like a 3G
   network) the property of autoconfiguration makes it relatively easy
   to allocate IPv6 addresses to equipments. The IPv4 address allocation
   may be more problematic. In this case, the Service Provider can offer
   IPv6 connectivity only; communication to the IPv4 Internet being
   assured by DSTM. DSTM nodes may be placed anywhere in the network, as
   long as IPv6 connectivity exists between the hosts and DSTM servers
   and TEPs. DSTM can be used to justify the creation of a native IPv6
   infrastructure, with TEPs and DSTM servers providing the access the
   IPv4 Internet.

   In the VPN scenario, we suppose that a DSTM node is located outside
   his home domain on an IPv6-only infrastructure and that the node can
   easely get an IPv6 address. The DSTM node can contact the DSTM server
   of his home domain using the IPv6 connectivity. If autentication
   succeeds, the DSTM server allocates a temporary IPv4 address to the
   DSTM node. For this scenario, the DSTM server MUST be in charge of
   TEP configuration. Only when the DSTM server has allocated an
   address, the corresponding IPv4/IPv6 address mapping and time of the
   lease are set up at the TEP. This is an important requirement that
   avoids the use of IPv4 ressources by non authorized nodes.

   The TEP and the DSTM server can be located inside the same home
   domain, allowing either the use of private IPv4 addresses to access
   only the company resources or the use of public IPv4 addresses for a
   complete access to the Internet v4.





Richier, Medina, Toutain  Expires August 2002                   [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT       draft-richier-dstm-vpn-00.txt         February 2002


   The investissement for sites is minimal, it requires an access to the
   IPv6 Internet through native links or tunnels and the installation of
   a TEP and a DSTM server. It can also be possible to locate this
   mechanism in another part of the network, which may be runned by a
   third party.




3. Security Considerations

   The main difference between the intranet scenario and the VPN
   scenario of DSTM is security. In the intranet scenario, the request
   for a temporary IPv4 address may not be authenticated since DSTM
   hosts are located inside an Intranet. In the VPN scenario, the DSTM
   server MUST authenticate the DSTM host. This authentication cannot
   rely on the IPv6 address since the address depends on the visiting
   network, but can be based on some shared secret.

   The mapping between the IPv4 and IPv6 address of the DSTM node in the
   TEP is also a security concern. If the mapping is established
   dynamically (no configuration by the DSTM server), it could be
   possible for every intruder knowing a valid temporary IPv4 address to
   use the TEP as an IPv4 relay or to access internal IPv4 ressources.
   So, in the VPN scenario, the mapping in the TEP MUST be managed by
   the DSTM server which authenticates the DSTM host and its IPv6
   address. The tunnel between the DSTM host and the TEP can be
   cyphered, but it is the authors' view that this is more an IPv6
   feature (like the use of IPv6 mobility) than a DSTM feature.

   From the authors' point of view, the use of DSTM under these
   circumstances could be benefic for IPv6 networks: it can be a way to
   install an IPv6 infrastructure and generate IPv6 traffic to access
   IPv4 ressources through DSTM TEPs.



References


   [1] Bound, Toutain, Medina et al. Dual Stack Transition Mechanism.
       draft-ietf-ngtrans-dstm-07.txt; Work in Progress.
       Expires August 2002.



 
 




Richier, Medina, Toutain  Expires August 2002                   [Page 3]

