


Intended Status: Informational                                 M. Larson
DNS Operations                                                  VeriSign
Internet-Draft                                            O. Gudmundsson
Expires: April 26, 2011                                    Shinkuro Inc.
                                                        October 23, 2010


           DNSSEC Trust Anchor Configuration and Maintenance
                draft-ietf-dnsop-dnssec-trust-anchor-04

Abstract

   This document recommends a preferred format for specifying trust
   anchors in DNSSEC validating security-aware resolvers and describes
   how such a resolver should initialize trust anchors for use.  This
   document also describes different mechanisms for keeping trust
   anchors up to date over time.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Trust Anchor Format and Storage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Trust Anchor Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Trust Anchor Priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Trust Anchor Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The DNSSEC standards documents ([RFC4033], [RFC4034] and [RFC4035])
   describe the need for trust anchors and how they are used.  A
   validating security-aware resolver (subsequently referred to as a
   "validating resolver") needs to be configured with one or more trust
   anchors, which specify the public keys of signed zones.  To
   authenticate DNS data, a validating resolver builds a chain of trust
   from a configured trust anchor to that data.

   The DNS root zone is signed and a validating resolver needs to be
   configured with at least the root zone's trust anchor.  A validating
   resolver might need additional trust anchors configured to
   accommodate islands of security.  (An island of security is a signed,
   delegated zone that does not have an authentication chain from its
   delegating parent.)  Consider the situation now that the root zone is
   signed but when a given top-level domain (TLD) zone is not signed.
   Various second-level zones under this unsigned TLD might be signed
   and resolver operators might want to validate responses from those
   zones, requiring a validating resolver to be configured with those
   zones' trust anchors.  Note islands of security can appear at any
   depth in the DNS tree.

   Because many different validating resolvers need be configured there
   is a benefit to creating a common trust anchor format.  A similar
   situation has occurred with the "root hints", the list of root name
   server names and IP addresses: this information is distributed in
   standard master file format and many resolver implementations support
   this common format.

   To simplify this trust anchor configuration process that will occur
   on a large number of resolvers, this document offers guidance to
   validating resolver implementers by specifying a standardized format
   for describing trust anchors.  The document also describes how a
   validating resolver should initialize or "prime" trust anchors before
   first use.  Finally, the document lists options for keeping trust
   anchor information current over time.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].










Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


2.  Trust Anchor Format and Storage

   A trust anchor is a DNSSEC public key configured in a validating
   resolver.  A validating resolver's configuration MUST allow one or
   more trust anchors to be specified.  According to the definition in
   Section 2 of RFC 4033 [RFC4033], a trust anchor can be specified as
   either a public key from a DNSKEY resource record (RR) or the hash of
   a public key as found in a DS RR.  (DS records are defined in Section
   5 of RFC 4034 [RFC4034].)

   This document RECOMMENDS that a trust anchor be specified using the
   hash of a public key rather than the key itself, i.e., the fields
   from a DS record rather than from a DNSKEY record.  A trust anchor
   specified in this manner will use all the fields from the
   corresponding key's DS record, including the owner name to indicate
   which zone the trust anchor corresponds to as well as the various
   fields from the DS RDATA.  The digest algorithm SHOULD be SHA-256
   [RFC4509], which is DS digest type 2.  DS records using SHA-1 (DS
   digest type 1) to specify trust anchors are NOT RECOMMENDED: RFC 4509
   encourages the use of DS RRs using SHA-256 over those using SHA-1.

   Specifying a trust anchor using a DS format instead of a DNSKEY
   format offers an advantage because it forces the resolver to make a
   DNS query to obtain the trust anchor's complete DNSKEY RRSet during a
   priming operation (described below).  If only a DNSKEY record were
   specified, resolver implementers could conceivably avoid priming the
   trust anchor.  But priming is desirable because it causes the
   resolver to retrieve an up-to-date version of a zone's DNSKEY RRSet
   from one of the zone's authoritative servers.  It should be noted
   that in practice, priming is frequently required, when the data in
   the trust anchor zone is signed with a different key than the one
   configured as the trust anchor.

   Using a DS format is also recommended because it is smaller than the
   DNSKEY format and is easier to compare manually, either by typing or
   cutting and pasting.

2.1.  Trust Anchor Storage

   For trust anchors to be useful the validating resolver needs to be
   able to read a file with the trust anchors.  This document recommends
   that all resolvers be able to read trust anchors specified in a file
   in the following format:

   ZoneName [DS] KeyTag DNSKEY-Algorithm Digest-type Digest

   Any truncated digest SHOULD be ignored.  The text "DS" in input is
   optional.  The input format assumes that the trust anchor is either



Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


   in the IN class or is valid in all classes.

   Validating resolvers ought to be able write out a list of current
   trust anchors in the format above.  Validating resolvers that perform
   trust anchor maintenance MUST be able to update their trust anchor
   storage.

   Example: (ID width rules force text onto two lines)

   . 19036 8 2
   49AAC11D7B6F6446702E54A1607371607A1A41855200FD2CE1CDDE32F24E8FB5

   Note: Trust anchor maintenance [RFC5011] and other schemas may
   require a different format as timers and other meta data is needed.





































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


3.  Trust Anchor Priming

   A validating resolver needs to obtain and validate the DNSKEY RRSet
   corresponding to a configured DS for that trust anchor to be usable
   in DNSSEC validation.  This process is called "priming" the trust
   anchor.  Priming can occur when the validating resolver starts, but a
   validating resolver may want to defer priming of individual trust
   anchors until each is first needed for verification.  This priming on
   demand is especially important when a validating resolver is
   configured with a large number of trust anchors to avoid sending a
   large number of DNS queries on startup.  This section adds additional
   details to the discussion of trust anchors in Section 5 of RFC 4035
   [RFC4035].

   Following are the steps a validating resolver SHOULD take to prime a
   configured trust anchor:

   1.  Read the trust anchor's information (corresponding to the fields
       in a DS record as descried above) from the validating resolver's
       configuration (e.g., a text file).

   2.  Look up the DNSKEY RRSet corresponding to the owner name of the
       trust anchor.  (The validating resolver can either perform
       iterative resolution or request recursive service from a
       recursive name server, depending on its capabilities.)

   3.  Verify that one of the DNSKEY RR(s) correspond to one the
       configured trust anchor(s) (i.e., one of the DNSKEY whose hash is
       configured) appears in the DNSKEY RRSet and that this DNSKEY RR
       has the Zone Key Flag (DNSKEY RDATA bit 7) set.  (This bit only
       indicates that the DNSKEY is allowed to sign the zone data.  This
       DNSKEY may or may not be a zone signing key (ZSK) as defined in
       RFC 4641 [RFC4641].)

   4.  Verify that the DNSKEY RRSet is signed by one of the DNSKEYs
       found in the previous step, i.e., that there exists a valid RRSIG
       (cryptographically and temporally) for the DNSKEY RRSet generated
       with the private key corresponding to the DNSKEY found in the
       previous step.

   If the validating resolver can successfully complete the steps above,
   all DNSKEY RRs in the RRSet ought to be considered authenticated and
   can be used to authenticate RRSets at or below the trust anchor.
   There is one exception: if the revoke bit used by the trust anchor
   automated update protocol RFC 5011 [RFC5011] is set, the trust anchor
   MUST be removed and not used.

   If any of the steps above result in an error, the validating resolver



Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


   SHOULD log them and abort the verification as specified in section
   5.5 of RFC 4035 [RFC4035].

   If there are multiple trust anchors configured for a zone, any one of
   them is sufficient to validate data in the zone.  For this reason,
   old trust anchors SHOULD be removed from a validating resolver's
   trust anchor list soon after the corresponding keys are no longer
   used by the zone, as described in RFC 5011 [RFC5011].  Even if a
   trust anchor is not used in resolution, a validating resolver needs
   to query for it frequently enough to detect changes as prescribed in
   RFC5011.

   If a validating resolver is unable to retrieve a signed DNSKEY RRSet
   corresponding to a trust anchor (i.e., prime the trust anchor), it
   SHOULD log this condition as an error.  Inability to prime a zone's
   trust anchor results in the validating resolver's inability to
   validate data from the corresponding zone.  The validating resolver
   MUST treat this zone as bogus, until such time it is able to get a
   DNSKEY set validated by a trust anchor.
































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


4.  Trust Anchor Maintenance

   Trust anchors usually correspond to zones' key signing keys and these
   keys do change in the course of normal operation.  It is up to
   validating resolver operators to ensure that configured trust anchor
   information remains current and does not go stale: each configured
   trust anchor SHOULD correspond to a DNSKEY RR in the trust anchor
   zone's apex DNSKEY RRSet.  This process is called trust anchor
   maintenance.  (Initial trust anchor configuration requires human
   intervention to verify the trust anchor's authenticity using out-of-
   band means and is outside the scope of this document.)

   This section provides a brief overview of some possible mechanisms to
   keep trust anchor information current:

   Manual configuration:  The validating resolver operator MAY choose to
      maintain trust anchor information completely manually.  In this
      case, the operator assumes responsibility for noticing stale trust
      anchor information (i.e., DS records that no longer point to a
      corresponding DNSKEY RR in the trust anchor zone's apex DNSKEY
      RRSet) and updating that information.  This process MAY require
      the operator to use the same out-of-band verification mechanism as
      used for initial configuration to ensure that the new trust anchor
      DS record is trustworthy.  Because manual maintenance is
      burdensome and prone to error, and because other automated trust
      anchor maintenance processes either exist or are in development,
      manual trust anchor maintenance is NOT RECOMMENDED.

   DNSSEC In-band Update:  RFC 5011 [RFC5011] defines an automated way
      keep DNSSEC trust anchors updated.  This protocol relies on a
      small DNSSEC protocol change (an additional flag in the DNSKEY
      record) and can be implemented either in a validating resolver
      itself or in an external program with access to the validating
      resolver's trust anchor configuration data.

   Trusted update mechanism:  Updated trust anchor information MAY be
      obtained via a trusted non-DNS update mechanism.  One possibility
      is the operating system update mechanism provided by most software
      vendors.  Operators already place considerable trust in this
      mechanism, so it is reasonable to extend this trust to allow
      distribution and update of DNSSEC public key material.  Another
      possibility is to obtain trust anchor configuration directly from
      the validating resolver software vendor.  A possible error
      condition in this mechanism is that a machine is brought up with
      an "old" trust configuration, like when a machine is configured
      from an old media or brought out of storage.  The machines ought
      to be able to detect the fact the list of trust anchors is "out-
      of-date" and fetch a more recent update.  During this process it



Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


      may be necessary to disable DNSSEC and only depend on the keys for
      the update mechanism to authorize the changes to the
      configuration.

   Combination of update mechanisms:  It is possible that for a given
      validating resolver, different trust anchors will be maintained by
      different mechanisms.  For example, some trust anchors might be
      kept up to date by a trusted update mechanism and others
      maintained by some site-specific mechanism.  In this case, it is
      important that the mechanisms maintain a mutually exclusive set of
      trust anchors.

   The out-of-sync errors described above in the "Trusted update
   mechanism" section can occur if the system the validating resolver is
   offline or in storage for an extend period or reinstalled.

   Trust Anchor Repositories (TAR) are sometimes mentioned at the same
   time as a trust anchor configuration.  TARs are in essence an
   outsourced trust anchor maintenance mechanism, where the user can
   avoid maintaining a large set of trust anchors by only configuring
   the root zone's key and the TAR key.






























Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


5.  Security considerations

   This document proposes a standard format for documenting DNSSEC trust
   anchors.  Configuration of trust anchors, especially those obtained
   from third parties as part of an automated process, is a critical
   security operation.  The procedures listed above describe the minimal
   checks that should be performed and reporting that should be done
   when configuring trust anchors.

   The root zone is now signed and many TLD's are planning DNSSEC
   deployment.  This state of affairs greatly reduces the number of
   trust anchors that validating resolvers need to configure and
   maintain.

   If multiple mechanisms are updating the trust anchor list then there
   is the possibility of conflict, such as one mechanism reinserting an
   expired trust anchor.

   Trust anchors are configuration information.  A validating resolver
   ought to treat this information differently than DNS data obtained
   over the network and never use the configured trust anchors as part
   of an answer.

   A signed zone that plans to transition to an unsigned state must
   first give a warning that it is going insecure, such as using the
   technique described in RFC 5011 [RFC5011].  Failure to do so will
   cause all validating resolvers that keep a trust anchor for the zone
   configured to treat responses from the zone as bogus, causing
   resolution failures.






















Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


6.  IANA considerations

   This document does not have any IANA actions.
















































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


7.  Acknowledgments

   This work was undertaken at the suggestion of the DNSSEC Deployment
   working group (www.dnssec-deployment.org).  The following people are
   acknowledged for contributing to this document: Alfred Hoenes, Edward
   Lewis, Wes Hardaker, Geoff Huston, Paul Hoffman, Matthijs Mekking,
   Scott Rose, Paul Wouters.












































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [RFC4509]  Hardaker, W., "Use of SHA-256 in DNSSEC Delegation Signer
              (DS) Resource Records (RRs)", RFC 4509, May 2006.

   [RFC5011]  StJohns, M., "Automated Updates of DNS Security (DNSSEC)
              Trust Anchors", RFC 5011, September 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4641]  Kolkman, O. and R. Gieben, "DNSSEC Operational Practices",
              RFC 4641, September 2006.






















Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Matt Larson
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21345 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20166-6503
   USA

   Email: mlarson@verisign.com


   Olafur Gudmundsson
   Shinkuro Inc.
   4922 Fairmont Av, Suite 250
   Bethsda, MD  20814
   USA

   Email: ogud@ogud.com

































Larson & Gudmundsson     Expires April 26, 2011                [Page 14]

