


IPTEL WG                                                     C. Jennings
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status:  Best Current                                V. Gurbani
Practice                               Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
Expires:  September 26, 2008                              March 25, 2008


   The Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA) tel Uniform Resource
                  Identifier (URI) Parameter Registry
                      draft-ietf-iptel-tel-reg-05

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 26, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document creates an Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA)
   registry for tel Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) parameters and
   their values.  It populates the registry with the parameters defined
   in the tel URI specification, along with the parameters in tel URI
   extensions defined for number portability and trunk groups.




Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Use of the Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  tel URI Parameters Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.2.  Registration Policy for tel URI Parameters  . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8




































Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


1.  Introduction

   The tel URI [1], defines a URI that can be used to represent
   resources identified by telephone numbers.  The tel URI, like many
   other URIs, provides extensibility through the definition of new URI
   parameters and new values for existing parameters.  However, RFC3966
   did not specify an IANA registry where such parameters and values can
   be listed and standardized.  This specification creates such a
   registry.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [2].


3.  Use of the Registry

   The tel URI parameters and values for these parameters MUST be
   documented in a RFC or other permanent and readily available public
   specification in order to be registered by IANA.  This documentation
   MUST fully explain the syntax, intended usage, and semantics of the
   parameter.  The intent of this requirement is to assure
   interoperability between independent implementations, and to prevent
   accidental namespace collisions between implementations of dissimilar
   features.

   RFCs defining tel URI parameters or parameter values MUST register
   them with IANA as described below.

   Some tel URI parameters only accept a set of predefined parameter
   values while others can take any value.  There are also parameters
   that do not have any value; they are used as flags.

   Those URI parameters that take on predefined values typically take on
   a large number of values.  Registering each of those values, or
   creating a sub-registry for each such parameter is not appropriate.
   Instead, we have chosen to register URI parameter values by
   reference.  That is, the entry in the URI parameter registry for a
   given URI parameter contains references to the RFCs defining new
   values of that parameter.

   Accordingly, the tel URI parameter registry contains a column that
   indicates whether or not each parameter only accepts a set of
   predefined values.  The column can contain "Yes", or "No".  A value
   of "Yes" in the column implies that certain predefined values exist



Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


   for this parameter and the accompanying RFC or other permanent and
   readily available public specification should be consulted to find
   out the accepted set of values.  A value of "No" in the column
   implies that the parameter is used either as a flag, or does not have
   a set of predefined values.  The accompanying RFC or other permanent
   and readily available public specification should provide more
   information on the semantics of the parameter.


4.  IANA Considerations

   The specification creates a new IANA registry named "tel URI
   Parameters".

4.1.  tel URI Parameters Registry

   New tel URI parameters and new values for existing tel URI parameters
   MUST be registered by IANA.

   When registering a new tel URI parameter the following information
   MUST be provided:

   o  Name of the parameter.

   o  Whether the parameter only accepts a set of predefined values.

   o  Reference to the RFC or other permanent and readily available
      public specification defining the parameter and new values.

   When registering a new value for an existing tel URI parameter the
   following information MUST be provided:

   o  Name of the parameter.

   o  Reference to the RFC or other permanent and readily available
      public specification providing the new value.

   Note to IANA editor:  When a new value for an existing tel URI
   parameter is standardized, the Reference column of Table 1 (below)
   corresponding to the parameter name must be updated to include the
   new RFC number.

   Table 1 contains the initial values for this registry.








Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


   Parameter Name     Predefined Values     Reference
   --------------     -----------------     ---------
   isub               Yes                   [RFC 3966]
   isub-encoding      Yes                   [RFC 4715]
   ext                Yes                   [RFC 3966]
   phone-context      Yes                   [RFC 3966]
   enumdi             No                    [RFC 4759]
   npdi               No                    [RFC 4694]
   rn                 Yes                   [RFC 4694]
   rn-context         Yes                   [RFC 4694]
   cic                Yes                   [RFC 4694]
   cic-context        Yes                   [RFC 4694]
   tgrp               Yes                   [RFC 4904]
   trunk-context      Yes                   [RFC 4904]

   Table 1: IANA tel URI parameter registry

4.2.  Registration Policy for tel URI Parameters

   As per the terminology in [6] and actions accorded to such a role,
   the registration policy for tel URI parameters shall be
   "Specification Required, Designated Expert" (the former implicitly
   implies the latter.)

   The Designated Expert when deliberating on whether to include a new
   parameter in the tel URI registry may use the criteria provided below
   to reach a decision (this is not an exhaustive list but
   representative of the issues to consider when rendering an equitable
   decision):

   o  If the tel URI -- with the parameter under consideration -- will
      be converted to a URI used by other signaling protocols such as
      the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP [4]) or H.323 [7], then the
      expert must consider whether this parameter merely encapsulates
      signaling information that is not meaningful to the processing of
      requests in the domain of the converted URI.  For example, certain
      Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) User Part (ISUP, [8])
      parameters have no equivalent corollary in SIP; thus their
      presence or absence in a SIP URI will not hinder the normal rules
      for processing that URI.  Other parameters may affect the normal
      processing rules associated with the URI; in such cases, the
      expert must consider carefully the ramifications, if any, of the
      presence of such parameters.

   o  Certain parameters of a tel URI can be optional.  These parameters
      act as metadata about the identifier in the tel URI.  Optional
      parameters should provide additional information to a service for
      which they apply instead of acting as enablers of that service in



Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


      the first place.  The service must continue to be invoked and
      operate normally even in the absence of these parameters.


5.  Security Considerations

   The registry in this document does not in itself have security
   considerations.  However, as mentioned in [3], an important reason
   for the IETF to manage the extensions of SIP is to ensure that all
   extensions and parameters are able to provide secure usage.  The
   supporting RFC publications for parameter registrations described
   this specification MUST provide detailed security considerations for
   them.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The structure of this document comes from [5], which is the
   equivalent work done in the SIP domain to establish a registry.  Ted
   Hardie, Jon Peterson and Jonathan Rosenberg provided substantive
   comments that have improved this document.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 3966,
        December 2004.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [3]  Mankin, A., Bradner, S., Mahy, R., Willis, D., Ott, J., and B.
        Rosen, "Change Process for the Session Initiation Protocol
        (SIP)", BCP 67, RFC 3427, December 2002.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [5]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA)
        Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameter Registry for the
        Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", BCP 99, RFC 3969,
        December 2004.




Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


   [6]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
        Considerations Section in RFCs",
        draft-narten-iana-considerations-rfc2434bis-08 (work in
        progress), October 2007.

   [7]  ITU-T H.323, "H.323: Packet-based multimedia communications
        systems", June 2006.

   [8]  ITU-T Q.764, "Signaling System No. 7: ISDN User Part Signaling
        Procedures", December 1999.


Authors' Addresses

   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   Mailstop SJC-21/2
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 902-3341
   Email:  fluffy@cisco.com


   Vijay K. Gurbani
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   2701 Lucent Lane
   Room 9F-546
   Lisle, IL  60532
   USA

   Phone:  +1 630 224-0216
   Email:  vkg@alcatel-lucent.com

















Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    IANA Registry for TEL URI Parameters        March 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Jennings & Gurbani     Expires September 26, 2008               [Page 8]

