

	    INTERNET-DRAFT		      Nathaniel	Borenstein
	    draft-cpsr-one-net-01.txt	      Harry Hochheiser
					      Computer Professionals for
						  Social Responsibility

	    Expires: 23	Apr 1998	      23 Oct 1997




	    Status of This Document

	    This draft,	file name draft-cpsr-one-net-01.txt, is	intended
	    to be become an Informational RFC.	Distribution of	this
	    document is	unlimited. Comments should be sent to the
	    authors at <onenet-comments@cpsr.org> or the onetnet-
	    discuss@cpsr.org mailing list.

	    This document is an	Internet-Draft.	 Internet-Drafts are
	    working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
	    (IETF), its	areas, and its working groups.	Note that other
	    groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
	    Drafts.

	    Internet-Drafts are	draft documents	valid for a maximum of
	    six	months and may be updated, replaced, or	obsoleted by
	    other documents at any time.  It is	inappropriate to use
	    Internet-Drafts as reference material or to	cite them other
	    than as "work in progress."

	    To view the	entire list of current Internet-Drafts,	please
	    check the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the
	    Internet-Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
	    ftp.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
	    ds.internic.net (US	East Coast), or	ftp.isi.edu (US	West
	    Coast).

	    Abstract

	    This document presents a suggested set of basic principles
	    that the authors believe should underlie all future	work in
	    the	area of	Internet governance.  The purpose of this
	    document is	to work	towards	as broad a consensus as
	    possible, in the diverse Internet community, about
	    principles that should inform the way the Internet is
	    administered for the benefit of all	humanity.









				       - 2 -


	    The	principles have	been drafted under the auspices	of
	    Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, with
	    several iterations internal	to that	organization.  However,
	    they are still very	much seen as a work in progress.
	    Comments are solicited from	all interested parties.	 Future
	    versions will be refined based on these comments and
	    published as future	Internet-Drafts, with a	goal of
	    publication	of a finalized version of the declaration as an
	    Internet RFC in summer, 1998.

	    All	comments on this document are welcome; please send them
	    to onenet-comments@cpsr.org.  Open discussion of this
	    document is	encouraged on the onenet-discuss list, which is
	    archived at	http://www.findmail.com/listsaver/onenet-
	    discuss.
	    ================================
	    One	Planet,	One Net:  Principles for the Internet Era

	    The	emergence of the Internet presents enormous
	    opportunities and challenges to humanity.  If we act
	    carefully, we can ensure that the Net will be used to change
	    the	human condition	for the	better,	and can	prevent	or
	    mitigate its less desirable	consequences.

	    For	our global community to	reach its potential in this
	    networked world, certain principles	must be	understood and
	    respected as we consider the more detailed daily questions
	    that arise in the administration or	governance of the Net.
	    We believe that among these	principles are the following:

	    1.	There is only one Net.
	    2.	The Net	must be	open and available to all.
	    3.	People have the	right to communicate.
	    4.	People have the	right to privacy.
	    5.	People are the Net's stewards, not its owners.
	    6.	No individuals,	organizations, or governments should
	    dominate the Net.
	    7.	The Net	should reflect human diversity,	not homogenize
	    it.

	    The	Internet is more than its constituent components --
	    synergistically more than a	combination of wires, computers,
	    software, modems, routers, standards, and the applications
	    that use them.  The	Net is the total of all	of these, plus
	    the	collective knowledge and experience of a set of
	    communities	that have already experienced years of technical









				       - 3 -


	    and	social development and growth.	The Internet is	a unique
	    conglomeration, with its own modes of interaction, languages
	    of discourse, and cultural expression.

	    As the Net has grown, its nature has continually changed,
	    reflecting the growing set of communities that have	embraced
	    Internet technology.  This will continue to	be the case as
	    more and more of humanity uses the Net on a	regular	basis.
	    The	Net's Americanv	origin has shaped its development in
	    many ways, but the Internet	is larger than one single
	    country, and over time may be expected to retain some
	    aspects of its American origins, such as its open and
	    democratic character, while	rejecting others, such as the
	    degree to which the	use of English is required to make
	    optimal use	of the Net.

	    --------------------------------

	    1.	There is only one Net.

	    The	nature of human	beings,	and the	nature of their	use of
	    computing and networking technology, fundamentally demands
	    interconnection.  While there will continue	to be occasional
	    roles for separate networks, the overall dynamic will be for
	    networks to	join together to enhance their usefulness, and
	    the	most useful network will be the	globally interconnected
	    Net.  People will demand the increased utility that	comes
	    from being universally connected.  Because the flow	of
	    information	on the Net transcends national boundaries, any
	    restrictions within	a single country may act to limit the
	    freedom of those in	other countries	as well.

	    This does not imply	that all Net access will be identical.
	    Some Internet-connected networks will provide higher levels
	    of service,	or service guarantees.	For better or worse,
	    others may restrict	certain	categories of internetwork
	    access, in the name	of security or user protection.	 Because
	    they allow their users to particpipate in such global
	    services as	email and Web access, such networks are	clearly
	    a part of the larger Net, even though their	restrictions may
	    be ill-advised or harmful.

	    2.	The Net	must be	open and available to all.

	    There's not	a second Net for minorities, dissidents, or
	    prisoners, and if there were, it wouldn't be as useful









				       - 4 -


	    because it wouldn't	be as big and interconnected as	the
	    Internet.  If a group were to be banned completely from the
	    Internet, its ability to flourish in future	society	would be
	    seriously threatened.  For this reason, the	rights of
	    minorities are even	more important in cyberspace than in the
	    physical world, where emigration is	at least sometimes an
	    option.

	    The	Net must be available to all who wish to use it,
	    regardless of economic, social, political,	lingustic, or
	    cultural differences or disabilities.  Any legislative or
	    practical barriers that limit access to the	Net will isolate
	    those who are denied access	while diminishing the value of
	    the	Net for	all others, by limiting	its ability to reflect
	    the	diversity of humanity.

	    3.	People have the	right to communicate.

	    The	right to communicate --	that is, the right to exchange
	    information	with others -- is fundamentally	the right to be
	    able to work together with other people in order to	shape
	    events and outcomes.  It is	predicated on the right	of
	    individuals	to hold	any belief, and	to convey their	ideas to
	    others in any form they deem appropriate.

	    Because everything that flows over the Net is information,
	    every use of the Net is inherently an exercise of freedom of
	    speech, to be restricted only at great peril to human
	    liberty.  Such free	expression becomes virtually meaningless
	    if access to that expression is not	itself protected.

	    The	right to communicate includes the right	to participate
	    in communication through interacting, organizing,
	    petitioning, mobilizing, assembling, collaborating,	sharing,
	    and	publishing.  It	would be a tragic waste	of the Net's
	    potential if it were to be deployed	and provisioned	in such
	    a way as to	encourage most people to be only passive
	    consumers of mass communication.

	    4.	People have the	right to privacy.

	    The	right to communicate is	mirrored by the	right to
	    privacy.  Privacy takes at least three forms:  the
	    sheltering of personal data	from public view, the sheltering
	    of private communication from public view, and the right of
	    citizens not to participate	in communications they find









				       - 5 -


	    undesirable	or intrusive.

	    The	use of personal	data, including	financial and
	    demographic	information, should be under the control of the
	    person to whom it refers.  Internet	users have a right to
	    maximal control over the way information about them	is
	    collected, used, and disseminated.	This does not imply that
	    all	such collection, use, and dissemination	is unacceptable,
	    merely that	it must	be disclosed to	the information's owner,
	    who	must also be given the ability not to participate in any
	    unacceptable uses of that information.

	    Privacy of communications must be accessible to all	who
	    desire it.	Network	users should be	free to	use any
	    technical measures that help ensure	that their
	    communications remain private.  Among the aspects of
	    communication which	may need to be kept private are	the fact
	    that a communication exists	at all,	its content, and the
	    identities of the communicating parties.

	    Privacy from unwanted communications is also fundamental.
	    People have	a fundamental right to minimize	unwanted
	    intrusions and demands on their personal space and time.
	    Communication is not a unilateral activity,	and one	person's
	    right to communicate is bounded by another's right to choose
	    not	to communicate.	 Accordingly, human beings on the
	    Internet have the right to choose not to participate in any
	    communications in which they choose	not to participate.

	    5.	People are the Net's stewards, not its owners.

	    Because there is only one Internet,	it must	be treated as a
	    global commons, the	shared trust of	all humanity.  The price
	    of reaping the benefits of the shared global Net must
	    therefore be an obligation to respect the rights of	others
	    who	may wish to use	the Net	in different ways.

	    We must work to preserve the free and open nature of the
	    current Internet, as a fragile resource that must be
	    enriched and passed	on to our children.  Administered
	    inappropriately, the Net could become an unprecedented tool
	    for	the repression of dissenting individuals and groups, or
	    it could become a vast commercial wasteland.

	    Individual pieces of the Net, such as wires, routers, and
	    servers, have individual owners whose economic rights and









				       - 6 -


	    interests must be respected.  However, the Net itself is not
	    owned by anyone.  No grouping of individuals, businesses, or
	    countries can be said to "own" the Internet, any more than
	    they can be	said to	"own" the air we breathe or the
	    ecosystem in which we live.

	    6.	No individuals,	organizations, or governments should
	    dominate the Net.

	    The	Net can	be managed only	in the loosest sense:
	    administered, but never controlled.	 This administration
	    should be conducted	in a truly open, inclusive, and
	    democractic	manner,	to channel the fundamental dynamics of
	    the	Net for	the betterment of humanity.  To	prevent	the
	    dominance of the net by a few large	organizations, the
	    technical infrastructure should be based on	fully open
	    protocols, competitive products, and an open standardization
	    process.

	    Attempts to	control	the Net	will inherently	risk serious
	    damage to the liberty of human beings.  Questions of
	    administration or governance should	always be resolved by
	    erring in the direction of more freedom and	empowerment for
	    the	least powerful and least influential among us.

	    7.	The Net	should reflect human diversity,	not homogenize
	    it.

	    The	Internet is remarkable in its global reach, in its
	    ability to span and	unite diverse social groupings and
	    communities.  This is potentially its greatest promise and
	    its	greatest threat.

	    With open access to	any and	all communities, the Net can be
	    as varied and multicultural	as life	itself.	 It can
	    facilitate dialogue	between	communities and	individuals that
	    might previously not have encountered each other in	a dozen
	    lifetimes.	As such, it can	be a tremendous	positive force
	    for	diversity in human affairs.

	    However, insofar as	the Net	is seen	as defining a single
	    global culture, or permitting humanity to speak with a
	    single voice, it could become a homogenizing force,	working
	    to suppress	diversity in favor of a	bland globalism.  This
	    would be a significant loss	to humanity.










				       - 7 -


	    For	this reason, the Internet should be administered with
	    the	goal of	promoting diversity rather than	reducing it.
	    Wherever possible, access should be	enriched for those who
	    are	not a part of any dominant social groups, particularly
	    for	linguistic minorities and economically underprivileged
	    groups.  Insofar as	the Net	is the context in which	a
	    significant	portion	of humanity's future will be played out,
	    no part of humanity's diversity should be left behind.



	    Authors' Addresses

	    Nathaniel S. Borenstein
	    1724 Shadford
	    Ann	Arbor, MI 48104	USA
	    Telephone: +1 313 761 4896
	    Email:  nsb@cpsr.org

	    Harry Hochheiser
	    Email: hhochheiser@cpsr.org


	    Internet Draft draft-cpsr-one-net-01.txt
	    Expires: 23	Apr 1997



























