IETF Secretariat                                             N. Bourbaki
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                      IETF
draft-ymbk-termroom-op-01.txt                                   99.06.22

                IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

0. Abstract

   Creating and running the 'terminal room' for an IETF meeting is
   tantamount to building, running, and dismantling a small computer
   center.  Although this is a well-known area of operations, the unique
   environment and its ephemeral nature warrant passing on the lore in a
   mildly organized fashion.  It is expected that this document will be
   updated regularly.

   As the IETF can ill afford failure of these facilities, it is assumed
   that the host and organizers have the experience and resources to
   build such environments, understand power facilities, cabling, WAN
   and LAN building, workstation provisioning, etc.  So this document
   does not attempt to detail how to build computer facilities or carry
   out prudent project management.  Rather it concentrates on the unique
   aspects of the IETF 'terminal room'.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

1. External Network Connectivity

   The picky and analytic nature of a large number of IETF participants
   means that the connectivity and performance of that connectivity will
   be measured, whined about, ...  Not to worry.  Move the packets well,
   and the nit pickers will pick each other to death.

   1.1 Bandwidth consumption is approximately 5kbps per attendee.  So
       currently 10mbps of external connectivity seems sufficient.
       Unicast peaks at about five, and multicast at three.  The
       addition of streaming services may require more bandwidth,
       especially if they are not cached off-site.

   1.2 If possible, diverse physical and logical paths should be
       provided.  It is understood that few conference centers have
       connectivity, let alone diversity.  But it is prudent to
       coordinate with the ISP to get as much redundancy as reasonably
       possible.  Redundant and diverse paths out of the local
       provider's POP(s) are advised when possible.

   1.3 It has been suggested that multicast WAN connectivity would
       benefit from being separated from unicast.  This has been tried
       and worked, though it is not believed to be necessary.

2. The Internal Network

   This has been the transport area of most concern at recent meetings.

   2.1 As they seem to interfere with each other, at least three
       separately routed LAN segments SHOULD be used for the terminal
       room, wireless ethernet, and multicast services.  In particular,
       the high speed multicast feed exceeds the capacity of the
       wireless ethernet, and therefore MUST be separate.

   2.2 The registration desk SHOULD be provisioned to accommodate three
       or four laptop users.

   2.3 Two of the meeting rooms MUST be provisioned for multicasting.
       The IETF Secretariat will specify which shortly before setup.

   2.4 A scattering of power outlets in all meeting rooms is much
       appreciated by laptop-based attendees, as will a few power strips
       in the lobby, bar, and other places laptop users congregate.

   2.5 Drops to connect the wireless ethernet base stations SHOULD be
       supplied at strategic locations throughout the facility.  The
       primary targets should be large gathering areas with seating,
       e.g. the lobby and bar.  Also all meeting rooms SHOULD have
       wireless coverage if at all possible.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

       The wireless ethernet equipment that has been in use for the last
       few years operates on various frequencies: 915MHz and 2.4GHz.
       Where local communications regulations permit, both frequencies
       SHOULD be made available.  Among the 2.4GHz family of
       frequencies, 2.422GHz SHOULD be used.  If a different frequency
       is chosen, adequate notice of the operating frequency SHOULD be
       given.

       The wired-to-wireless bridges have parameters global to all
       bridges which SHOULD be set as follows:

                Domain ID:   0x1
                Beacon key:  0x1E1F

       The wired-to-wireless bridges have parameters unique to each
       bridge which SHOULD be set as follows: the first location's
       bridge (or bridges, if multiple frequencies are in use) NWID
       (network ID) SHOULD be 0xAAAA; the second's 0xBBBB, the third's
       0xCCCC, the fourth's 0xDDDD, and so forth.

       If parameter values are chosen which are different from those
       above, at least one week's public notice prior to the meeting
       SHOULD be given.  For users whose laptops do not support roaming,
       a map detailing the location of each bridge and its associated
       NWID SHOULD be provided.

       It is assumed that attendees using wireless use end-to-end
       encryption or are suicidal.  So the wireless network itself is
       run in the clear.

3. Network Services

   A lot of stress is put on DHCP, printing, and ...

   3.1 Laptop users outnumber users needing desktop UNIX and/or MS-
       Windows platforms.  Currently one terminal room 10baseT drop per
       15 attendees is comfortable.  10baseT is sufficient, as 10base2
       has all but disappeared.

   3.2 DCHP SHOULD be provided by a very standards-conformant server.
       Wide or ISC DHCP running on a UNIX platform is strongly
       recommended until non-UNIX DHCP servers have demonstrated better
       compatibility.  The address pool MUST be large enough to avoid
       shortages given constant connection churn.

       Some experience indicates that it is desirable to have a
       sufficiently large pool on standby to permit rolling over DHCP
       servers without making a mess.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

       The DCHP server will likely have to serve multiple subnets.  This
       will also require router configuration.

       The DHCP lease timeout must be set short enough to roll over
       leases quickly, while not overwhelming the network with packets
       attempting to renew a lease.  A lease life of one hour appears to
       work well.

   3.3 A pool of address for static assignment to laptop users without
       DHCP is necessary for approximately one client per 100 attendees.
       There SHOULD be a mechanism at the help desk to allocate and
       register their use.  Providing for allocation by email before the
       meeting is kind to those with serious security issues at home.

   3.4 Printer services are very like those in a small computer center.
       Two paper printers SHOULD be provided, and a third for spare is
       advisable.  The printing rate is about .05 PPM / attendee, and an
       attendee prints approximately 15 pages during the meeting.

       One transparency printing facility MUST be provided.  The
       transparency printing rate is about .01 PPM / attendee, and an
       attendee prints approximately 1.5 pages during the meeting.

       An alternative to a transparency printer is a copier machine with
       transparencies loaded.

       Macs and MS-Windows systems need a print spooling server, either
       samba- or NT-based.

   3.5 The cost of transparencies and their tendency to jam printers
       often warrants manual queue operation.  It is kind to train a
       local a nocturnal denizen or two in queue running to reduce
       whining at three in the morning.

   3.6 A local SMTP server SHOULD be available for those whose home
       servers will not do mail forwarding for clients with strange DNS
       names and/or unknown addresses.

   3.7 Consider splitting the UNIX server functions over more than one
       machine.  Print spooling or X duty may bog down a single server.
       Consider one server for print queue and Xhost, another for DHCP
       and SMTP relay and DNS caching.  Isolate the critical and non-
       critical server functions on different machines so a non-critical
       function, like print queuing, if it stalls or hangs the machine,
       won't stop DHCP and DNS.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

   3.8 The help desk SHOULD be staffed from early morning to late
       evening by people of patience and clue.  As many attendees are
       rather experienced, their questions can be rather technical.  Of
       course, like the typical user population, they also have less
       sophisticated needs and temperaments.  An emergency contact
       number SHOULD be available when the help desk is not staffed.

   3.9 A small stash of office supplies such as staplers, tape, markers,
       etc. is often much appreciated.  It has been suggested that a
       lively market could develop in RJ4x adapters, RJ11 kits, AC plug
       converters, local phone to RJ11 adapters, etc.

4. Computer Systems

   There seems to be a general preference for both UNIX and MS-Windows
   platforms, though there have been successful terminal rooms with only
   one or the other.  Many users are agnostic.  But UNIX and Linux
   bigotry is increasing, and some folk need Microsoft Office to prepare
   presentations.

   Approximately one workstation per twenty attendees seems comfortable.

   Some months before the meeting, the IETF Secretariat gives the local
   host an estimate of the number of attendees.

   4.1 The software needed on all desktops MUST be at least the
       following: a web browser and an ssh client.  X-Windows is
       desirable on MS-Windows hosts, and contributes to OS
       indifference.

   4.2 A dozen desktops with MS-Windows and presentation tools SHOULD be
       provided for those very few <smirk> working on presentations at
       the last moment in full panic.  These SHOULD have floppy drives
       for folk who must use sneakernet.

   4.3 Air conditioning for the terminal room SHOULD be sufficient for
       the time of year, the heat load from the machines, and a lot of
       people.

5. Documentation

   As the users' needs mature, so do their expectations of
   documentation.

   5.1 Some weeks before the meeting, the network prefixes to be used
       SHOULD be announced on the IETF list.  This allows users with
       security issues to have their home networks adjusted if
       necessary.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

   5.2 A single-page document SHOULD be included in the attendees'
       registration packets explaining the network layout, addressing,
       workstation facilities, printing facilities, etc.

   5.3 A short presentation is usually given at the opening session.

   5.4 A full on-site mirror of the RFC and I-D directories will lower
       demand on the circuits as well as the associated servers.  The
       address of the mirror should be stated loudly in all
       documentation.

6. Security Considerations

   As in most computer facilities, physical as well as network security
   is important.

   6.1 Physical security is difficult, with attendees walking in and out
       with laptops and other gear at all hours.  The guards SHOULD be
       told to expect strange things, but to not let large equipment
       walk out without a green badge.

   6.2 Network security is traditional, see the Site Security Handbook
       [RFC2196].  The IETF network has been attacked from the outside a
       number of times.

   6.3 Secure on-site storage for boxes and equipment makes life a lot
       easier.

7. Prudence

   Spares of all critical components, workstations, switches, routers,
   etc. SHOULD be on-site.  "A fool and their data are soon parted." --
   M Williams

8. References

[RFC2196]
     Site Security Handbook. B. Fraser. September 1997.

9. Acknowledgments

   The author is indebted for very constructive contributions by a num-
   ber of IETF local hosts, the IETF Secretariat, a NANOG local host,
   some operators of large networks, and of course Mr. (sorreeee) Wire-
   less.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT  IETF Meeting Network Infrastructure Lore        99.06.22

10. Author's Address

    N. Bourbaki
    666 Rue le Jour
    Sophie Antibes
    nbourbaki@ops.ietf.org

11. Specification of Requirements

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

12. Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of develop-
    ing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
    defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as
    required to translate it into languages other than English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

N. Bourbaki                 Expires 99.12.22                    [Page 7]
