                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   Sipping Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                         Roland Jesske 
   Expires: December 28, 2005                          Denis Alexeitsev 
                                                       Deutsche Telekom 
                                                   Miguel Garcia-Martin 
                                                                  Nokia 
                                                              June 2005 
 
    
 
    
                                      
       Analysis of the Input Requirements for the Session Initiation 
       Protocol (SIP) in support for the European Telecommunications 
   Standards Institute (ETSI) Next Generation Networks (NGN) simulation 
                                 services  
			draft-jesske-sipping-tispan-analysis-00.txt
    
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 24, 2005.  
    
   Copyright Notice  
     
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  
    
    
Abstract 
    
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 1] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   This document analyzes the requirements generated by ETSI to support 
   NGN simulation services implemented with SIP. The document analyzes 
   standard solutions that can meet the requirements. Where a standard 
   solution is not available, the document proposes one or more 
   solutions. The aim is to provoke discussion within the Internet 
   community and get early feedback.  
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Overview 
   2. Analysis of the TISPAN Simulation Services requirements  
      2.1 General Requirements[REQ-GEN-1] 
      2.2 Anonymous Communication Rejection (ACR)[ACR-REQ-1] and [ACR-
   REQ-2] 
      2.3 Terminating Indication Presentation (TIP)/Terminating 
   Indication Restriction (TIR). [REQ-TIP-1] and [REQ-TIP-2] 
      2.4 Advice of Charge (AOC) [REQ-AoC-1] and [REQ-AoC-2] 
      2.5 Communication Completion on Busy Subscriber (CCBS) [REQ-CCBS-
   1]- [REQ-CCBS4] 
      2.6 Communication Completion on no Reply (CCNR) [REQ-CCNR-1]- 
   [REQ-CCBNR4] 
      2.7 Malicious Communication IDentification (MCID) [REQ-MCID-1] and 
   [REQ-MCID-2] 
      2.8 Communication Waiting (CW) [REQ-7] [REQ-CW-1] and [REQ-CW-2] 
      2.9 Communication Diversion (CDIV) [REQ-CDIV-1] and [REQ-CDIV-4] 
      2.10 [REQ-CAT-1] and [REQ-CAT-2] 
   3. Security Considerations 
   4. IANA Considerations 
 
 
1. Overview 
    
   This document is a companion document of the Internet Draft       
   "Input Requirements for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) in 
   support for the European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
   (ETSI) Next Generation Network (NGN) simulation services" [3]. We 
   analyze each requirement trying to find an available standard 
   solution that meets the requirement. When such solution is not known, 
   we analyze different alternatives that will meet the requirement. The 
   document's intention is to provoke discussion in the Internet 
   community in order to find suitable mechanisms that guarantee the 
   implementation of the requirements within the ETSI NGN timeframe. 
    
2 Analysis of the TISPAN Simulation Services reqirements 
    
   The following section could be seen as collected thoughts what 
   possibilities are given to fulfill the above mentioned requirements. 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 2] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   Some of these ideas are still under discussion in ETSI and thus, do 
   not even represent a firm proposal, but just a collection of 
   alternatives that require further exploration. 
    
 
2.1 General Requirements[REQ-GEN-1] 
    
   This requirement, since it is generally applicable to all the 
   requirements, does not require a particular behavior. However, 
   solutions that meet other requirements should also meet the 
   constraint of seamlessly interwork with a similar service in the 
   PSTN. 
 
2.2 Anonymus Communication Rejection (ACR)[ACR-REQ-1] and [ACR-REQ-2] 
 
   Requirement [ACR-REQ-1] requires informing the caller that her call 
   has been rejected due to anonymity. We thought that an application 
   server that implements the ACR service can either send an instant 
   message to the caller (if supported) or divert the call to an 
   announcement player that plays the appropriate audio message, 
   however, this will be hard to be processed by an automata or a PSTN 
   gateway. For example, in a PSTN originated call the PSTN should 
   indicated an appropriate Release Cause (cause 24) due to interaction 
   with the ACR service. Thus, any solution based on these two proposals 
   would make difficult to meet REQ-GEN-1. The Release Causes are 
   described within ETSI EN300 485 [13] 
    
   A more sophisticated solution proposes to add a Reason header with an 
   appropriate Release Cause 24 as described in ETSI EN300 485 [13] to a 
   603 Decline response. This will allow interworking with the PSTN. Yet 
   another alternative is to create a new response code, but we believe 
   it is not really necessary to go into that solution. 
    
   As the current Reason header extension header is limited to requests, 
   some extension is needed to state that the Reason header is valid for 
   either the 603 (Decline) response, or some other status code as 
   determined by this discussion. 
    
   Requirement [ACR-REQ-2] reads about allowing certain authorized 
   callers to bypass the ACR service of a given callee. For that we 
   envision that an application or SIP proxy server that has access to 
   the caller's user profile is able to add indicate in SIP that the 
   user is authorized to bypass a potential callee's ACR service. We 
   propose to add a new P-ACR header field that proxies or application 
   servers can insert. This header would be subject to the same security 
   concerns and trusted domain considerations as the P-Asserted-Identity 
   header field [8]. 
    
2.2.1 The P-ACR header field 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 3] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   In support for the ACR service [REQ-ACR-2], there is a need to 
   indicate that in some circumstances the ACR service provided towards 
   the terminating UE should not apply. 
    
   One of these cases is when the originating user has requested privacy 
   of his asserted identity, but because the user belongs to an 
   authorized group (e.g., policeman), all SIP request should go through 
   to the called UA, no matter whether the called user has activated ACR 
   or not. 
    
   In another scenario, a PSTN originated call does not deliver the  
   asserted identity of the called party (e.g., if the call is 
   originated in an analogue switch). In this case the PSTN gateway is 
   not able to provide an asserted identity of the calling party. If the 
   call is routed to a user who has the ACR service activated, the call 
   shouldn't be rejected due to ACR. 
    
   To tackle this problem we suggest creating a new P-ACR header, which 
   can be populated by a trusted entity (e.g., an Application Server or 
   Media Gateway Control Function). The contents of the header will 
   indicate that willingness of bypassing a potential ACR service in the 
   called party side, and the motivation for it. 
    
   It is the same restrictions for the P-ACR as in RFC3325 for the P-
   Asserted-ID described must apply. 
    
   Proposed syntax for this header: 
    
          P-ACR          = "P-ACR" HCOLON p-acr-spec 
                           *(COMMA p-acr-spec) 
          p-acr-spec     = "bypass" *(SEMI due-to-param) 
          due-to-param   = "due-to" EQUAL reason-token 
          reason-token   = "interworking" / "is-authorized" / "network"/  
                            token 
    
   Example: P-ACR = bypass;due-to=is-authorized 
    
      Header field         where   proxy   ACK  BYE  CAN  INV  OPT  REG 
      ------------         -----   -----   ---  ---  ---  ---  ---  --- 
      P-ACR                         adr     -    -    -    o    -    - 
    
    
                                           SUB  NOT  REF  INF  UPD  PRA 
                                           ---  ---  ---  ---  ---  --- 
                                            o    -    o    -    -    - 
    
    
                                           MESSAGE  PUBLISH   
                                             ---      ---   
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 4] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
                                              o        o    
    
   The draft-ietf-sip-identity was not considered due to the fact that 
   this draft recommends practices and conventions for identifying end 
   users in SIP messages, and proposes a way to distribute 
   cryptographically-secure authenticated identities. This is only for 
   Requests specified. The P-ACR is especially used for indicating 
   bypass mechanisms for ACR and the indication how P-Asserted-Identity 
   was set. 
    
    2.3 Terminating Indication Presentation (TIP)/Terminating Indication     
    Restriction (TIR). [REQ-TIP-1] and [REQ-TIP-2] 
 
   The implementation of these requirements need some header to convey 
   the callee's URI, which might be different from the To header field 
   or Request-URI, due to, e.g., redirections, call transfer, usage of 
   PBX extensions, etc. 
    
   We believe that the P-Asserted-Identity [8] header field inserted in 
   responses meets these requirements. 
   An additional Identity header is needed that is send from the 
   connected SIP user like the From header from the originating user.  
    
2.3.1 The P-Additional-Identity Header 
 
   The P-Additional-Identity header field is used among SIP entities 
   (typically intermediaries) to carry the identity of the user 
   sending a SIP response as it was not verified by authentication. 
    
   This additional header is needed for example a user calling a PBX 
   desk (e.g., +49 6151 83 0000 for Deutsche Telekom in Darmstadt) will 
   be forwarded to an Extension (e.g., +49 6151 83 5940 for Roland 
   Jesske). It is required that the caller gets the latter identity, 
   which is allocated to the callee. 
    
    
      PAdditionalID = "P-Additional-Identity" HCOLON PAdditionalID-value 
                      *(COMMA PAdditionalID-value) 
      PAdditionalID-value = name-addr / addr-spec 
    
   A P-Additional-Identity header field value MUST consist of exactly 
   one name-addr or addr-spec.  There may be one or two P-Additional-
   Identity values.  If there is one value, it MUST be a sip, sips, or 
   tel URI. 
   If there are two values, one value MUST be a sip or sips URI and the 
   other MUST be a tel URI.  It is worth noting that proxies can (and 
   will) add and remove this header field. 
    
   This document adds the following entry to Table 2 of [1]: 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 5] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
    
      Header field         where   proxy   ACK  BYE  CAN  INV  OPT  REG 
      ------------         -----   -----   ---  ---  ---  ---  ---  --- 
      P-Additional-Identity  r      adr     -    o    -    o    o    - 
    
    
                                           SUB  NOT  REF  INF  UPD  PRA 
                                           ---  ---  ---  ---  ---  --- 
                                            o    o    o    -    -    - 
    
                                           MESSAGE  PUBLISH          
                                             ---      ---   
                                              o        o    
    
    
   Note: Here is also an ongoing discussion if a new header is needed or 
   if a existing header could be used to identify the ôrealö connected 
   user. The Contact or Reply-to header were identified as not usable. 
 
2.4 Advice of Charge (AOC) [REQ-AoC-1] and [REQ-AoC-2] 
 
   The Advice of Charge simulation service requires a caller to give an 
   indication to the network that he wants to receive advice of charge 
   information for a given communication (e.g., session, subscription, 
   instant message, etc.). A mechanism to invoke the service based on a 
   SIP-event base subscription and notification has been analyzed. 
   However, this solution will introduce a synchronization problem, due 
   to indicating the request for the service out-of-band. The basic 
   problem is how to identify the SIP request for which the advice 
   should be provided prior to sending the request, when such request 
   has not even been created.  
    
   We propose, though, that the SIP request for which the Advice of 
   Service information is requested is complemented with a new header 
   that invokes the service. Once the service is properly invoked, there 
   are a number of available mechanisms to deliver the information to 
   the user, including but not restricted to, audio visual 
   announcements, instant message, etc. 
    
   A detailed proposal for a new P-AoC header field is described in 
   draft-garcia-sipping-etsi-ngn-p-headers-00 [7]. 
 
 
2.5 Communication Completion on Busy Subscriber (CCBS) [REQ-CCBS-1]to    
    [REQ-CCBS4] 
   Discussion in ETSI TISPAN are leaning towards a segmented 
   implementation of the CCBS service, where there is an application 
   server which is serving the caller, and another application server 
   which serving the callee. The main role of application servers is to 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 6] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   provide queue management. This is based on the modelling in the ISDN 
   stage 2 and operates in this manner to allow interworking with the 
   related ISDN service through a SIP/PSTN gateway. 
    
   We model the actual implementation of the CCBS service according to 
   the following: 
    
   - When the AS of the callee detects that the callee is busy and that 
   the callee supports the dialog event package [9], it forwards the 
   busy response to the AS of the caller with an indication that the 
   CCBS service is possible (i.e. queuing capabilities, and dialog event 
   are supported, REQ-CCBS-1 and REQ-CCBS-2). 
   - Upon receipt of this indication, the caller is offered to activate 
   the CCBS service (e.g. the AS of the caller plays an announcement 
   with DTMF collection, etc).  
   - If the caller accepts the service activation, the AS of the caller 
   subscribes to the CCBS service (e.g. subscribes to the CCBS queue of 
   the callee to the dialog status of this callee, REQ-CCBS-2). 
   - Upon receipt of the CCBS subscription request, the AS of the caller 
   confirms that CCBS monitoring has started,  
   - the AS of the callee then subscribes to the dialog event [9] of the 
   callee, 
   - Upon receipt of a notification that the callee is free, the AS of 
   the callee, notifies the AS of the caller. 
    
   - The AS of the caller sets-up the CCBS call using either a 3rd party 
   control mechanism of a Refer with an indication that this is a CCBS 
   call (REQ-CCBS-4). 
     
   In order to provide compatibility with terminals that implement the 
   dialog event package, subscriptions that may originate or terminate 
   in a terminal will be implemented according to the dialog event 
   package [9].  
    
   Subscriptions not involving terminals (i.e., such as the 
   subscriptions from one application server to another one) need to be 
   complemented with additional information (REQ-CCBS-3). It is proposed 
   to define a new "CCBS" event package for backwards compatibility 
   purposes. The main difference between the "CCBS" event package and 
   the ôdialogö event package lies in the way subscriptions and 
   notifications are handled, there is no need to change the contents of 
   the XML documents exchanged therein. Consequently, the CCBS event 
   package notifications should contain a dialog information document as 
   described in [9].  This allows to "tunnel" dialog information 
   documents contained in dialog package notifications originated by 
   endpoints into CCBS package notifications sent by application 
   servers. The additional information to the dialog event package for 
   providing queues management and concurs to build a subscription 
   target is as follows:  
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 7] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
    
   queue: this information is needed for the application server to know 
   whether to insert this new subscription in the queue or not. We 
   suggest to add a new "queue" parameter to the "dialog" Event header 
   field value. Possible values are "true","false", "suspend" (to 
   suspend its place in queue), "resume" to resume its place in queue. 
    
   Hence, the CCBS Event: header will look like, for example 
    
   To start CCBS subscription:    
      Event: ccbs;queue=true;caller=sip:+390112285111@example.com 
    
   To suspend CCBS service (for instance, if caller becomes busy): 
      Event: ccbs;queue=suspend;caller= sip:+390112285111@example.com  
    
   To resume CCBS service: 
      Event: ccbs;queue=resume;caller= sip:+390112285111@example.com  
    
   A value of "ccbs" or "dialog" in the 486 Busy Here response will 
   indicate the URI where the subscription could be made. This URI 
   could, e.g., a GRUU. Additionally, the presence in a 486 Busy Here 
   response of an Allow-Events header field with the value "CCBS" would 
   help to determine the support for the service. However, RFC 3265 [11] 
   seems to indicate that the Allow-Evens header is only meaningful in 
   requests and 200 or 489 responses. 
    
   Implementation of REQ-CCBS-3 requires that the second time that the 
   caller sends the INVITE request to the callee, as a result of an 
   indication that the callee is not busy any longer, the INVITE request 
   is marked with an flag indicating that the INVITE is the result of 
   CCBS service. It is proposed that a Call-Info header field is 
   extended with a new value of the "purpose" parameter. Hence, at the 
   time of the CCBS call, the AS can insert the Call-Info: header into 
   the INVITE message directed to user B when triggering the 3rd party 
   call, or instruct the terminal to do so in the Refer-To: header 
   inserting the æCall-Info:Æ header as a URL header (after the æ?Æ 
   character). 
    
   Note: With regard to CCBS the discussion is ongoing what kind of 
   solution could be taken. If a new Event Package is needed or if the 
   extension of the existing dialog event package is good enough for 
   CCBS.  
 
2.6 Communication Completion on no Reply (CCNR) [REQ-CCNR-1] to  
    [REQ-CCNR-4] 
    
    


 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 8] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   The implementation of the CCNR service does not require any extra 
   implementation beyond the solutions proposed for implementing the 
   CCBS service. 
    
 
2.7 Malicious Communication IDentification (MCID) [REQ-MCID-1] and [REQ-
MCID-2] 
 
   The implementation of the MCID service suggests to split the solution 
   into the mechanism whereby a callee can indicate to an application 
   server that he suspects a call is malicious [REQ-MCID-1], from the 
   mechanism whereby an application server acquires the caller's 
   identity if not present in the SIP request [REQ-MCID-2]. 
    
   A possible solution for implementing REQ-MCID-1 consists of the user 
   subscribing to a new event package. The application server will act 
   as a notifier. Since the user does not need to receive any 
   information, other than a message indicating whether the service has 
   been successfully activated or not, we propose to do a fetch 
   operation (as per RFC 3265 [11]) with the new event package.  
    
   We propose, therefore, a new event "mcid" event package. The value is 
   accompanied by package parameters indicating the call to be 
   identified (e.g., by its from-tag, call-id, and to-tag (if 
   available)). The event package itself should contain a simple 
   indication of the acceptance or not of the service.  
    
   To implement REQ-MCID-2 we envision that all SIP requests addressed 
   to the user will be routed through the MCID application server. The 
   application server will analyze all SIP requests. Two possbilities 
   might take place: the SIP request contains trusted identity 
   information (e.g., a trusted P-Asserted-Identity [8] header field, or 
   an Identity [12] header field); or such identity is not present in 
   the request, in which case, it might be still available upon request. 
   This is the sometimes the case when a call is originated in the PSTN, 
   because sometimes the calling party number is only available upon 
   request. 
    
   To meet this requirement and be able to request the identity of the 
   originator, we propose a SIP event package for requesting identity 
   information. In most cases this will not be used, but in cases of 
   interworking with the PSTN, the PSTN gateway will receive a SUBSCRIBE 
   request for the new event package, will do the PSTN operations to 
   retrive the calling party number, and will provide the appropriate 
   notification to the subscriber (the application server). 
    
 
2.8 Communication Waiting (CW) [REQ-CW-1] and [REQ-CW-2] 
 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005               [Page 9] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   A solution that meets REQ-CW-1 suggests to use send an instant 
   message indicating the ser the relevant parameters of the waiting 
   call. 
    
   To implement REQ-CW-2 we suggest to use a 182 Queue response until 
   the callee accepts the incoming session. 
    
2.9 Communication Diversion (CDIV) [REQ-CDIV-1] to [REQ-CDIV-4] 
 
   For supporting CDIV service we envision the usage of draft-ietf-sip-
   history-info-06 [6] and draft-elwell-sipping-redirection-reason-01 
   [2].We therefore request the adoption of draft-elwell-sipping-
   redirection-reason as a working group charter item. 
    
2.10 [REQ-CAT-1] and [REQ-CAT-2] 
 
   To support REQ-CAT-1 and REQ-CAT-2 we propose that, a PSTN Gateway 
   (UA) or SIP proxy that has knowledge of the user's category inserts a 
   P-Caller-Category header field categorizing the caller.  
    
   Sometimes the category of the caller is determined to be "operator". 
   In such case, the presence of the Accept-Language header field can be 
   combined to determine the language of the operator. 
    
   Use of this mechanism in any other context has serious security 
   shortcomings, namely that there is absolutely no guarantee that the 
   information has not been modified, or was even correct in the first 
   place. 
    
   The proposed syntax for this header: 
    
          P-Caller-Category   = "P-Caller-Category " HCOLON p-cat-spec 
                                 *(COMMA p-cat-spec) 
          p-cat-spec     = "operator" / "subscriber" / "data" / 
                           "test" / "payphone" / "mobile" / token 
    
   Example: P-Caller-Category = "payphone" 
    
   An other possibility is to use the solution described within draft-
   mahy-iptel-cpc-00 [14]. This solution was dicussed in the past within 
   IPTEL but not follwed on 
    
   Question is which would be the appropriate way to follow. 
 
 
4. Security Considerations 
 


 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005              [Page 10] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   The requirements in this document are intended to result in a 
   mechanism with applicability for ETSI NGN and NOT for the general 
   Internet. 
    
   Use of this mechanism in any other context has serious security 
   shortcomings, namely that there is absolutely no guarantee that the 
   information has not been modified, or was even correct in the first 
   place. 
 
 
5. IANA Considerations 
 
   This document discusses implementation possibilities and does not 
   pretend to be a firm proposal for the implementation of any of the 
   solutions. Therefore, this document does not provide any action to 
   IANA. 
    
References 
    
   [1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, 
      A.,Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, 
      "SIP:Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    
   [2] Elwell, J., "SIP Reason header extension for indicating 
      redirection reasons", draft-elwell-sipping-redirection-reason-
      02.txt (work in progress), June 2005. 
    
   [3] Jesske, R., Alexeitsev, D., Garcia-Martin, M. "Input Requirements 
      for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) in support for the 
      European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) Next 
      Generation Network (NGN) simulation services", draft-jesske-
      sipping-tispan-requirements-01.txt (work in progress), June 2005. 
    
   [4] 3GPP TS 24.229: "IP Multimedia Call Control Protocol based on SIP 
      and SDP". 
    
   [5] Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session Initiation 
       Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002. 
    
   [6] Barnes, M., "An Extension to the Session Initiation Protocol for 
      Request History Information", draft-ietf-sip-history-info-06.txt 
      (work in progress), January 2005. 
    
   [7] Garcia-Martin, M. "Private Header (P-Header) Extensions to the 
      Session Initiation Protocol(SIP) in support of the European 
      Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) Next Generation 
      Networks (NGN)", draft-garcia-sipping-etsi-ngn-p-headers-00.txt 
      (work in progress), June 2005. 
     
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005              [Page 11] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   [8] Jennings C., Peterson J., and Watson M. "Private Extensions to 
      the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within 
      Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002. 
    
   [9] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Mahy, R"An INVITE Initiated 
      Dialog Event Package for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", 
      draft-ietf-sipping-dialog-package-06.txt (work in progress), April 
      2005. 
    
   [10] Rosenberg, J. "Obtaining and Using Globally Routable User Agent 
      (UA) URIs (GRUU) in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", draft-
      ietf-sip-gruu-03 (work in progress), February 2005. 
    
   [11] Roach, A.B., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event 
      Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002. 
    
   [12] Peterson, J., Jennings, C. "Enhancements for Authenticated 
      Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", 
      draft-ietf-sip-identity-05.txt (work in progress), March 2005. 
    
   [13]  ETSI EN 300 485: "Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN); 
      Definition and usage of cause and location in Digital Subscriber 
      Signalling System No. one (DSS1) and Signalling System No. 7 (SS7) 
      ISDN User Part (ISUP) [ITU-T Recommendation Q.850 (1998) with 
      addendum modified]". 
    
   [14]  R. Mahy "The Calling Party's Category tel URI Parameter" draft-
      mahy-iptel-cpc-00, June 2003 
    
Contributors  
    
       
    
   Keith Drage 
   Lucent Technologies 
   SN5 6PP SWINDON  
   United Kingdom 
   Phone: +44 1793 897312    
   Email: drage@lucent.com  
    
   Sebastien Garcin 
   France Telecom 
   38-40, Rue du General Leclerc 
   92130 Issy Les Moulineaux 
   France  
    
    
Acknowledgments  
    
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005              [Page 12] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   The authors would like to thank the participants of the ETSI TISPAN 
   WG3 for the comments and initial review of this document. 
     
 
Author's Addresses  
    
   Roland Jesske  
   Deutsche Telekom  
   Am Kavalleriesand 3  
   64307 Darmstadt  
   Germany  
   Phone: +496151835940  
   Email: r.jesske@t-com.net  
    
   Denis Alexeitsev  
   Deutsche Telekom  
   Am Kavalleriesand 3  
   64307 Darmstadt  
   Germany  
   Phone: +496151832130  
   Email: d.alexeitsev@t-com.net  
    
   Miguel A. Garcia-Martin  
   Nokia  
   P.O. Box 407  
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN 00045  
   Finland  
   EMail: miguel.an.garcia@nokia.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement  
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.  
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
    
   Intellectual Property  
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005              [Page 13] 
                  Analysis of TISPAN req. to SIP   June 2005 
 
 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.  
    
Acknowledgement  
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society.  
    
 























 
 
Jesske                 Expires -  December 2005              [Page 14] 
