MANET Working Group                                         Sanghyun Ahn 
Internet Draft                                       University of Seoul
Expires: June 13, 2016                                 December 22, 2015 

                                     
          Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols for MANET
              draft-ahn-manet-multipath-architecture-00.txt 

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to format it
   for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 13, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.







Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols December 2016


Abstract

   This document describes the architecture on the protocols providing
   multiple routes between a given source and destination node pair
   in a mobile ad hoc network (MANET).


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Terminoloy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Architecture of MANET Multipath Routing Protocols. . . . . . .  4
   4.1 Route Discovery Phase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.2 Route Determination Phase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.3 Route Maintenance Phase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Other Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
































Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols December 2016


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   
2.  Introduction

   The mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is composed of a number of mobile
   nodes which can communicate with each other through multiple wireless
   links without the help of a wired infrastructure. Therefore,
   in the MANET, the route connectivity tends to be very unstable.
   This route unstability can be mitigated by providing more than
   one route to a source and destination node pair. In recent years,
   there have been intensive studies done on multipath routing protocols
   for the MANET [1]. Also, multipath routing protocols may have the
   advantage of providing load balancing by distributing data traffic
   to a number of routes. On the other hand, it may incur more control
   message overhead to set up multiple routes.
 

   In this draft, we define the architecture of the MANET multipath
   routing protocol.


3.  Terminology

   Primary Route
                The route with the best quality among the selected
                routes

   Alternative Route
                The selected routes not chosen as the primary route

   Route Discovery Phase
                The procedure of finding all the possible routes from
                the source to the destination; initiated by the source

   Route Determination Phase
                The procedure of selecting routes which meet the given
                route performance criteria                

   Route Maintenance Phase
                The procedure of recovering the route used for the data
                delivery 





Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols December 2016


   Route Discovery Message
                The message used during the Route Discovery phase to
                find possible routes

   Route Determination Message
                The message used during the Route Determination phase
                to select routes

   Route Maintenance Message
                The message used during the Route Maintenance phase
                to recover a route; sent back to the source

   Base MANET Unicast Routing Protocol
                The MANET unicast routing protocol on which the MANET
                multipath routing protocol is based


4.  Architecture of MANET Multipath Routing Protocols

   MANET multipath routing protocols consist of three phases; the Route
   Discovery phase, the Route Determination phase, the Route Maintenance
   phase. The Route Discovery phase is the procedure of figuring out
   all the possible routes from the given source to the destination.
   In the Route Determination phase, the appropriate multiple routes
   from the available routes found in the Route Discovery phase are
   determined. In the Route Determination phase, one of the selected
   routes may be chosen as the primary route on which all the data
   packets from the source are sent on to the destination. In this
   case, the other route(s) act(s) as the alternative backup path(s)
   which are reserved for the use in the Route Maintenance phase.
   Or, all the selected routes in the Route Determination phase may
   be used for the delivery of data packets from the source to the
   destination.This is called the per-packet allocation [2] in which
   each data packet is placed on one of the selected routes randomly
   or based on some scheduling scheme.


4.1  Route Discovery Phase

   When a source node wishes to send data packets to a destination node,
   it initiates the Route Discovery phase by sending out one or more
   route discovery message. This route discovery message may be
   broadcast to the entire network to figure out all the possible
   routes to the destination. The propagation method of the route
   discovery message is decided by the base MANET unicast routing
   protocol. When an intermediate node receives a route discovery
   message, the node has to decide whether to forward the message or
   not based on the base MANET unicast routing protocol or other
   criteria.


Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols December 2016


4.2  Route Determinination Phase

   The routes for a given source and destination node pair may be
   determined (i) by only the destination or (ii) by both of the
   destination and the intermediate nodes and/or (iii) by the source.
   If only the destination is given with the right to select the
   routes, the quality of the selected multiple routes can be satisfied
   easily according to the given criteria. But, for this, the
   destination has to be given with the information on all the possible
   routes between the source and the destination. That is, an
   intermediate node has to forward a received route discovery message
   towards the destination. On the other hand, if the intermediate
   nodes are involved in selecting routes, a received route discovery
   message may not be forwarded if the intermediate node finds a path
   from the source to the destination based on the received route
   discovery message and its own route to the destination. In this case,
   the selected routes may not be good compared with (i). However,
   (ii) may incur less route discovery overhead than (i). The source
   may be involved in route determination when (i) or (ii) is used to
   enhance the quality of the selected routes.

   Among the selected routes, one route can be chosen as the primary
   route which is the only route used for the data delivery. While
   the primary route works normally, the other selected routes become
   the alternative routes. That is, upon the primary route failure, one
   of the alternative is chosen as the primary route.

   Or, all the selected routes can be used for the data delivery.
   In this scheme, a data packet is sent on one of the selected routes
   based on a route scheduling mechanism. This scheme can provide
   higher load balancing effect than the above-mentioned primary
   path-based scheme.


4.3  Route Maintenance Phase

   If a node recognizes a link failure (i.e., a given number of data
   transmission failures over a link), it initiates the Route
   Maintenance phase by sending out a route maintenance message back
   to the source. A route maintenance message may be intercepted by
   an intermediate node on the reverse route to the source for fast
   route recovery. For this, the intermediate node has to have the
   alternative route information to the destination. This capability
   can be achieved by the route maintenance mechanism of the base
   MANET unicast routing protocol. For the primary path-based scheme,
   when the source node receives a route maintenance message,
   it selects one of the alternative routes as the primary path.




Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft Architecture of Multipath Routing Protocols December 2016


   On the other hand, when all the selected routes are used for the data
   delivery, the source node receiving the route maintenance message
   ignores the message if it has at least one route available.
   Otherwise, the source initiates the Route Discovery phase.

 
5.  Other Considerations

   TBD


References

   [1] M. Tarique, K. E. Tepe, S. Abidi and S. Erfani, "Survey of
       Multipath Routing Protocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks," Journal
       of Network and Computer Applications, November 2009.
   [2] C. Taddia and G. Mazzini, "Per-Packet Allocation Strategies for
       Heterogeneous Multichannel Wireless Networks," International
       Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile
       Computing, June 2005.


Author's Address

   Sanghyun Ahn 
   University of Seoul 
   90, Cheonnong-dong, Tongdaemun-gu 
   Seoul 130-743
   Korea 
   Email: ahn@uos.ac.kr





















Ahn                      Expires June 13, 2016                  [Page 6]