


Internet Architecture Board                               G. Huston, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Expires: July 25, 2005                                  January 24, 2005


            Process for the IAB selection of an IAOC member
                    draft-iab-iaoc-selection-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 25, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This memo outlines the process by which the IAB makes a selection of
   a member of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee.

Document Revision Notes

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to publication.]

   The following changes have been made to the draft:



Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 1]



   draft-iab-iaoc-selection-01:

      Confirmation of selected Candidate
         On the basis that this is an IAB selection as distinct from an
         IETF selection, the step of confirmation of the selected
         candidate by the IESG has been removed.

      Section 3.4 Timeframe
         Extended the timeframe to allow for a total time of between 5
         to 7 weeks for this process.


1.  Introduction

   The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides the
   administrative structure required to support the IETF standards
   process and to support the IETF's technical activities.  Within this
   activity is the office of an Internet Administrative Director (IAD)
   and the Internet Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC).  In
   addition to the ex-officio role of the IAB Chair on this committee,
   the IAB is responsible for the appointment of a voting member of this
   committee.

   This memo outlines the process by which the IAB makes that selection.
   This process will also be used in the event of mid-term vacancies
   that may arise with IAB-nominated position.

1.1  Overview of IAOC

   The IASA consists initially of a single full-time ISOC employee, the
   IETF Administrative Director (IAD), an officer entitled to act on
   behalf of the IASA at the direction of the IAOC.

   The IAOC's role is to provide appropriate direction to the IAD, to
   review the IAD's regular reports, and to oversee the IASA functions
   to ensure that the administrative needs of the IETF community are
   being properly met.  The IAOC's mission is not to be be engaged in
   the day-to- day administrative work of IASA, but rather to provide
   appropriate direction, oversight and approval.

   As described in [I-D.IASA], the IAOC's responsibilities are:

   o  To select the IAD and provide high-level review and direction for
      his or her work.

   o  To review the IAD's plans and contracts to ensure that they will
      meet the administrative needs of the IETF.





Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        IAB Selection of IAOC Member          January 2005


   o  To track whether the IASA functions are meeting the IETF
      community's administrative needs, and to work with the IAD to
      determine a plan for corrective action if they are not.

   o  To review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
      the IETF's needs, and review the IAD's regular financial reports.

   o  To ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
      manner.  While the day-to-day work should be delegated to the IAD
      and others, the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA
      finances and operational status are tracked appropriately, and
      that monthly, quarterly, and annual financial and operational
      reports are published to the IETF community.

   o  To designate, in consultation with the IAB and the IESG, the
      person or people who carry out the tasks which other IETF process
      documents say are carried out by the IETF Executive Director.

   The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
   IAD and IASA.  The IAOC holds periodic teleconferences and
   face-to-face meetings as needed to carry out the IAOC's duties
   efficiently and effectively.

1.2  Overview of Selection Process

   In brief, this document describes the timeframe and procedures for
   the IAB to solicit public input and make a selection for the
   position.

2.  Desirable Qualifications and Selection Criteria for an IAB-Nominated
   IAOC member

   Candidates for the IAOC position should have a demonstrable
   involvement in the IETF, knowledge of contracts and financial
   procedures, and familiarity with the administrative support needs of
   the IAB, the IESG, and the IETF standards process

   The candidate is also expected to be able to understand the
   respective roles and responsibilities of the IETF and ISOC in this
   activity, and be able to articulate these roles within the IETF
   community.

   The candidate will also be expected to exercise all the duties of an
   IAOC member, including being prepared to undertake any associated
   responsibilities, including the setting of administrative support
   policies, oversight of the administrative operations of the IETF,
   representing the interests of the IETF, and be able to undertake full
   participation in all Committee meetings and Committee activities.



Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        IAB Selection of IAOC Member          January 2005


   Although the IAB selects this member of the IAOC, the selected member
   does not directly represent the IAB.  The IAB-selected member is
   accountable directly to the IETF community.

3.  IAB's Selection Process of an IAOC member

3.1  Nominations and eligibility

   Every second year, the IAB will make a public call for nominations on
   the ietf-announce@ietf.org mailing list.  The public call will
   specify the manner by which nominations will be accepted and the
   means by which the list of nominees will be published.

   Self-nominations are permitted.  Along with the name and contact
   information for each candidate, details about the candidate's
   background and qualifications for the position should be attached to
   the nomination.  All IETF participants, including working group
   chairs, IETF NomCom members, IAB and IESG members are eligible for
   nomination.

   IAB and IESG members who accept nomination will recuse themselves
   from selection and confirmation discussions respectively.

3.2  Selection

   The IAB will publish the list of nominated persons prior to making a
   decision, allowing time for the community to pass any relevant
   comments to the IAB.

   The IAB will review the nomination material, any comments passed to
   the IAB, and make a selection.

3.3  Care of Personal Information

   The following procedures will be used by the IAB in managing
   candidates' personal information:

   o  The candidate's name will be published, with all other candidate
      names, at the close of the nominations period.

   o  Except as noted above, all information provided to the IAB during
      this process will be kept as confidential to the IAB.

3.4  Timeframe

   IAB expects to seat new its committee member at the first IETF
   meeting of every second year, for a two year term of office.  Basic
   timeframe requirements for the IAB process are as follows:



Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 4]


   o  2 - 3 weeks for solicitation of nominations.

   o  3 - 4 weeks for review of nominees, deliberation and selection.

   In November of every second year, the IAB will announce the specific
   dates for the IAB IAOC election process for that year, following the
   guidelines above.

3.5  Mid-term Vacancies

   This document describes the process for the general, biannual
   appointment of the IAB-selected IAOC member.  However, if the IAB-
   appointed member is unable to serve the full two year term, the IAB
   may, at its discretion, immediately select a replacement to serve the
   remainder of the term using the interim process defined in Section
   3.6.1.  If the IAB does not invoke the interim process, the next
   biannual selection process will fill the vacancy.

3.5.1  Interim Appointment Process

   If the IAB elects to fill the mid-term vacancy before the next annual
   selection, a separate timeline will be announced and the remainder of
   the process described in this document will be followed.

4.  Acknowledgements

   This document is based extensively on RFC 3677 [RFC3677].  It has
   benefited from helpful review comments from Bert Wijnen, Brian
   Carpenter and Rob Evans.

5  Informative References

   [I-D.IASA]
              Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)",
              draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-04 (work in progress), December 2004.

   [RFC3677]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "IETF ISOC
              Board of Trustee Appointment Procedures", BCP 77, RFC
              3677, December 2003.


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston (editor)
   Internet Architecture Board

   EMail: gih@apnic.net





Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        IAB Selection of IAOC Member          January 2005


Appendix A.  IAB Members

   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   drafted were:


      Bernard Aboba
      Harald Alvestrand
      Rob Austein
      Leslie Daigle
      Patrik Faltstrom
      Sally Floyd
      Jun-ichiro Itojun Hagino
      Mark Handley
      Geoff Huston
      Pete Resnick
      Bob Hinden
      Eric Rescorla
      Jonathan Rosenberg
































Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        IAB Selection of IAOC Member          January 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Huston                   Expires July 25, 2005                  [Page 7]
