



6man                                                            J. Leddy
Internet-Draft                                                   Comcast
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Bonica
Expires: December 31, 2018                              Juniper Networks
                                                           June 29, 2018


                         IPv6 Packet Truncation
                      draft-leddy-6man-truncate-04

Abstract

   This document defines IPv6 packet truncation procedures.  When an
   IPv6 source node originates a packet, it can mark the packet as being
   eligible for truncation and forward it towards its destination.  If
   an intermediate node cannot forward the packet because of an MTU
   issue, it truncates the packet, marks it as being truncated, and,
   again, forwards it towards its destination.  When the destination
   node receives the packet, it detects that it has been truncated and
   sends an ICMP message to the source node.  The ICMP message contains
   MTU information that the source node uses to update its Path MTU
   estimate.

   The above-mentioned procedures enhance Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) by
   eliminating its reliance on the network's ability to deliver ICMP
   messages from an intermediate node to the source node.  However, the
   above-mentioned procedures require the network to deliver ICMP
   messages from the destination node to the source node.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2018.






Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Reference Topology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  New IPv6 Destination Options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  The IPv6 Truncation Eligible Option . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  The IPv6 Truncated Packet Option  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  PMTU Signaling Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Truncation Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Destination Node Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Backward Compatibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. Upper-Layer Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   12. Encapsulating Security Payload Considerations . . . . . . . .  11
   13. Extension Header Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   14. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   15. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   16. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   17. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     17.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     17.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   An Internet path connects a source node to a destination node.  A
   path can contain links and intermediate nodes (e.g., routers).

   Each link is constrained by the number of bytes that it can convey in
   a single IP packet.  This constraint is called the link Maximum
   Transmission Unit (MTU).  IPv6 [RFC8200] requires every link to have



Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   an MTU of 1280 bytes or greater.  This value is called IPv6 minimum
   link MTU.

   Likewise, each Internet path is constrained by the number of bytes
   that it can convey in a IP single packet.  This constraint is called
   the Path MTU (PMTU).  For any given path, the PMTU is equal to the
   smallest of its link MTUs.

   IPv6 allows fragmentation at the source node only.  If an IPv6 source
   node sends a packet whose length exceeds the PMTU, an intermediate
   node will discard the packet.  In order to prevent this, IPv6 nodes
   can either:

   o  Refrain from sending packets whose length exceeds the IPv6 minimum
      link MTU.

   o  Maintain a running estimate of the PMTU and refrain from sending
      packets whose length exceeds that estimate.

   IPv6 nodes can execute Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) [RFC8201]
   procedures in order to maintain a running estimate of the PMTU.
   According to these procedures, the source node produces an initial
   PMTU estimate.  This initial estimate is equal to the MTU of the
   first link along the path to the destination.  It can be greater than
   the actual PMTU.

   Having produced an initial PMTU estimate, the source node sends
   packets to the destination node.  If one of these packets is larger
   than the actual PMTU, an intermediate node will not be able to
   forward the packet through the next link along the path.  Therefore,
   the intermediate node discards the packet and sends an Internet
   Control Message Protocol (ICMP) [RFC4443] Packet Too Big (PTB)
   message to the source node.  The ICMP PTB message indicates the MTU
   of the link through which the packet could not be forwarded.  The
   source node uses this information to refine its PMTU estimate.

   PMTUD relies on the network's ability to deliver ICMP PTB messages
   from the intermediate node to the source node.  If the network cannot
   deliver these messages, a persistent black hole can develop.  In this
   scenario, the source node sends a packet whose length exceeds the
   PMTU.  An intermediate node discards the packet and sends an ICMP PTB
   message to the source.  However, the network cannot deliver the ICMP
   PTB message to the source.  Therefore, the source node does not
   update its PMTU estimate and it continues to send packets whose
   length exceeds the PMTU.  The intermediate node discards these
   packets and sends more ICMP PTB messages to the source.  These ICMP
   PTB messages are lost, exactly as previous ICMP PTB messages were
   lost.



Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   In some operational scenarios (Section 3), networks cannot deliver
   ICMP PTB messages from an intermediate node to the source node.
   Therefore, enhanced procedures are required.

   This document defines IPv6 packet truncation procedures.  When an
   IPv6 source node originates a packet, it can mark the packet as being
   eligible for truncation and forward it towards its destination.  If
   an intermediate node cannot forward the packet because of an MTU
   issue, it truncates the packet, marks it as being truncated, and,
   again, forwards it towards its destination.  When the destination
   node receives the packet, it detects that it has been truncated and
   sends an ICMP message to the source node.  The ICMP message contains
   MTU information that the source node uses to update its Path MTU
   estimate.

   The above-mentioned procedures enhance PMTUD by eliminating its
   reliance on the network's ability to deliver ICMP messages from an
   intermediate node to the source node.  However, the above-mentioned
   procedures require the network to deliver ICMP messages from the
   destination node to the source node.

   By default, destination nodes discard truncated packets and do not
   deliver them to upper-layer protocols.  However, upper-layer
   protocols can register for delivery of truncated packets.  When an
   upper-layer protocol receives a truncated packet, it can infer the
   PMTU between the source node and itself from the packet's length.
   Having inferred the PMTU, the upper-layer protocol can negotiate a
   maximum packet size with its upper-layer peer, thus reducing its
   reliance upon PMTUD and IPv6 fragmentation.

   While IPv6 packet truncation may facilitate new upper-layer
   procedures, upper-layer procedures are beyond the scope of this
   document.  In particular, this document does not address the behavior
   of upper-layer protocols that register for delivery of truncated
   packets.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.








Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


3.  Operational Considerations

   The packet truncation procedures described herein make PMTUD more
   resilient when:

   o  The network can deliver ICMP messages from the destination node to
      the source node.

   o  The network cannot deliver ICMP messages from an intermediate node
      to the source node.

   The following are operational scenarios in which packet truncation
   procedures can make PMTUD more resilient:

   o  The destination node has a viable route to the source node, but
      the intermediate node does not.

   o  The source node is protected by a firewall that administratively
      blocks all packets except for those from specified subnetworks.
      The destination node resides in one of the specified subnetworks,
      but the intermediate node does not.

   o  The source address of the original packet (i.e., the packet that
      elicited the ICMP message) was an anycast address.  Therefore, the
      destination address of the ICMP message is the same anycast
      address.  In this case, an ICMP message from the destination node
      is likely to be delivered to the correct anycast instance.  By
      contrast, an ICMP message from an intermediate node is less likely
      to be delivered to the correct anycast instance.

   Packet truncation procedures do not make PMTUD more resilient when
   the network cannot reliably deliver any ICMP messages to the source
   node.  The following are operational scenarios where the network
   cannot reliably deliver any ICMP PTB messages to the source node:

   o  The source node is protected by a firewall that administratively
      blocks all ICMP messages.

   o  The source node is an anycast instance served by a load-balancer
      as defined in [RFC7690].  The load-balancer does not implement the
      mitigations defined in [RFC7690].

4.  Reference Topology








Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


 -----------            -----------            -----------            -----------
|   Upper   |          |           |          |           |          |   Upper   |
|   Layer   |          |           |          |           |          |   Layer   |
|           |          |           |          |           |          |           |
|    IP     |<-------->|    IP     |<-------->|    IP     |<-------->|    IP     |
|   Layer   |    MTU   |   Layer   |    MTU   |   Layer   |   MTU    |   Layer   |
 -----------    9000    -----------    4000    -----------    1500    -----------
    Source                Router 1               Router 2              Destination
    Node                                                                 Node


                       Figure 1: Reference Topology

   Figure 1 depicts a network that contains a Source Node, intermediate
   nodes (i.e., Router 1, Router 2), and a Destination Node.  The link
   that connects the Source Node to Router 1 has an MTU of 9000 bytes.
   The link that connects Router 1 to Router 2 has an MTU of 4000 bytes,
   and the link that connects Router 2 to the Destination Node has an
   MTU of 1500 bytes.  The PMTU between the Source Node and the
   Destination Node is 1500 bytes.

   This topology will be used in examples throughout the document.

5.  New IPv6 Destination Options

   This document defines the IPv6 Truncation Eligible option and the
   IPv6 Truncated Packet option.

5.1.  The IPv6 Truncation Eligible Option

   The IPv6 Truncation Eligible Option indicates that the packet is
   eligible for truncation but has not been truncated.  It contains the
   following fields:

   o  Option Type - Truncation Eligible option.  Value TBD by IANA.  See
      Notes below.

   o  Opt Data Len - Length of Option Data, measured in bytes.  MUST be
      equal to 0.

   The IPv6 Destination Options header:

   o  MAY include a single instance of the Truncation Eligible option.

   o  SHOULD NOT include multiple instances of the Truncation Eligible
      option.





Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   o  SHOULD NOT include both the Truncation Eligible option and the
      Truncated Packet option.

   The IPv6 Hop-by-hop Options header SHOULD NOT include the Truncation
   Eligible option.

   Source nodes MUST NOT emit packets that contain both the Fragment
   Header and Truncation Eligible option.

   NOTE 1: According to [RFC8200], the highest-order two bits of the
   Option Type (i.e., the "act" bits) specify the action taken by a
   destination node that does not recognize Option Type.  The required
   action is skip over this option and continue processing the header.
   Therefore, IANA is requested to assign this Option Type with "act"
   bits "00".

   NOTE 2: According to [RFC8200], the third-highest-order bit (i.e.,
   the "chg" bit) of the Option Type specifies whether or not the Option
   Data of that option can change en route to the packet's final
   destination.  Because this option contains no Option Data, IANA can
   assign this Option Type without regard to the "chg" bit.

5.2.  The IPv6 Truncated Packet Option

   The IPv6 Truncated Packet Option indicates that the packet has been
   truncated and is eligible for further truncation.  It contains the
   following fields:

   o  Option Type - Truncated Packet option.  Value TBD by IANA.  See
      Notes below.

   o  Opt Data Len - Length of Option Data, measured in bytes.  MUST be
      equal to 0.

   The IPv6 Destination Options:

   o  MAY include a single instance of the Truncated Packet option.

   o  SHOULD NOT include multiple instances of the Truncated Packet
      option.

   o  SHOULD NOT include both the Truncated Packet option and the
      Truncation Eligible option.

   The IPv6 Hop-by-hop Options header SHOULD NOT include the Truncated
   Packet option.





Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   Source nodes MUST NOT emit packets that contain both the Fragment
   Header and Truncated Packet option.

   NOTE 1: According to [RFC8200], the highest-order two bits of the
   Option Type (i.e., the "act" bits) specify the action taken by a
   destination node that does not recognize Option Type.  The required
   action is to discard the packet and, regardless of whether or not the
   packet's Destination Address was a multicast address, send an ICMP
   Parameter Problem, Code 2, message to the packet's Source Address,
   pointing to the unrecognized Option Type.  Therefore, IANA is
   requested to assign this Option Type with "act" bits "10".

   NOTE 2: According to [RFC8200], the third-highest-order bit (i.e.,
   the "chg" bit) of the Option Type specifies whether or not the Option
   Data of that option can change en route to the packet's final
   destination.  Because this option contains no Option Data, IANA can
   assign this Option Type without regard to the "chg" bit.

6.  PMTU Signaling Procedures

   In the Reference Topology (Figure 1), an upper-layer protocol that
   resides on the Source Node causes the IP layer to emit a packet.  The
   packet contains a Destination Options header and the Destination
   Options header contains a Truncation Eligible option.  The total
   packet length, including all headers and the payload, is 1000 bytes.
   Because the total packet length is less than the PMTU, the packet can
   be delivered to the Destination Node without encountering any MTU
   issues.

   The IP layer on the Source Node forwards the packet to the Router 1,
   Router 1 forwards the packet to Router 2, and the Router 2 forwards
   the packet to the Destination Node.  The IP layer on the Destination
   Node examines the Destination Options header and finds the Truncation
   Eligible option.  The Truncation Eligible option requires no action
   by the Destination Node.  Therefore, the Destination Node processes
   the next header and delivers the packet to an upper-layer protocol.

   Subsequently, the upper-layer protocol that resides on the Source
   Node causes the IP layer to emit another packet.  This packet is
   identical to the first, except that the total packet length is 2000
   bytes.  Because the packet length is greater than the PMTU, this
   packet cannot be delivered without encountering an MTU issue.

   The IP layer on the source node forwards the packet to Router 1.
   Router 1 forwards the packet to Router 2, but the Router 2 cannot
   forward the packet because its length exceeds the MTU of the next
   link in the path.  Because an MTU issue has been encountered, Router
   2 examines the Destination Options header, searching for either a



Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   Truncation Eligible option or a Truncated Packet option.  (Normally,
   the Router 2 would ignore the Destination Options header).

   Because Router 2 finds one of the above-mentioned options, it:

   o  Truncates the packet, so that its total length equals the MTU of
      the next link in the path.

   o  Updates the Payload Length field in the IPv6 header.

   o  Overwrites all instances of the Truncation Eligible option with a
      Truncated Packet option.

   o  Forwards the packet to the Destination Node.

   The IP layer on the Destination Node receives the packet and examines
   the Destination Options header.  Because it finds the Truncated
   Packet option, it sends an ICMP PTB message to the Source Node.  The
   MTU field in the ICMP PTB message is set to the packet's length.

   By default, the IP layer on the Destination Node discards the
   truncated packet, without delivering it to any upper-layer protocol.
   However, the upper-layer protocol can register for the delivery of
   truncated packets.

   When the Source Node receives the ICMP PTB message, it updates its
   PMTU estimate, as per [RFC8201].

7.  Truncation Considerations

   A packet can be truncated multiple times.  In the Reference Topology
   (Figure 1), assume that the Source Node sends a 5000 byte packet to
   the Destination Node.  Using the procedures described in Section 6,
   Router 1 truncates this packet to 4000 bytes and Router 2 truncates
   it again, to 1500 bytes.

   A truncated packet MUST contain the basic IPv6 header, all extension
   headers and the first upper-layer header.  When an intermediate node
   cannot forward a packet due to MTU issues, and the total length of
   the basic IPv6 header, all extension headers, and first upper-layer
   header exceeds the MTU of the next link in the path, the intermediate
   node MUST discard the packet and send and ICMP PTB message to the
   source node.  It MUST NOT truncate the packet.

   A truncated packet MUST NOT include the Fragment header.  When an
   intermediate node cannot forward a packet due to MTU issues, and the
   packet contains a Fragment header, the intermediate node MUST discard




Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   the packet and send and ICMP PTB message to the source node.  It MUST
   NOT truncate the packet.

   A truncated packet must have a total length that is greater than or
   equal to the IPv6 minimum link MTU.

8.  Destination Node Considerations

   The following packet types are invalid::

   o  Packets that contain the Packet Truncated option and the Fragment
      Header.

   o  Packets that contain the Packet Truncated option and have a total
      length less than the IPv6 minimum link MTU.

   When the destination node receives an invalid packet, it MUST:

   o  Discard the packet, without delivering it to any upper-layer
      protocol, regardless of whether the upper-layer protocol has
      registered for delivery of truncated packets.

   o  Send an ICMP Parameter Problem, Code 2, message to the packet's
      Source Address, pointing to the Truncated Packet option.

9.  Backward Compatibility

   The procedures described in Section 6 assume that all nodes recognize
   the Truncation Eligible option and Truncated Packet option.  This
   section explores backwards compatibility scenarios, where one or more
   nodes do not recognize the above-mentioned options.

   Assume that an intermediate node does not recognize the Truncation
   Eligible option or the Truncated Packet option.  When that node
   receives a packet that it cannot forward because of an MTU issue, its
   behavior is as described in [RFC8200].  The intermediate node
   discards the packet and sends and ICMP PTB message to the source
   node.  It does not examine the Destination Options header, searching
   for the above-mentioned options and it does not truncate the packet.

   Now assume that a destination node does not recognize the Truncation
   Eligible option.  When that node receives a packet that contains the
   Truncation Eligible option, its behavior is determined by the
   highest-order two bits of the Option Type (i.e., the "act" bits).
   Because the "act" bits are equal to "00", the destination node skips
   over the option and continues to process the packet.  This is exactly
   what the destination node would have done if it had recognized the
   Truncation Eligible option.



Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   Finally, assume that a destination node does not recognize the
   Truncated Packet option.  When that node receives a packet that
   contains the Truncated Packet option, its behavior is determined by
   the highest-order two bits of the Option Type (i.e., the "act" bits).
   Because the "act" bits are equal to "10", the destination node
   discards the packet and, regardless of whether or not the packet's
   Destination Address was a multicast address, send an ICMP Parameter
   Problem, Code 2, message to the packet's Source Address, pointing to
   the Truncated Packet option.  The destination node does not emit an
   ICMP PTB message and it does not deliver the packet to an upper-layer
   protocol.

   The source node takes appropriate action when it receives the ICMP
   Parameter Problem message.

10.  Optimizations

   The procedures described in Section 6 of this document can be
   optimized by omitting the Truncation Eligible option on packets whose
   length is known to be less than the PMTU (e.g., packets whose length
   is less than the IPv6 minimum link MTU).

11.  Upper-Layer Considerations

   The procedures described herein rely upon the networks ability:

   o  To convey packets that contain destination options from the source
      node to the destination node.

   o  To convey ICMP Parameter Problem messages in the reverse
      direction.

   Operational experience [RFC7872] reveals that a significant number of
   networks drop packets that contain IPv6 destination options.
   Likewise, many networks drop ICMP Parameter Problem messages.

   [I-D.bonica-6man-unrecognized-opt] describes procedures that upper-
   layer protocols can execute to verify that the above-mentioned
   requirements are satisfied.  Upper-layer protocols can execute these
   procedures before emitting packets that contain the Truncation
   Eligible option.

12.  Encapsulating Security Payload Considerations

   An IPv6 packet can contain both:

   o  An Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) [RFC4303] header.




Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   o  The Truncation Eligible Option.

   In this case, the packet MUST contain a Destination Options header
   that precedes the ESP.  That Destination Options header contains the
   Truncation Eligible Option and is not protected by the ESP.  The
   packet MAY also contain another Destination Options header the
   follows the ESP.  That Destination Options header is protected by the
   ESP and MUST NOT contain the Truncation Eligible Option.

   As per RFC 4303, a packet can contain two Destination Options headers
   one preceding the ESP and one following the ESP.

13.  Extension Header Considerations

   According to [RFC8200], the following IPv6 extension headers can
   contain options:

   o  The Hop-by-hop Options header.

   o  The Destination Options header.

   The Hop-by-hop option can be examined by each node along the path to
   a packet's destination.  Destination options are examined by the
   destination node only.  However, [RFC2473] provides a precedent for
   intermediate nodes examining the Destination options on an exception
   basis.  (See the Tunnel Encapsulation Limit.)

   The Truncation Eligible option and the Truncated Packet option are
   examined by:

   o  Intermediate nodes, on an exception basis (i.e, when the packet
      cannot be forwarded due to MTU issues).

   o  The Destination node.

   Therefore, the above-mentioned options can be processed most
   efficiently when they are contained by the Destination Option header.
   When contained by the Destination Options header, the above-mentioned
   options are examined by intermediate nodes on an exception basis,
   only when they are relevant.  If contained by the Hop-by-hop Options
   header, they are always examined by intermediate nodes, even when
   they are irrelevant.

14.  Security Considerations

   PMTUD is vulnerable to ICMP PTB forgery attacks.  The procedures
   described herein do nothing to mitigate that vulnerability.




Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   The procedures described herein are susceptible to a new variation on
   that attack, in which an attacker forges a truncated packet.  In this
   case, the attackers cause the Destination Node to produce an ICMP PTB
   message on their behalf.  To some degree, this vulnerability is
   mitigated, because the Destination Node will not emit an ICMP PTB
   message in response to a truncated packet whose length is less than
   the IPv6 minimum link MTU.

15.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate the following codepoints from the
   Destination Options and Hop-by-hop Options registry
   (https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-parameters/
   ipv6-parameters.xhtml#ipv6-parameters-2).

   o  Truncation Eligible ("act-bits" are "00. "chg-bit" can be either 0
      or 1.)

   o  Truncated Packet ("act-bits" are "10". "chg-but can be either 0 or
      1.)

16.  Acknowledgements

   Special thanks to Mike Heard, Geoff Huston, Joel Jaeggli, Tom Jones,
   Andy Smith, and Jinmei Tatuya who reviewed and commented on this
   document.

17.  References

17.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4303]  Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)",
              RFC 4303, DOI 10.17487/RFC4303, December 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4303>.

   [RFC4443]  Conta, A., Deering, S., and M. Gupta, Ed., "Internet
              Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet
              Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", STD 89,
              RFC 4443, DOI 10.17487/RFC4443, March 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4443>.






Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.

   [RFC8201]  McCann, J., Deering, S., Mogul, J., and R. Hinden, Ed.,
              "Path MTU Discovery for IP version 6", STD 87, RFC 8201,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8201, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8201>.

17.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bonica-6man-unrecognized-opt]
              Bonica, R. and J. Leddy, "The IPv6 Unrecognized Option",
              draft-bonica-6man-unrecognized-opt-01 (work in progress),
              June 2018.

   [RFC2473]  Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Generic Packet Tunneling in
              IPv6 Specification", RFC 2473, DOI 10.17487/RFC2473,
              December 1998, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2473>.

   [RFC7690]  Byerly, M., Hite, M., and J. Jaeggli, "Close Encounters of
              the ICMP Type 2 Kind (Near Misses with ICMPv6 Packet Too
              Big (PTB))", RFC 7690, DOI 10.17487/RFC7690, January 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7690>.

   [RFC7872]  Gont, F., Linkova, J., Chown, T., and W. Liu,
              "Observations on the Dropping of Packets with IPv6
              Extension Headers in the Real World", RFC 7872,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7872, June 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7872>.

Authors' Addresses

   John Leddy
   Comcast
   1717 John F Kennedy Blvd.
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   USA

   Email: john_leddy@comcast.com






Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Packet Truncation                June 2018


   Ron Bonica
   Juniper Networks
   2251 Corporate Park Drive
   Herndon, Virginia  20171
   USA

   Email: rbonica@juniper.net












































Leddy & Bonica          Expires December 31, 2018              [Page 15]
