SIPPING Working Group                        H. Sinnreich/Adobe, editor 
Internet Draft                                        A. Johnston/Avaya 
                                                           E. Shim/Locus  
                                            K. Singh/Columbia University 
 
Intended status: Informational 
May 18, 2008 
Expires: November 2008  
                                    
 
                                      
        Simple SIP Usage Scenario for Applications in the Endpoints 
                       draft-sinnreich-sip-tools-03 


   Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.  

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  

   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html"  

   This Internet-Draft will expire in October 2008. 

   Copyright Notice 

      Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).  
      

Abstract 


 
 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   For Internet-centric usage, the number of SIP related standards for 
   presence, IM and audio/video communications can be reduced by using 
   only the rendezvous and session initiation capabilities of SIP. Such 
   'simple SIP' implies (1) using SIP without network based features and 
   (2) without emulating the telephone network. Rich applications, 
   including telephony features can however be implemented in the 
   endpoints. This approach for SIP reduces the number of SIP standards 
   to comply with, currently from roughly 100 to about 9. Additional 
   application examples and references for NAT traversal and for 
   security are also provided.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................3 
      1.1. The changing nature of voice communications...............3 
      1.2. What Is Avoided by the Simple Usage of SIP................4 
   2. Minimal Set of References......................................5 
      2.1. RFC 3261: "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol"..............5 
      2.2. RFC 4566: "SDP: Session Description Protocol".............5 
      2.3. RFC 3264: "An Offer/Answer Model with SDP"................6 
      2.4. RFC 3840: "Indicating User Agent Capability in SIP".......6 
      2.5. RFC 3263: "SIP: Locating SIP Servers".....................6 
      2.6. RFC 3856: "A Presence Event Package for SIP"..............6 
      2.7. RFC 3863: "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)".......7 
      2.8. RFC 3428: "SIP Extension for Instant Messaging"...........7 
      2.9. RFC 4474: "Enhancements for Authenticated Identity Management 
      in SIP"........................................................7 
   3. SIP Applications in the Endpoints..............................7 
   4. NAT Traversal..................................................8 
   5. Security Considerations........................................9 
      5.1. SIP Security..............................................9 
      5.2. Datagram Transport for SIP and Media Security............10 
      5.3. ZRTP: Media Path Key Agreement for Secure RTP............10 
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................10 
   7. Conclusions...................................................10 
   8. Acknowledgements..............................................11 
   9. Changes from version 02.......................................11 
   10. Informative References.......................................11 
   Author's Addresses...............................................12 
    

 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

1. Introduction 

   The Session Initiation Protocol has its origins in Internet 
   multimedia conferencing work started in the early 1990's. SIP has 
   also been universally embraced by the telecommunications industry, 
   most of all due to its flexibility and extensibility to adapt to 
   various telecom business models and services. The resulting drawback 
   however has been the present complexity of SIP. This complexity is 
   documented in "A Hitchhikers' Guide to SIP" [2] where roughly 140 SIP 
   standards and Internet-Drafts are discussed or mentioned. See also 
   the web site http://rfc3261.net [3] that tracks and displays the 
   growth in numbers of SIP related standards. The increased complexity 
   of SIP can be avoided by eliminating the traditional telephony 
   approach of placing the "intelligence in the network". This is 
   possible due to the increasing computing power of user devices and 
   the rich applications residing in Internet endpoints. Powerful 
   endpoints can thus enable new, simpler usages of SIP that are 
   nevertheless standards compliant for basic discovery and session 
   initiation. We will refer to this as the Internet-centric approach to 
   SIP. 

    

   This approach can be used both in client-server (CS) SIP 
   implementations as well as in peer-to-peer (P2P) SIP. Service 
   providers and various organizations deploying SIP can minimize the 
   cost of the infrastructure by placing SIP based applications in the 
   endpoints. 

1.1.  The changing nature of voice communications 

   Describing the change from voice communications and fax to rich 
   Internet multimedia communications is beyond the scope of this memo, 
   but one change will be highlighted here: Mixing of rich web based 
   applications with voice communications, presence, IM and video. In 
   such web based mixed applications, voice may or may not be the 
   primary application. The possible usage scenarios of voice on the web 
   differ considerably from traditional telephony.  

   Rich Internet and web applications may support boundless user choice 
   as an alternative to and beyond what is traditionally prepackaged as 
   network based communication service plans. In such scenarios, 
   applications residing in the endpoints may require only the 
   rendezvous and session setup capabilities of SIP.  



 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   Once the applications have established basic communications, it is up 
   to them to support available features selected by users. This paper 
   is targeted to such scenarios. 

1.2.  What Is Avoided by the Simple Usage of SIP 

   The simple usage of SIP can be accomplished by avoiding the 
   traditional telephony centric approaches to provide, manage and 
   charge for services, some examples of which are listed here. 

  o Placing any services in the network other than the rendezvous 
     function of SIP. Special considerations deserve here servers for 
     NAT traversal, such as STUN and TURN relays that are also required 
     in the network. We note here that NAT traversal is a basic Internet 
     service function for all applications, not necessarily limited to 
     SIP and RTP. 
   

  o Avoiding the support of legacy telephony functions, such as 
     emulating public telephone switch services and voice-only private 
     branch exchanges. 
   
  o Avoiding the support for legacy telephony business models such as 
     identifying end user devices for the purpose of differentiated 
     charging by type of service or charging for roaming between 
     networks. 
      

  o Avoiding policies and the associated policy servers and network 
     elements to enforce specific policies for real-time communications. 
   

  o Avoiding design considerations for SIP for compatibility with 
     legacy telephony networks, traditional telephony services and their 
     various addressing plans. This pushes the responsibility of mapping 
     the URI to telephone numbers to edge networks where the IP-PSTN 
     gateway functions are performed. Other handling of telephony 
     specific functions such as early media are also pushed to edge 
     gateway networks. 
 




 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   The list is not exhaustive, but conveys the concept on what to avoid 
   in order to making SIP a simpler protocol to understand and to 
   implement.  

   This approach limits the number of SIP standards to 9 listed in the 
   following section as the core for simple SIP. We will refer in the 
   following to 'simple SIP' as to what is necessary to only support the 
   rendezvous and session setup functions of SIP, support basic presence 
   and instant messaging and also support the identity requirements for 
   security. Multi-purpose secure transport protocols such as TLS, DTLS 
   and ZRTP are not included in this count and are included separately 
   in the section on Security Considerations. 

   The total number of references has been kept here to a minimum and 
   includes other related topics, such as examples for providing 
   telephony services in the endpoints, NAT traversal and security. The 
   referenced papers are entry points into these knowledge domains and 
   no attempt is made for an exhaustive reference list for such SIP 
   related topics. Readers interested into a more exhaustive source of 
   SIP topics can follow up with the comprehensive list in [2]. 

2. Minimal Set of References 

   Here is the minimal set of references to support the Internet-centric 
   approach to SIP outlined above. 

2.1. RFC 3261: "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol" 

   RFC 3261 [4] is the core specification for SIP. The trapezoid model 
   for SIP RFC 3261 is only an example and a use case applicable to two 
   service providers featuring an outgoing SIP proxy and an incoming SIP 
   proxy in each domain respectively.  

   SIP however can also work in peer-to-peer (P2P) communications.  

2.2. RFC 4566: "SDP: Session Description Protocol" 

   SDP [5] is the standard format for the representation of media 
   details, transport addresses and other session data irrespective of 
   the protocol used to transport the SDP data. SIP is one of the 
   protocols used to transport SDP data, to enable the setting up of 
   multimedia communication sessions. Other Internet application 
   protocols use SDP as well. 




 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

2.3. RFC 3264: "An Offer/Answer Model with SDP" 

   Though SDP has the capability to describe SIP sessions, how to arrive 
   at a common description by two SIP endpoints requires a negotiation 
   procedure to agree on common media codecs along with IP addresses and 
   ports where the media can be received. This negotiation procedure is 
   specified in RFC 3264 [6]. As will be seen in the following on NAT 
   traversal, this negotiation is usually considerably complicated due 
   to the existence of NAT between the SIP endpoints. 

2.4. RFC 3840: "Indicating User Agent Capability in SIP" 

   SIP UAs can convey their capability in the Contact header field 
   indicating if it can support such as presence, IM, audio, video, if 
   the device is fixed or mobile and other such as the endpoint being an 
   automaton; voice mail for example. Which SIP methods are supported 
   may also be indicated as specified in RFC 3840 [7]. In the CS model, 
   SIP registrars can be informed of endpoint capabilities and also 
   directly end-to-end.  

2.5. RFC 3263: "SIP: Locating SIP Servers" 

   RFC 3263 [8] adds key clarifications to the base SIP specification in 
   RFC 3261 by specifying how a SIP user agent (UA) or SIP server can 
   determine with DNS queries not only the IP addresses of the target 
   SIP servers, but also which SIP servers can support UDP or TCP 
   transport as required. TCP may be required to support secure SIP 
   (SIPS) using TLS transport or when SIP messages are too large to fit 
   into UDP packets. Successive DNS queries yield finer grain location 
   by providing NAPTR, SRV and A type records. Note that finding a SIP 
   server requires these three successive DNS queries. 

   Locating SIP servers is also required for P2P SIP when a peer node 
   wishes to communicate with a SIP UA outside its own P2P SIP overlay 
   network. 

2.6. RFC 3856: "A Presence Event Package for SIP" 

   RFC 3856 [9] defines the usage of SIP as a presence protocol and 
   makes use of the SUBSCRIBE and NOTIFY methods for presence events. 
   SIP location services already contain presence information in the 
   form of registrations, and as such can be reused to establish 
   connectivity for subscriptions and notifications. This can enable 
   either endpoints or servers to run rich applications based on 
   presence. 


 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

2.7. RFC 3863: "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)" 

   RFC 3863 [10] defines the Presence Information Data Format (PIDF) and 
   the media type "application/pidf+xml" to represent the XML MIME 
   entity for PIDF. PIDF is used by SIP to carry presence information. 

2.8. RFC 3428: "SIP Extension for Instant Messaging" 

   The SIP extension for IM in RFC 3428 [11] consists in the MESSAGE 
   method defined here only for the pager model of IM based on the 
   assumption that each IM stands alone and conversation exists only in 
   the client user interface in the endpoints or perhaps in the user's 
   own imagination. 

   Message sessions are supported by the Message Session Relay Protocol 
   (MSRP) specified in RFC 4975. MSRP has advanced properties, such as 
   working with relays that are beyond the scope of simple SIP. 

2.9. RFC 4474: "Enhancements for Authenticated Identity Management in 
   SIP" 

   RFC 4474 [12] defines (1) an identity header and (2) an identity info 
   header for SIP requests that carry respectively the signature of the 
   issuer over parts of the SIP request and the signed identity 
   information. The signature includes the FROM header and the identity 
   of the sender. The associated identity info header identifies the 
   sender of the SIP request, such as INVITE. The issuer of the 
   signature can present their certificate as well. It is assumed the 
   issuer may be the domain owner. Strong authentication is thus 
   provided for SIP requests. Authentication for SIP responses is not 
   defined in this document.  

3. SIP Applications in the Endpoints 

   Although the present adoption of SIP is mainly due to telephony 
   applications, its roots are in the Web and it has initial similarity 
   to HTTP. As a result, SIP may play other roles in adequately powerful 
   endpoints (their power keeps increasing with Moore's law). SIP based 
   multimedia communications may be linked with various other rich 
   applications. Either some non-SIP application or the communication 
   feature may be perceived as the primary usage in some cases. An 
   example is mixing SIP based real-time communications with some web 
   content of high interest to the user. It is a matter of judgment if 
   the web content or the associated communication capability is more 
   important or if the mix of both is most attractive. 


 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   For new usages of SIP we believe avoiding the complexity of the 
   traditional telephony model "intelligence in the network" is an 
   essential requirement for such mixed applications. This is the main 
   driver for writing this memo. 

   SIP applications in the endpoints can however accomplish most 
   telephony functions as well. This has been well documented in SIP 
   related work in the IETF, such as: 

  o "A Call Control and Multi-party usage framework for SIP" [13] 
     presents an ample assortment of telephony applications where the 
     call control resides in the participating endpoints that use the 
     peer-to-peer feature invocation model. 
   

  o "SIP Service Examples" [14] contain a vast collection of SIP call 
     flows for traditional telephony that require no network support for 
     the respective features. The peer-to-peer design and principles are 
     based on the above paper on multiparty call control. The SIP 
     service examples are extremely useful, since they illustrate in 
     detail the concepts and applications supported by the core simple 
     SIP references and go beyond that by also illustrating traditional 
     telephony services. 
    

   In conclusion, SIP applications in the endpoints can support both a 
   mix of real-time communications with new rich Internet applications 
   and traditional telephony features as well. 

4. NAT Traversal 

   SIP devices behind one or more NAT are at present the rule rather 
   than the exception. In consequence, IETF contributors to SIP related 
   work have published a wealth of information on various tools in the 
   arsenal required to solve the difficult problem of NAT traversal for 
   SIP signaling and RTP media streams. 

  1. "Best Current Practices for NAT Traversal for SIP" [15] is a 
     comprehensive summary of the use of the various tools, most 
     prominent being STUN, TURN and ICE. This document provides a 
     definitive set of 'Best Common Practices' to demonstrate the 
     traversal of SIP and its associated media through NAT devices. 
 

 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   As mentioned above, emerging communication models on the Internet may 
   include a mix of SIP and non-SIP applications. A general, non-SIP 
   specific approach for NAT traversal is therefore required. Other 
   proposals such as NICE, generic for non-SIP, and "D-ICE" for RTSP 
   streaming media have been proposed. This approach is based on 
   somewhat different NAT traversal techniques for different application 
   protocols. 

  2. Another approach for NAT traversal that is generic and applicable 
     for all applications is to deploy the Host Identity Protocol (HIP) 
     and solve NAT traversal only once, at the HIP level for all 
     application protocols. HIP may be supported in the endpoints only 
     without any changes in the Internet routing infrastructure. HIP has 
     many other useful features such as the support for mobility, for 
     multihoming, and compatibility with IPv6 that are beyond the scope 
     of this paper. NAT traversal for HIP is just as complex as it is 
     for SIP and it may use ICE techniques as well. "Basic HIP 
     Extensions for Traversal of Network Address Translators and 
     Firewalls" [16] provides an extensive coverage of the use of HIP 
     for NAT traversal.  
    
5.  Security Considerations 

   All protocols discussed in this paper have their own specific 
   security considerations that MUST be considered. These are not 
   repeated here.  

   The special security considerations however for SIP signaling 
   security and RTP media security are discussed here. 


5.1. SIP Security 
   SIP security has two main parts: Transport security and identity. 

    

o Transport security for SIP is specified in RFC 3261. Secure SIP has 
  the notation SIPS in the request URI and uses TLS over TCP. Note that 
  SIP over UDP cannot be secured in this way. Transport security works 
  only hop by hop. Specifying SIPS does not provide an absolute 
  assurance that some hops on the path may not use non-secure TCP 
  transport. Specifying SIPS requires therefore the user to trust all 


 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

  the intermediate proxies, and does not provide end-to-end user 
  encryption. 
    

o RFC 4474: "Enhancements for Authenticated Identity Management in SIP" 
  mentioned previously specifies the use of certificates for secure 
  identification of the parties involved in SIP signaling requests. 

5.2. Datagram Transport for SIP and Media Security 
   The Datagram Transport Layer Security specified in RFC 4347 [17] is a 
   comprehensive security solution both for SIP datagrams as well for 
   RTP media. DTL has wide applicability for other applications that 
   require UDP transport. DTLS has been designed to have maximum 
   commonality with TLS yet does not require TLS transport and works 
   over UDP. 


5.3. ZRTP: Media Path Key Agreement for Secure RTP 
   ZRTP [18] provides RTP media security without depending on SIP 
   signaling, though it can use authentication obtained by SIP signaling 
   as well. ZRTP does not require any Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). 
   ZRT uses normal RTP/AVP profiles for codec payload descriptions. ZRTP 
   works over UPD since it is designed to provide security for real-time 
   media flows. 

6. IANA Considerations 

   There are no IANA considerations associated with this memo. 

7. Conclusions 

   Rich Internet applications may include real time communication usage 
   scenarios that differ from the traditional telephony services for 
   voice. For Internet-centric usage, the number of SIP related 
   standards for presence, IM and multimedia communications can be 
   reduced by using only the rendezvous and session initiation 
   capabilities of SIP. Such 'simple SIP' implies (1) using SIP without 
   network based features and (2) without emulating the telephone 
   network. Rich applications, including telephony features can however 
   be implemented in the endpoints. This approach for SIP reduces the 
   number of SIP related standards, currently from roughly 100 to about 
   9. Successful IP communications must however include solutions for 
   NAT traversal which are referenced here as well. 


 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

8. Acknowledgements 

   We would like to thank Wilhelm Wimmreuter for the detailed review of 
   the initial draft and to Arjun Roychaudhury for the comments 
   regarding the need for a definition of network based services. 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

9.  Changes from version 02 

   The text has been rewritten and is based on the presentation to the 
   SIPPING WG at the 71 IETF. 

10. Informative References 

   Since this is an informative memo, we provide no list of mandatory 
   SIP related standards, but only an informative list of SIP related 
   standards and Internet-Drafts that serve us for the purpose of a 
   simple toolkit for SIP. 

   [1] RFC 2119 "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels" by S. Bradner, IETF BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2] "A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)" 
   by J. Rosenberg. Internet-Draft, IETF February 2008. Work in 
   progress. 

   [3] "VoIP RFC Watch by Nils Ohlmeier". Web site that is tracking the 
   number and pages of SIP related standards at http://rfc3261.net/" 

   [4] RFC 3261: "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol." by J. Rosenberg et 
   al. IETF, June 2002. 

   [5] RFC 4566: "SDP: Session Description Protocol" by M. Handley et 
   al. IETF, July 2006. 

   [6] RFC 3264: "An Offer/Answer Model with the Session Description 
   Protocol (SDP)" by J. Rosenberg et al. IETF, June 2002. 

   [7] RFC 3840: "Indicating User Agent Capabilities in SIP" by J. 
   Rosenberg et al. IETF, August 2004. 

   [8] RFC 3263: "SIP: Locating SIP Servers" by J. Rosenberg et al. 
   IETF, June 2002. 

   [9] RFC 3856: "A Presence Event Package for the Session Initiation 
   Protocol" by J. Rosenberg. IETF, August 2004. 
 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   [10] RFC 3863: "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)" by J. Sugano 
   et al. IETF, August 2004. 

   [11] RFC 3428: "SIP Extension for Instant Messaging" by B. Campbell 
   et al. IETF, December 2002. 

   [12] RFC 4474: "Enhancement for Authenticated Identity Management in 
   the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)" by J. Peterson et al. IETF, 
   August 2006. 

   [13] "A Call Control and Multi-party usage framework for the Session 
   Initiation Protocol (SIP)" by R. Mahy et al. Internet-Draft. IETF 
   April 2008, work in progress. 

   [14] "Session Initiation Protocol Service Examples" by A. Johnston et 
   al., Internet-Draft. IETF, February 2008. Work in progress. 

   [15] "Best Current Practices for NAT Traversal for SIP" by C. Boulton 
   et al., IETF, April 2008. Internet-Draft. Work in progress. 

   [16] "Basic HIP Extensions for Traversal of Network Address 
   Translators and Firewalls" by M. Komu et al. Internet-Draft, IETF, 
   February 2008. Work in progress. 

   [17] "RFC 4347: "Datagram Transport layer Security" by E. Rescorla et 
   al. IETF, April 2006. 

   [18] "ZRTP: Media Path Key Agreement for Secure RTP" by P. Zimmermann 
   et al. Internet-Draft, IETF, March 2008. Work in progress. 

Author's Addresses 

   Henry Sinnreich 

   Adobe Systems, Inc.  

   601 Townsend Street,   

   San Francisco, CA 94103, USA   

   Email: henrys@adobe.com 

    

   Alan B. Johnston 

   Avaya 
 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

   Saint Louis, MO, USA 

   Email: alan@sipstation.com  

    

   Eunsoo Shim 

   Locus Telecommunications, Inc. 
   111 Sylvan Avenue 
   Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632 USA 
   Email: eunsooshim@gmail.com 

    

   Kundan Singh  

   Columbia University Alumni 

   660 King Street, #359   

   San Francisco, CA 94107, USA   

   Email: kundansingh_99@yahoo.com 

    
Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights."  
    
   "This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE". 

Intellectual Property 


 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        Simple SIP Usage Scenario                May 2008 
    

     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
     Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
     documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
     ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Acknowledgment 

      Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 

      Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  

 


















 
 
Sinnreich               Expires November 2008                 [Page 14] 

