


MARID                                                          J. Levine
Internet-Draft                                      Taughannock Networks
Expires: December 25, 2006                                    D. Crocker
                                             Brandenburg InternetWorking
                                                            S. Silberman
                                                                Openwave
                                                                T. Finch
                                                 University of Cambridge
                                                           June 23, 2006


                  Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)
                       draft-levine-mass-batv-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 25, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The envelope of Internet mail contains an RFC2821.MailFrom command,
   which may supply an address to be used as the recipient of
   transmission and delivery notices about the original message.



Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   Existing Internet mail permits unauthorized use of addresses in the
   MailFrom command, causing notices to be sent to unwitting and
   unwilling recipients.  Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV) defines
   an extensible mechanism for validating the MailFrom address.  It also
   defines an initial use of that mechanism which requires no
   administrative overhead and no global implementation.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Meta-Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Tagging Schemes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Beyond BATV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Local-Part Meta-Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Simple Private Signature (prvs)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Interoperability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1.  Reference - Normative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.2.  References - Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix B.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15






















Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


1.  Introduction

   The envelope for Internet Mail may contain an address that is
   designated to receive transmission-related notifications.  It is
   specified in the RFC2821.MailFrom command.  [RFC2821] The field is
   set by the RFC2822.Sender, acting as an agent of the message author
   specified in RFC2822.From.[RFC2822] However no portion of the
   MailFrom address is required to have any similarity to any portion of
   the From or Sender addresses, and valid usage scenarios do call for
   the MailFrom address to have no visible relationship to the From or
   Sender values.

   Further, existing Internet mail permits unauthorized use of addresses
   in the MailFrom command, which results in having notices sent to
   unwitting and unwilling recipients.  Therefore, the challenge is to
   distinguish legitimate uses from these unauthorized uses and to do
   this with a mechanism that incurs modest administration, operations
   and performance costs.

   Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV) defines a framework for
   mechanisms that validate the value in this command.  Multiple
   validation methods are envisioned.  So BATV defines a common
   syntactic framework that enhances the local-part field of the
   MailFrom address.  An initial, specific validation scheme is also
   defined; it requires no administrative overhead and no global
   implementation.

   The <local-part> of an Internet mail address is a globally opaque
   string.  Hence the specified modification to a local-part can be
   deployed in a manner that is entirely transparent to the public
   Internet mail service.  The exception is for mail system components,
   within the scope of the MailFrom domain, that process the MailFrom
   address during an MTA message relaying process, on behalf of another
   Administrative Management Domain (ADMD).[RFC1035] In this case it
   must not tag the MailFrom address, even if the original ADMD did not
   add a tag to the local-part.  The result permits the MailFrom target
   domain to distinguish notification message addresses that are valid
   from those that are not.  Enhancements would permit processing agents
   that are along the original message's transfer path to determine
   whether the MailFrom address is likely to be valid.  This assessment
   could aid in deciding whether to send a bounce message, thereby
   reducing the Internet mail infrastructure cost for transmitting
   notification messages that have invalid uses of addresses.  It might
   even be used to detect invalid messages, thereby reducing Internet
   mail infrastructure cost for original messages.






Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   Terminology: Terminology conforms to [I-D.email-arch]

      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
      in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]


2.  Model

   BATV defines a method for tagging information to be included in the
   <local-part> of the RFC2821.MailFrom address.  This permits encoding
   information that authenticates the MailFrom.  Because the information
   is placed in MailFrom, rather than in an RFC2822 header, it sometimes
   is not as publicly visible as an RFC2822 header.  This might reduce
   concern that it will be re-used in a form of replay attack, but it
   cannot eliminate it.  In particular, sending messages to some mailing
   lists or to recipients whose computers are infected by viruses can
   greatly increase the exposure of the MailFrom string.  So the tagged
   information does need to be robust against public disclosure.

2.1.  Meta-Syntax

   BATV tagging is based on a meta-syntax that defines a field-oriented
   structure for an address local-part.  It permits use of a variety of
   address authentication methods, while supporting remote extraction of
   the core portion of the local-part, without having to understand the
   semantics of any particular scheme.

   NOTE:  BATV is for the purpose of detecting invalid RFC2821.MailFrom
      addresses.  Any BATV-related modifications that are made to the
      original MailFrom MUST preserve the result of returning valid
      bounces to the address originally specified in that MailFrom.

   The meta-syntax for MailFrom local-part is defined in Section 3.

2.2.  Tagging Schemes

   BATV permits alternative schemes.  To ensure interoperability among
   independent participants, other specifications adopting the meta-
   syntax conventions MUST define and register with IANA a unique, case
   insensitive <tag-type> element, to identify the specific mechanism
   that is being used for MailFrom validation.

   Private Tagging:  If MailFrom validity assessment is performed only
      within the scope of the domain referenced in the MailFrom address,
      then its semantic scope is private (closed), encompassing only
      that domain and the one that generated the validity information.
      To the rest of the Internet, the tag information is opaque, like a



Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


      Web browser cookie.  In these situations, the closed system is
      free to use any tagging scheme it deems helpful, although a
      standard format aids other systems that wish to avoid re-tagging
      addresses that are already tagged, or to strip off the tag for
      compatibility with legacy systems that key on the MailFrom address
      of incoming mail.  A simple scheme for this is defined in
      Section 4.

   Public Tagging:  Using a public-key approach, for signing the
      MailFrom's local-part permits intermediaries which process the
      envelope to validate that address.  For example, an intermediary
      that otherwise might create a bounce message would be able to
      decide that the MailFrom address use is not valid, so they might
      decide to terminate bounce processing.  Such a scheme might use
      the BATV meta-syntax in the following way:
   pub3=<loc-core>=<crypted>=<attributes>@example.com

      It is significant that having the creator of a bounce be able to
      make this assessment, means that all of earlier intermediary MTAs
      also can.  Hence, every MTA would be able to assess whether a
      message has an unauthorized RFC2821.MailFrom.

      Unfortunately, public key services have not yet gained wide
      adoption and there are multiple mechanisms already in service.
      Therefore, this specification is not able to provide a single
      method for public MailFrom validity checking.

2.3.  Beyond BATV

   BATV defines a framework that retains the original local-part of the
   MailFrom address, within the BATV-encoded form.  This permits
   external inspection of the original local-part, such as for analyzing
   its use with respect to particular RFC2822.From addresses.
   Enhancements that go beyond the open information of BATV might
   replace the original local-part with some form of translation.
   Examples of such schemes could include:

   Alias:  The original RFC2821.MailFrom local-part could be replaced
      with an alternative local-part.  The meta-syntax provides a way of
      flagging the difference between the new local-part and the
      original.

   Opaque Pointer:  This could be used to consult a database with
      records of mail sent and bounces received.







Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   Challenge Response:  The receiver could make a DNS-query for
      instructions about processing the RFC2821.MailFrom bounce address.

2.4.  Operation

   The basic methods for creating and interpreting BATV-encoded MailFrom
   addresses are very simple.

2.4.1.  Tag Creation

   The RFC2821.MailFrom address is specified by the RFC2822.Sender.
   This makes the MailFrom address an end-user string, created by the
   oMUA or MSA.  However it is entirely reasonable to have an outbound
   MTA, under administrative control of the Sender's domain, perform the
   necessary signing.  What is significant is that this requires a
   change to only two modules, one in the outbound sequence and one in
   the corresponding inbound sequence.  The change is transparent to all
   other systems components that transmit the message.

   NOTE:  If a MailFrom local-part already conforms to the meta-syntax
      then the string SHOULD be left unchanged, so as not to break
      forwarding.

   NOTE:  An MTA MUST ONLY tag addresses in domains whose inbound MTAs
      can validate the tags.  In particular, when an MTA is relaying a
      message, on behalf of another Administrative Management Domain
      (ADMD), it must not tag the MailFrom address, even if the original
      ADMD did not add a tag.

2.4.2.  Tag Interpretation:

   Addresses that contain BATV tags can be interpreted for two different
   purposes: bounce address validation and bounce delivery.

   Address validation:  An MTA MAY validate a BATV-encoded MailFrom
      address.  This requires the MTA to be able to process the specific
      BATV validation scheme that is specified by the <tag-type> field.
      If the address is determined to be invalid, the MTA SHOULD process
      the address as having a permanent failure, for example by
      returning a 550 response to the SMTP command containing the
      address.

      The MTA MAY also require that the use of the address is
      appropriate, for example that the message is a bounce as indicated
      by a null RFC2821.MailFrom; other heuristically determined
      contexts MAY also be appropriate.  For example a message with a
      From or MailFrom that begins with "mailer-daemon@" is almost
      always a bounce.  Use of a BATV address in inappropriate contexts



Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


      SHOULD cause a permanent failure as above.

   Bounce delivery:  When an MTA within the specified address delivery
      domain's administration receives a delivery notification directed
      to a BATV-encoded address, the MTA SHOULD validate that address
      when that message has a null MailFrom.  A receiving server MAY
      also perform heuristic selection of other incoming mail, such as
      ones that have a From or MailFrom starting with "mailer-daemon@".
      If it determines that the use is not valid, it MAY reject the
      message during the mail transfer connection, such as with SMTP;
      but more likely will simply discard the message.

      If the BATV address passes these checks the message SHOULD then be
      delivered to the original RFC2821.MailFrom address as specified by
      the RFC2822.Sender of the message that bounced.  This original
      MailFrom address will be recovered as a side-effect of validating
      the BATV address.


3.  Local-Part Meta-Syntax

   A meta-syntax for the <local-part> of an address creates a public
   convention for partitioning an address' local-part field (left-hand
   side) into sub-fields of attributes associated with the <addr-spec>
   that was the original local-part.  The syntax used by BATV follows
   much of the framework defined in [RFC3191].

   A standardized meta-syntax for local-part permits attributes to be
   present in the address, without requiring that public processing of
   the address have any understanding of the attributes' semantics.  The
   semantics of <local-part> are strictly local to the domain
   administering the <local-part> field.  This separation between global
   semantics, versus local, has been a powerful benefit to Internet
   mail.  It affords considerable operational flexibility.  The meta-
   syntax permits public information in an address to be richer, while
   maintaining the local/global separation.

   The generic element syntax for the structured fields defined for a
   BATV <local-part> is:












Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


         local-part       = tag-type "=" tag-val "=" loc-core

         tag-type         = 1*( DIGIT / ALPHA / "-" )
                            ; specific, registered validation scheme
                            ; see <IANA Considerations> section

         loc-core         = {original local-part value}

         tag-val          = 1*( DIGIT / ALPHA / "-" )
                            ; the validation data


4.  Simple Private Signature (prvs)

   This scheme signs the original MailFrom by using a simple shared-key
   to add a hash of the address and some time-based randomizing
   information.

4.1.  Syntax

   This scheme is identified as:


         tag-type       = "prvs"
                           ; simple private signature

         tag-val        =  K DDD SSSSSS

         K              =  1DIGIT
                           ; key number, to allow key rotation

         DDD            =  3DIGIT
                           ; day number, low three digits of
                           ; the number of days since 1970
                           ; when the address will expire

         SSSSSS         =  6HEXDIG
                           ; hex of the first three bytes of the
                           ; SHA-1 HMAC of <hash-source> and a key

         hash-source    =  K DDD <orig-mailfrom>

         orig-mailfrom  =  {original RFC2821.MailFrom address}

4.2.  Operation






Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


4.2.1.  Signature Creation

   PRVS creates a package around an existing <local-part>, comprising
   the PRVS label and the signature hash on the left.  The hash is
   extremely simple and not very robust, because the requirements for
   BATV do not entail strong protection.  The mechanism provides very
   weak protection against replay, in order to keep the effort to create
   or validate the signature small.

4.2.2.  Signature Checking

   Checking of private signatures is only performed within the domain
   specified in the MailFrom header.  The first component that processes
   the MailFrom's local-part must be able to interpret the meta-syntax.
   It MAY also perform validation.

   The scheme described here permits algorithmic validation.  It does
   not require maintaining a database of information about recently sent
   messages.

   The DDD part of the <tag-val> allows a domain to limit the lifetime
   of PRVS addresses to give very basic protection against replay
   attacks.  If the expiry time has passed the address SHOULD be
   considered invalid even if the HMAC is OK.  The address lifetime
   SHOULD be 7 days, to allow for long delivery delays before a bounce
   occurs.  Since it is valid and often useful for a single message to
   provoke multiple bounces, it is specifically not a goal of BATV to
   prevent them.


5.  Interoperability

   BATV seeks to retrofit a standardized syntactic structure onto the
   <local-part> of an RFC2821.MailFrom email address.  Although it is
   derived from an existing, standard structure, it will be used in new
   environments.  Because this field has previously been opaque to these
   environments, it is likely to create some usage problems with some
   existing services.  Problems are most likely for services that
   operate in the scope of the delivery processing, rather than for
   intermediaries between independent user services.  In particular
   serious problems are likely to be with third-party services that
   constrain the local-part beyond what is specified by Internet
   standards.  Hence they restrict interoperability, even without
   concern for BATV.

   As an example, such systems incorrectly identify the sender of the
   message by using the MailFrom address, rather than the RFC2822.Sender
   address.  Examples are listed below.  Further, they require that this



Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   address be the same for all future postings from the RFC2822.From
   address.  Problems arise because messages authored by a particular
   RFC2822.From address are like to vary the associated MailFrom address
   over time, particularly when BATV encoding is used.

   Such systems SHOULD fix the underlying problem, at a minimum by using
   the RFC2822.Sender address to identify the sender.  In particular,
   note that Internet mail does not require that the value of the Sender
   address be constant for a From address, and there are many,
   legitimate reasons that it varies.

   Some systems MAY continue to require correlation between MailFrom and
   From.  For example the system might analyze the envelope before the
   message's DATA has been received.  The system might strip off the
   meta-syntax to recover the <loc-core>.  This can then be used as the
   MailFrom address's original <local-part>.  For such validation
   processing, this altered address MUST NOT be used for further mail-
   delivery processing.  Rather the MailFrom string MUST be preserved as
   it was received.

   The benefit of a standardized meta-syntax for adding validation
   attributes is that it permits such mechanisms to detect the
   "attribute" portions of the local-part and extract only the core
   portion, without having to understand any of the details of the
   attributes.

   The known and likely set of problem third-parties are:

   Greylisters:  Some SMTP receiving servers record the source email
      addresses that they have previously seen, rejecting the first
      occurrence of new ones.  For a correct BATV implementation to
      cause only routine delays in this case, the BATV tagging MUST be a
      constant local-part, for a given message.  That is, it MUST NOT be
      (re-)created -- such as for each transmission attempt -- whereby
      each retry gets a different validation string.  Such constant
      regeneration will prevent ever getting through a greylisting
      server.

   Mailing Lists:  BATV will cause problems with some mailing lists that
      identify or validate posters by their bounce address.  The list
      will not recognize the identical MailFrom address that it
      requires, because it will interpret differing BATV attributes as
      part of the address.  These services will either reject postings
      or pass them all to the moderator.







Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   Challenge-Response Systems:  The problem with these is similar to the
      that with mailing lists, but the challenged user will have to take
      special action for every message recipient that auto-sorts mail by
      bounce address.

   Sorting and Duplicate Detection:  Any system that sorts by bounce
      address (MailFrom) will interpret the addresses as different, even
      though they are not.  This may include whitelisting services.

   BATV requires that the sending and receiving mail software for a
   domain share the secret key used to create the signature.  Usually
   this is easy to arrange, by creating the signature in a domain's
   outgoing mail relay and checking it in the inbound MX if both are run
   by the same management.  But it is not necessary for a domain's
   inbound and outbound relays to be under the same management; for
   example it is fairly common for incoming mail for a small business
   domain to be received by an MTA run by a hosting company, while the
   outbound mail is sent through the ISP that provides the connection to
   the company's office.  In this case, it may be necessary to sign the
   outgoing mail in the individual senders' MUAs, to check the signature
   in the individual recipients' MUAs, or both.


6.  Security Considerations

   This entire document pertains to the security of email's asynchronous
   error handling (bounce notification) mechanism, by describing a way
   to detect valid and invalid bounce addresses.  This document does not
   directly provide a mechanism for authenticating RFC2821.MailFrom
   addresses at intermediate relay nodes.  The ability to perform
   validation across the entire transfer sequence is possible if a
   standardized public key scheme is defined.

   The PRVS scheme described here provides minimal protection of the
   RFC2821.Mailfrom against forgery, with detection done at the target
   (delivery) domain.  The scheme does not attempt to protect against a
   replay attack in which a valid, signed MailFrom is used but the
   message contents are replaced.  This will also be true for any other
   BATV scheme that does not include some link with the message content.
   However such protection is only reliable for the recipient of the
   original message, because the integrity of the link will often be
   broken, when the original message data is reformatted, to be part of
   the bounce content.

   There are two common forms of email address forgery: guessing (e.g.
   attaching common <local-part>s to a domain) and harvesting (e.g. from
   the web or usenet).  Cryptographic BATV schemes make guessing attacks
   unfeasibly difficult; however these are relatively minor compared to



Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


   replay attacks, which deserve closer attention.

   MailFrom addresses are not usually exposed in the places from which
   addresses are usually harvested.  Many mailing list systems archive
   messages sent to a list on the web; however they usually replace the
   original MailFrom address with one that refers to the mailing list
   manager.  So this case is generally not a problem, although there are
   exceptions.  There are other instances of systems that archive email
   publicly without altering the MailFrom address, such as bug tracking
   systems; these are a problem.

   A proportion of forgeries are caused by mass mailing viruses.  Unlike
   spammers, these have access to private email stores and are therefore
   more likely to be able to find and replay BATV addresses.  For that
   matter, they can generate MailFrom addresses that are entirely valid.

   The PRVS scheme includes a modest protection against replay attacks,
   by virtue of its using an expiry time, which prevents very old
   addresses from being used by attackers.  It does not prevent replay
   attacks of young addresses.


7.  References

7.1.  Reference - Normative

   [I-D.email-arch]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", May 2004.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

7.2.  References - Informative

   [RFC3191]  Allocchio, C., "Minimal GSTN address format in Internet
              Mail", RFC 3191, October 2001.






Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This specification was greatly improved by the extensive
   participation of John Leslie and Douglas Otis, in early design
   discussions.


Appendix B.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.









































Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   John Levine
   Taughannock Networks
   PO Box 727
   Trumansburg, NY  14886

   Email: standards@taugh.com


   Dave Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking
   675 Spruce Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94086
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.246.8253
   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net


   Sam Silberman
   Openwave

   Email: sam_silberman@openwave.com


   Tony Finch
   University of Cambridge
   Cambridge  CB2 1TN
   UK

   Email: dot@dotat.at
   URI:   http://dotat.at


















Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)         June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Levine, et al.          Expires December 25, 2006              [Page 15]

