


Internet Engineering Task Force                           Steve Christey
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                     MITRE
Valid for six months                                       Chris Wysopal
Category: Best Current Practice                             @stake, Inc.
                                                           February 2002

              Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure Process
             draft-christey-wysopal-vuln-disclosure-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 

Abstract

   New vulnerabilities in software and hardware products are discovered
   and publicized on a daily basis.  The disclosure of vulnerability
   information has been a divisive topic for years.  During the process
   of disclosure, many vendors, security researchers, and other parties
   follow a variety of unwritten or informal guidelines for how they
   interact and share information.  Some parties may be unaware of these
   guidelines, or they may intentionally ignore them.  This state of
   affairs can make it difficult to achieve a satisfactory outcome for
   everyone who uses or is affected by vulnerability information. 

   The purpose of this document is to describe best practices for a
   responsible disclosure process that involves vulnerability reporters,
   product vendors or maintainers, third parties, the security
   community, and ultimately customers and users. 



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002



Table of Contents

   1 Introduction and Purpose .......................................  3
   1.1 Background ...................................................  3
   1.2 Major Roles in Disclosure ....................................  3
   1.3 Motivations ..................................................  4
   1.4 Goals of Responsible Disclosure ..............................  5
   2 Phases of Responsible Disclosure ...............................  6
   3 Responsibilities in the Phases of Vulnerability Disclosure .....  7
   3.1 Latent Flaw ..................................................  7
   3.2 Discovery ....................................................  7
   3.3 Notification Phase: Initial Notification .....................  8
   3.3.1 Vendor Responsibilities ....................................  8
   3.3.2 Reporter Responsibilities ..................................  9
   3.4 Notification Phase: Vendor Receipt ..........................  11
   3.4.1 Vendor Responsibilities ...................................  11
   3.5 Validation Phase ............................................  11
   3.5.1 Vendor Responsibilities ...................................  11
   3.5.2 Reporter Responsibilities .................................  13
   3.5.3 Coordinator Responsibilities ..............................  14
   3.6 Resolution Phase ............................................  14
   3.6.1 Vendor Responsibilities ...................................  14
   3.6.2 Reporter Responsibilities .................................  15
   3.7 Release Phase ...............................................  16
   3.7.1 Vendor Responsibilities ...................................  16
   3.7.2 Reporter Responsibilities .................................  18
   3.7.3 Coordinator Responsibilities ..............................  18
   3.7.4 Customer Responsibilities .................................  19
   3.7.5 Security Community Responsibilities .......................  19
   3.8 Follow-Up Phase .............................................  20
   4 Policy Publication ............................................  20
   4.1 Vendor Policy ...............................................  20
   4.2 Reporter Policy .............................................  20
   4.3 Coordinator Policy ..........................................  21
   5 References ....................................................  21
   5.1 Disclosure Policies .........................................  21
   5.2 Commentary on Disclosure Details ............................  21
   5.3 Commentary on Disclosure Process ............................  22
   5.4 Commentary on Advisories ....................................  24
   5.5 Commentary on Vendor Accessibility ..........................  24
   5.6 Discovery of Issues in the Wild .............................  25
   5.7 Researcher Credibility and Vulnerability Reproduction .......  26
   5.8 Miscellaneous ...............................................  26
   6 Acknowledgements ..............................................  26
   7 Security Considerations .......................................  26
   8 Authors' Addresses ............................................  27
   9 Full Copyright Statement ......................................  27



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


Document Conventions

   The key words "REQUIRED", "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in "Key
   words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [RFC2119]. 

1 Introduction and Purpose

   This document provides guidance and recommendations for the community
   of developers, vendors, end users, researchers and security
   professionals who wish to perform responsible vulnerability
   disclosure within the information technology arena.  For purposes of
   this document, the term "responsible" refers to the recognition of a
   formal, repeatable process for the reporting, evaluation, resolution
   and publication of vulnerability information.  "Vulnerability" refers
   to any bug, flaw, behavior, output, outcome or event within an
   application, system, device, or service that could lead to increased
   risk or security exploit.  For purposes of this document, we have
   standardized on the term "product" to encompass the full suite of
   products that are addressed by this document. 

1.1 Background

   Vulnerabilities are an inherent and unfortunate part of the design
   and development process.  Vulnerability detection may occur during
   any phase of the product lifecycle, to include design, development,
   testing, implementation or operation.  Ideally, vulnerabilities are
   largely prevented through a design process that considers security. 
   However, due to a variety of reasons, many vulnerabilities are
   detected after a product is implemented in an operational environment
   and supporting customer objectives.  A variety of legislative and
   social issues directly influences the process for vulnerability
   research, detection and response.  Developers, customers and the
   security community all have divergent perspectives on the impact of
   vulnerabilities.  Currently, vulnerability release is inconsistent
   and largely driven from the perspective of the party who has the
   greatest ability to control the process.  In an effort to create a
   common framework by which objectives are met to the benefit of all
   parties, this document communicates a formal, repeatable process for
   addressing vulnerability disclosure in a responsible manner.  This
   document provides a means to address the common goal of providing
   more secure products while reducing the risk to customers. 

1.2 Major Roles in Disclosure

   Several types of individuals or organizations may play a role in the
   process of vulnerability disclosure.  These roles may overlap. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   A Vendor is an individual or organization who provides, develops, or
   maintains software, hardware, or services, possibly for free. 

   A Customer is the end user of the software, hardware, or service that
   may be affected by the vulnerability. 

   A Reporter is the individual or organization that informs (or
   attempts to inform) the Vendor of the vulnerability.  Note that the
   Reporter may not have been the initial discoverer of the problem. 

   A Coordinator is an individual or organization who works with the
   Reporter and the Vendor to analyze and address the vulnerability. 
   Coordinators are often well-known third parties.  Coordinators may
   have resources, credibility, or working relationships that exceed
   those of the reporter or vendors.  Coordinators may serve as proxies
   for reporters, help to verify the reporter's claims, resolve
   conflicts, and work with all parties to resolve the vulnerability in
   a satisfactory manner.  Note: while Coordinators can facilitate the
   responsible disclosure process for a vulnerability, the use of
   Coordinators by other parties is not a requirement. 

   The Security Community includes individuals or organizations whose
   primary goals include improving overall information technology
   security.  The community includes security administrators and
   analysts, system administrators who are responsible for the security
   of their systems, commercial or non-profit organizations who provide
   security-related products or services, researchers and academics,
   informal groups, and individuals. 

1.3 Motivations

   Individuals and organizations have a wide variety of motivations
   (some in direct conflict with each other) that make the disclosure
   process more complex. 

   Vendors may have one or more of the following motivations.  Some
   vendors believe that public notification may help their customers
   address vulnerabilities, at the possible cost of negative publicity. 
   Some vendors may be unresponsive, or secretly fix vulnerabilities,
   for fear of negative publicity.  Some vendors may not have the
   technical skills to understand the nature of the vulnerability and
   the risk that it poses. 

   Customers often wish to have secure products, but security features
   can make it more difficult to use those products.  Many customers do
   not care about the nature of the vulnerability.  However, there is a
   small percentage of customers for whom vulnerability information
   plays a critical role in their usage of products.  Some vendors may
   be customers of other vendors. 


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   Reporters have a variety of motivations.  Because reporters are often
   the means through which vulnerability information is communicated,
   they have a major impact on how the disclosure process is followed. 
   Reporters may be motivated by altruism ("to make computers more
   secure"), recognition or fame, marketing to highlight technical
   skills (for individuals as well as companies), forcing unresponsive
   vendors to address a vulnerability, curiosity or the challenge of
   vulnerability analysis, or malicious intent to damage the reputations
   of specific vendors, wreak havoc, or cause financial damage to
   customers.  The vague goals of altruism are often open to different
   interpretations by different reporters.  Reporters may be
   inexperienced, malicious, or have insufficient resources to follow
   the full process of disclosure.  Reporters are seldom compensated for
   their important role in enhancing Internet security. 

   The motivations for members of the security community may vary
   depending on the specific tasks that are being undertaken by the
   members.  Community members may have motivations that include those
   of vendors, customers, and/or reporters.  In addition, members of the
   security community may wish to track trends in vulnerabilities,
   identify new types of vulnerabilities, or design new products and
   processes to reduce the impact of vulnerabilities. 

   Coordinators are often members of the security community, and as such
   may share the same motivations.  Coordinators may also be required by
   their mission or contract to perform this role. 

1.4 Goals of Responsible Disclosure

   The goals of responsible disclosure include:

   1) Ensure that vulnerabilities can be identified and eliminated
   effectively and efficiently for all parties. 

   2) Minimize the risk to customers from vulnerabilities that could
   allow damage to their systems. 

   3) Provide customers with sufficient information for them to evaluate
   the level of security in vendors' products. 

   4) Provide the security community with the information necessary to
   develop tools and methods for identifying, managing, and reducing the
   risks of vulnerabilities in information technology. 

   5) Minimize the amount of time and resources required to manage
   vulnerability information. 

   6) Facilitate long-term research and development of techniques,
   products, and processes for avoiding or mitigating vulnerabilities. 


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   7) Minimize the amount of antagonism that often exists between
   parties as a result of different assumptions and expectations, due to
   the lack of consistent and explicit disclosure practices. 

2 Phases of Responsible Disclosure

   Following are the basic phases of the responsible vulnerability
   disclosure process.  Some of these phases may be bypassed in specific
   situations with agreement across all parties.  In other cases, one or
   more parties may not be responsible, skipping some phases. 

   1) Latent Flaw.  A flaw is introduced into a product during its
   design, specification, development, installation, or default
   configuration. 

   2) Discovery.  One or more individuals or organizations discover the
   flaw through casual evaluation, by accident, or as a result of
   focused analysis and testing.  In some cases, knowledge of the flaw
   may be kept within a particular group.  A vulnerability report or an
   exploit program may be discovered "in the wild," i.e., in use by
   malicious attackers or made available for use and distribution. 

   3) Notification.  A reporter or coordinator notifies the vendor of
   the vulnerability ("Initial Notification").  In turn, the vendor
   provides the reporter or coordinator with assurances that the
   notification was received ("Vendor Receipt"). 

   4) Validation.  The vendor or other parties verify and validate the
   reporter's claims ("Reproduction"). 

   5) Resolution.  The vendor and other parties also try to identify
   where the flaw resides ("Diagnosis").  The vendor develops a patch or
   workaround that eliminates or reduces the risk of the vulnerability
   ("Fix Development").  The patch is then tested by other parties (such
   as reporter or coordinator) to ensure that the flaw has been
   corrected ("Patch Testing"). 

   6) Release.  The vendor, coordinator, and/or reporter release the
   information about the vulnerability, along with its resolution.  The
   vendor may initially release this information to its customers and
   other organizations with which it may have special relationships
   ("Limited release").  The vendor or other parties may then release
   the information - possibly with additional details - to the security
   community. 

   7) Follow-up.  The vendor, customer, coordinator, reporter, or
   security community may conduct additional analysis of the
   vulnerability or the quality of its resolution. 



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


3 Responsibilities in the Phases of Vulnerability Disclosure

3.1 Latent Flaw

   The following recommendations identify how most latent flaws can be
   avoided. 

   1) The Vendor SHOULD ensure that programmers, designers, and testers
   are knowledgeable about common flaws in the design and implementation
   of products. 

   Rationale: Some classes of vulnerabilities are well-known and can be
   easily exploited using repeatable techniques.  Educated programmers,
   designers, and testers can identify and eliminate vulnerabilities
   before the product is provided to customers, or prevent their
   introduction into the product in the first place. 

   2) Customers SHOULD configure their products and systems in ways that
   eliminate latent flaws or reduce the impact of latent flaws,
   including (1) removing default services that are not necessary for
   the operation of the affected systems, (2) limiting necessary
   services only to networks or systems that require access, (3) using
   the minimal amount of access and privileges necessary for proper
   functioning of the products, and (4) using security features of the
   product or operating system that reduce the chance that a flaw can be
   successfully exploited. 

   Rationale: Many computer intrusions involve the exploitation of
   vulnerabilities in network services that are unnecessary for typical
   operating environments.  In some cases, system configuration can
   reduce the overall risk of vulnerabilities (known and unknown).  For
   example, the Code Red and Nimda worms of 2001 were largely successful
   because of these factors. 

   3) The Security Community SHOULD track all known vulnerabilities to
   identify new classes of vulnerabilities, educate the public about
   these types of vulnerabilities, and find ways to detect or prevent
   them in the development, testing, and deployment of products. 

3.2 Discovery

   1) The Reporter SHOULD make a reasonable effort to ensure that: - the
   vulnerability is real - the process of getting the product into a
   known exploitable state is repeatable - the vulnerability has not
   already been reported by the vendor or well-established vulnerability
   information sources

   Rationale: Some vulnerabilities are re-discovered after they have
   already been fixed, or the reporter has introduced the problem due to


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   misconfiguration, or the reporter identifies the symptoms of the
   vulnerability without determining the cause.  If the reporter ensures
   that the problem is new and real, then the reporter will will avoid
   unnecessarily consuming the time and resources spent by vendors and
   other parties in investigating the problem. 

   Note: in some cases, a reporter may not be able to make a reasonable
   effort due to limitations of time, resources, access to the product,
   or expertise.  In some cases, the problem may only appear
   intermittently, or the product is only temporarily accessible to the
   reporter (e.g., when the reporter is a consultant who discovers the
   problem in products that a customer uses).  In other cases, the
   reporter may discover information about the vulnerability without
   having any access to the product. 

   Note: in some cases, the reporter may be able to coerce the product
   into a state that is known to be exploitable, without creating a
   fully working exploit program (e.g., a buffer overflow with a long
   string of 'A' characters may produce a result that shows that the
   instruction pointer has been overwritten).  This is considered a
   reasonable effort. 

3.3 Notification Phase: Initial Notification

   To facilitate the disclosure process, Vendors need to be accessible
   to Reporters, and Reporters need to find and use the appropriate
   communication channels for notifying Vendors. 

3.3.1 Vendor Responsibilities

   1) The Vendor MUST make it as easy as possible for Reporters,
   Coordinators, Customers, and the Security Community to notify the
   Vendor of vulnerabilities. 

   Rationale: It is often difficult for reporters or other parties to
   notify vendors of vulnerabilities, especially if the reporters are
   not customers.  This may cause the parties to bypass other phases of
   the disclosure process, or adopt a policy that avoids vendor
   notification because of previous bad experiences with vendors. 

   2) The Vendor SHOULD establish a Security Response Capability (SRC)
   that consists of one or more individuals or groups that are
   responsible for responding to vulnerability reports, verifying
   vulnerabilities, releasing bulletins, etc. 







Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   3) The Vendor SHOULD ensure that its staff knows how to recognize a
   reported security issue and direct it to the Security Response
   Capability.  This recommendation applies to staff who provide support
   online, over the telephone, in person, or through some other means by
   which reporters may interact with the Vendor. 

   4) If the Vendor can control the e-mail addresses that it uses (e.g.,
   it has its own domain name), then the Vendor SHOULD define and
   publish the "secalert" alias for use in vulnerability notification. 

   Rationale: Currently, Vendors use a variety of aliases for
   notification, including "security-alert," "security," and "support."
   Some Vendors may use the "security" alias for physical security
   facilities.  The "security" alias is also defined in RFC2142 for use
   in incident handling.  The "security-alert" alias is longer than 8
   characters and contains a dash, which could make it more difficult to
   use or locate in search engines.  The "secalert" alias is not
   commonly used at this time, and as such it does not have the types of
   issues that some commonly-used aliases have. 

   Note: smaller vendors may not be able to control which e-mail
   addresses they use. 

   5) If the Vendor operates a web site or other means of distributing
   information regarding its product, then the Vendor SHOULD create and
   publish a "security" page or folder that identifies how vulnerability
   reports should be made.  The Vendor SHOULD make this page easy to
   find from other locations, such as a separate contact page or index. 

   6) The Vendor MUST provide a facility for individuals or
   organizations who are not Customers to report vulnerabilities.  The
   Vendor SHOULD NOT require (1) an active technical support number, (2)
   telephone access that is not toll-free, or (3) user registration for
   a web site or other facility that would be used for reporting. 

   Rationale: As described earlier, some reporters or coordinators are
   not necessarily customers of the Vendor.  If the Vendor is not
   accessible to them, then they will be more likely to bypass other
   aspects of this process. 

   7) The Vendor SHOULD recognize that inexperienced or malicious
   reporters may not use proper notification, and define its own
   procedures for handling such cases. 

3.3.2 Reporter Responsibilities

   1) The Reporter SHOULD make reasonable efforts to use the appropriate
   channels for notifying the Vendor of the vulnerability:



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   (a) The Reporter SHOULD attempt to notify the vendor through the
   channels described in this section. 

   (b) If the Vendor is not accessible through those channels, then the
   Reporter MAY attempt to contact the vendor through technical
   support. 

   Note: in some cases, a reporter may not be able to make a reasonable
   effort due to time limitations, lack of proper access to the vendor,
   inexperience, expense, prohibitions by the reporter's own
   organization, or the reporter does not meet some criteria for
   notification (e.g., a support contract number). 

   2) If the Reporter is unable to notify the Vendor, then the Reporter
   SHOULD ask a Coordinator to notify the Vendor.  The Reporter SHOULD
   provide the Coordinator with a list of contacts or mechanisms that
   were used to attempt to notify the Vendor. 

   Rationale: a Coordinator may appear more credible than the Reporter,
   or have a previously established relationship with the Vendor.  The
   Reporter may be prohibited from disclosing the vulnerability directly
   to the Vendor. 

   Note: the Coordinator will not necessarily have a different way of
   reaching the Vendor than the Reporter does. 

   3) The Reporter and/or Coordinator SHOULD record the date of
   notification. 

   Rationale: This helps Customers, Reporters, Coordinators, and the
   Security Community track how long it takes for a Vendor to resolve a
   vulnerability after the initial notification. 

   4) The Reporter SHOULD provide the Vendor, and the Coordinator (if
   any), with all known details of the issue, including any programs,
   scripts, or pseudo-code that would allow the Vendor to reproduce
   and/or confirm the vulnerability. 

   Rationale: such details make it easier for the Vendor and Coordinator
   to reproduce and diagnose the vulnerability, which then allows the
   Vendor to identify or develop a resolution more quickly. 

   Note: some vulnerabilities may be theoretical or not well-understood
   in this phase of the disclosure process, and the Reporter may not
   have developed programs that exploit the problem.  In other cases,
   the Reporter may be using proprietary programs to demonstrate the
   vulnerability. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


3.4 Notification Phase: Vendor Receipt

3.4.1 Vendor Responsibilities

   1) The Vendor MUST notify the Reporter and involved Coordinators that
   the Vendor has received the notification.  This Receipt does not
   necessarily imply that the Vendor has researched or reproduced the
   vulnerability, only that the Vendor is aware of the notification. 

   Rationale: if the Vendor does not respond, then the Reporter or
   Coordinator may not be sure if the Vendor is truly aware of the
   reported vulnerability, and/or if the Vendor intends to resolve the
   vulnerability.  This often causes Reporters or Coordinators to bypass
   later phases of the disclosure process in order to warn customers of
   the risks to their systems. 

   2) The Vendor MUST provide the Reporter and involved Coordinators
   with a Receipt within 7 days. 

   Rationale: Other time frames (such as 5 business days) were
   considered but deemed unworkable due to international issues (e.g.,
   "work weeks" may fall on different days in different countries, there
   are different national or religious holidays).  Defining a time frame
   relative to the Vendor or Reporter could not work without some form
   of communication between both parties. 

   Note: small but responsible Vendors or individuals may not be able to
   provide this degree of responsiveness, especially during vacation
   periods.  Reporters and Coordinators SHOULD take this into account
   during the notification phase.  Small, responsible Vendors SHOULD
   post some clear notification when it is known that such delays will
   occur. 

   3) If the Vendor's receipt message is automatically generated, then
   it SHOULD include a time period or date by which an individual (or
   the Security Response Capability) will provide follow-up on the
   reported vulnerability.  The time period SHOULD NOT exceed 10 days. 

   4) Within 10 days of initial notification, the Vendor's Security
   Response Capability SHOULD provide a clear response to the Reporter
   and any involved Coordinators. 

3.5 Validation Phase

3.5.1 Vendor Responsibilities

   1) If the vulnerability is found in a supported product, the Vendor
   MUST either (1) reproduce the vulnerability, (2) determine if there
   is enough evidence for the existence of the vulnerability when it


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   cannot be reproduced, (3) determine if the vulnerability is already
   known (and possibly resolved), or (4) work with the Reporter to
   determine if the vulnerability is related to the specific environment
   in which it was discovered (including configuration errors or
   interactions with other products). 

   2) If the vulnerability is found in an unsupported or discontinued
   product, the Vendor MAY refuse to validate the vulnerability. 
   However, the Vendor MUST ensure that the reported vulnerability does
   not exist in supported product versions or other supported products
   based on the vulnerable product. 

   3) The Vendor SHOULD NOT assume that the risk or impact of the
   vulnerability is limited to what has been identified by the Reporter
   or involved Coordinator. 

   Rationale: The Reporter or involved Coordinator may not have
   sufficient experience or time to identify the full scope of the
   problem.  Sometimes, a theoretical vulnerability is later found to be
   more easily exploitable as a result of follow-on analysis or the
   creation of a tool.  For example, it may be easy for a Reporter to
   find evidence of a buffer overflow vulnerability by sending a long
   argument that causes a product to crash.  It is an indicator that a
   carefully crafted program could be used to execute arbitrary code. 
   The Reporter and Vendor may not have the skills or resources to
   create such a program, but such a program could be created in the
   future. 

   4) The Vendor SHOULD examine its product to ensure that it is free of
   other problems that are similar to the reported vulnerability. 

   Rationale: some Vendors reproduce and resolve the specific issue that
   is identified by the Reporter without extending their analysis to see
   if similar mistakes were made elsewhere in the product.  The
   Reporter, others in the Security Community, or hackers may conduct
   follow-on research to find these other vulnerabilities.  This can
   result in a cycle in which vulnerabilities are discovered and patched
   so often that it becomes difficult for customers to manage the volume
   of resolutions that they need to apply. 

   5) The Vendor MUST consult with the Reporter and involved
   Coordinators when more information or analysis is needed. 

   6) The Vendor SHOULD provide status updates to the Reporter and any
   involved Coordinators every 7 days.  The Vendor MAY negotiate with
   the parties for less frequent updates. 

   7) The Vendor MUST notify the Reporter and any involved Coordinators
   when the Vendor is able to reproduce the vulnerability. 


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   8) The Vendor SHOULD attempt to resolve the vulnerability within 30
   days of initial notification. 

   9) If the Vendor cannot resolve the vulnerability within 30 days,
   then the Vendor MUST provide the Reporter and involved Coordinators
   with specific reasons why the vulnerability cannot be resolved. 

   10) If the Vendor is aware of other vendors that share the same
   codebase as the affected product, then the Vendor MUST either (1)
   notify those vendors, or (2) notify a Coordinator that other Vendors
   may be affected by the reported vulnerability. 

3.5.2 Reporter Responsibilities

   1) The Reporter SHOULD work with the Vendor in a timely fashion to
   explain the vulnerability and conduct further analysis. 

   Rationale: if a problem is sufficiently complex or only appears in a
   portion of deployed systems, then the Vendor may not be able to
   reproduce the issue.  In other cases, the Vendor may not understand
   the problem.  If the Reporter is slow to respond, then this can
   extend the time window during which Customers are at risk. 

   2) If the Vendor does not understand the nature, risk, or resolution
   of the vulnerability, then the Reporter or involved Coordinators
   SHOULD provide the Vendor with resources that help to explain the
   vulnerability. 

   Note: Some Vendors may require - or insist - upon extensive
   consultation to identify the vulnerability.  Reporters and
   Coordinators may not have the time or resources to provide such
   assistance. 

   3) If the Reporter does not have the time or resources to conduct
   such analysis, then the Reporter SHOULD notify the Vendor and suggest
   alternate contacts (such as Coordinators) who may be able to assist
   the Vendor.  The Reporter SHOULD NOT attempt to bypass later phases. 

   4) If the Reporter finds that the Reporter is in error, then the
   Reporter SHOULD notify the Vendor and involved Coordinators. 

   Rationale: if a Reporter does not perform this notification, then the
   Vendors or Coordinators may continue to spend unnecessary resources
   on further analysis of the issue. 

   5) The Reporter SHOULD grant time extensions to the Vendor if there
   is evidence that the Vendor is acting in good faith to resolve the
   vulnerability. 



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   6) If the Vendor is unresponsive or disagrees with the Reporter's
   findings, then the Reporter SHOULD involve a Coordinator. 

3.5.3 Coordinator Responsibilities

   1) The Coordinator MUST attempt to resolve any conflicts or technical
   disagreements that arise between the Reporter and the Vendor. 

   2) If a Vendor is unresponsive or does not appear to be acting in
   good faith to resolve the vulnerability, then the Coordinator SHOULD
   attempt to convince the Vendor to follow the proper process. 

   3) If a Reporter is unresponsive or does not appear to be acting in
   good faith to resolve the vulnerability, then the Coordinator SHOULD
   attempt to convince the Reporter to follow the proper process. 

   4) The Coordinator SHOULD work with the Vendor and Reporter to
   determine if other Vendors are affected by the same problem. 

   5) The Coordinator SHOULD work with the Vendor and Reporter to
   identify time extensions (if any) that are acceptable to all
   parties. 

3.6 Resolution Phase

   The "Resolution" of a vulnerability involves action regarding one or
   more of the following:

   - patch creation
   - recommendation of configuration change
   - design change
   - workaround
   - no action

   If the Vendor does not participate or is unresponsive, then the
   Reporter and Coordinator might not be able to create a patch or
   change the design of the product. 

3.6.1 Vendor Responsibilities

   1) The Vendor MUST identify the fundamental nature of the flaw within
   the source code or in the design of the product ("Diagnosis"). 

   2) The Vendor MUST either (1) provide a patch, configuration change,
   or workaround that appropriately reduces or eliminates the risk of
   the vulnerability ("Fix Development"), or (2) provide the Reporter
   and involved Coordinators with specific reasons for its inaction. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   3) The Vendor SHOULD request time extensions from the Reporter and
   involved Coordinators when necessary. 

   4) The Vendor SHOULD test the patches, configuration changes, and
   workarounds sufficiently to ensure that either (1) they do not
   adversely affect the operation of the product, or (2) it is clear
   which conditions may adversely affect the operation of the product. 

   Rationale: Vendors may be pressured to quickly resolve
   vulnerabilities without sufficient testing, especially when Reporters
   have bypassed the Notification or Validation phases.  As a result,
   the resolution may adversely affect more systems than necessary. 

   5) The Vendor MUST provide the Reporter and involved Coordinators
   with all known configuration changes or workarounds that address the
   vulnerability ("Fix Development"). 

   6) The Vendor SHOULD provide the Reporter and involved Coordinators
   with any patches ("Patch Testing"). 

   Rationale: this helps the Reporter and Coordinator to confirm that
   the vulnerability has been reduced or eliminated. 

   Note: the Vendor's business model may require that only supported
   Customers can have access to a patch, which could exclude Reporters
   or Coordinators.  Such Vendors should recognize that this practice
   may result in an incomplete patch that does not address the
   vulnerability in question. 

   7) If the Reporter is unresponsive or uncooperative, or a dispute
   arises, then the Vendor SHOULD work with a Coordinator to identify
   the best available resolution for the vulnerability. 

3.6.2 Reporter Responsibilities

   1) The Reporter SHOULD recognize that it may be difficult for a
   Vendor to resolve a vulnerability within 30 days if (1) the problem
   is related to insecure design, (2) the Vendor has a diverse set of
   hardware, operating systems, and/or product versions to support, or
   (3) the Vendor is not skilled in security. 

   2) The Reporter SHOULD grant time extensions to the Vendor if the
   Vendor is acting in good faith to resolve the vulnerability. 

   3) If the Vendor is unresponsive or uncooperative, or a dispute
   arises, then the Reporter SHOULD work with a Coordinator to identify
   the best available resolution for the vulnerability. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


3.7 Release Phase

3.7.1 Vendor Responsibilities

   1) The Vendor SHOULD work with the Reporter and involved Coordinators
   to arrange a date after which the vulnerability information may be
   released. 

   2) The Vendor MAY ask the Reporter and Coordinator to allow a "Grace
   Period" up to 30 days, during which the Reporter and Coordinator do
   not release details of the vulnerability that could make it easier
   for hackers to create exploit programs. 

   Rationale: a grace period provides Customers with a time period in
   which they can fix their systems.  During this time, the lack of
   details may make it more difficult or resource-intensive for
   attackers to determine the nature of the vulnerability and craft an
   exploit.  However, some security-aware Customers desire such details
   so that they can better decide whether the resolution of the
   vulnerability is appropriate for their environment.  In addition,
   some members of the Security Community desire such details in order
   to (1) enhance tools or techniques to detect vulnerable systems on
   Customer networks (such as vulnerability scanners), (2) enhance tools
   or techniques to detect attempts to exploit vulnerabilities on
   Customer networks (such as intrusion detection systems), (3) provide
   databases or other information that Customers use to identify and
   prioritize vulnerabilities that may affect the Customer's enterprise,
   and (4) perform research and trend analysis. 

   3) If the Reporter has not properly followed the process and publicly
   announces the vulnerability, then the Vendor SHOULD post its
   awareness of the vulnerability, and the Vendor's progress in its
   resolution, to appropriate forums. 

   Rationale: this allows Customers and the Security Community to know
   that the Vendor is aware of the problem and working to resolve it. 

   Note: some Vendors may not wish to acknowledge such vulnerabilities
   until a patch is available. 

   4) If a Reporter has properly followed the process, then the Vendor
   MUST provide credit to that reporter. 

   5) If a Coordinator has properly followed the process, then the
   Vendor SHOULD provide credit to the Coordinator. 

   6) If a Reporter has not properly followed the process and publicly
   announces the vulnerability, then the Vendor MAY provide credit to
   the reporter. 


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   Rationale: Some people believe that even if a reporter has not
   followed the procedures properly, the reporter has still provided
   valuable information that is useful to the Vendor, Customers,
   Coordinators, and the Security Community, and academic integrity
   would dictate that reporters should be credited.  However, since
   credit is a motivation for some reporters, others believe that
   irresponsible reporters should not be encouraged to bypass the
   process and still get credit. 

   7) The Vendor MUST NOT assume that the lack of vulnerability details
   will prevent the creation of an exploit. 

   Rationale: If the Vendor provides source code for the product, then
   any entity who has access to the product could easily determine the
   specific locations of the vulnerability and identify possible attack
   vectors that reach the vulnerable code.  If the Vendor does not
   provide source code, then any entity who has access to a patch could
   use reverse engineering techniques to determine how the code was
   changed, then infer the nature of the vulnerability. 

   8) The Vendor SHOULD cryptographically sign all patches using a
   method that is commonly accessible on the platforms for the Vendor's
   product.  The Vendor should clearly advertise its cryptographic key
   and provide cryptographic checksums for its patches. 

   Rationale: This increases the assurance that the patches from the
   Vendor are authentic. 

   9) The Vendor SHOULD provide an easily accessible mechanism for
   Customers and the Security Community to obtain all security
   advisories, such as a web page.  The most recent advisory SHOULD be
   listed first. 

   10) The Vendor SHOULD provide a mechanism for notifying Customers and
   the Security Community when new advisories are published. 

   11) The Vendor SHOULD provide a means for the Security Community to
   identify which reported vulnerabilities are genuine, but are not
   regarded by the Vendor as important enough to merit a security
   advisory. 

   Rationale: Vendors are often unwilling to release security advisories
   unless the security issue is critical for its Customers.  This can
   reduce operating expenses for the Vendor and most Customers. 
   However, some members of the Security Community, and some Customers,
   also prefer to protect themselves against less serious
   vulnerabilities.  If a Vendor does not at least indicate to its
   security-aware Customers that a security-related resolution is
   available, then those Customers may remain at risk for


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   vulnerabilities that they would otherwise wish to resolve. 

   12) The Vendor SHOULD provide an easily accessible indicator that
   allows a Customer to determine if the resolution has been applied to
   a system, e.g., by modifying the product's version number or
   providing the Customer with a tool that identifies the resolutions
   that have been applied to a product. 

3.7.2 Reporter Responsibilities

   1) The Reporter SHOULD work with the Vendor and involved Coordinators
   to arrange a date after which the vulnerability information may be
   released. 

   2) If the Vendor has not resolved the vulnerability within a time
   frame that is allowed by this process, then the Reporter SHOULD work
   with a Coordinator to announce the vulnerability to Customers and the
   Security Community. 

   3) If another reporter has not properly followed the process and
   publicly announced the vulnerability, then the Reporter MAY announce
   that the Reporter was responsibly following the disclosure process
   with the Vendor and involved Coordinators. 

   4) If a Vendor requests a Grace Period, then the Reporter SHOULD
   follow the Grace Period before releasing details of the
   vulnerability. 

   5) After the Grace Period, the Reporter MAY release additional
   details.  The Reporter SHOULD carefully consider how much detail is
   needed by Customers and the Security Community. 

   Note: in some cases, the nature of the vulnerability could make it
   difficult or impossible to release vulnerability details that do not
   allow someone to exploit the vulnerability. 

   6) The Reporter SHOULD provide credit to any Vendor and/or
   Coordinator who has followed the process. 

3.7.3 Coordinator Responsibilities

   1) The Coordinator SHOULD work with the Vendor and Reporter to
   arrange a date after which the vulnerability information may be
   released. 

   2) If the Vendor requests a Grace Period, the Coordinator SHOULD
   follow the Grace Period and encourage the Reporter to follow the
   Grace Period. 



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   3) The Coordinator SHOULD provide credit to any Vendor and/or
   Reporter who properly follows the process. 

   4) The Coordinator MAY provide credit to a reporter who has not
   properly followed the process. 

3.7.4 Customer Responsibilities

   1) The Customer MUST NOT assume that the lack of details will prevent
   the creation of an exploit. 

   2) If the Vendor has released information regarding the
   vulnerability, then the Customer SHOULD assume that the information
   is credible.  The Customer SHOULD NOT require that the vulnerability
   be demonstrated before applying the resolution. 

   3) If the Vendor has not released such information, but a
   well-established Reporter or Coordinator has, then the Customer
   SHOULD assume that the information is credible.  The Customer SHOULD
   NOT require that the vulnerability be demonstrated before applying
   the resolution. 

   4) If vulnerability information has been released and a Grace Period
   exists, then the Customer SHOULD apply the resolution to its systems
   during the Grace Period. 

   5) Where possible, the Customer SHOULD test any patches,
   configuration changes, or workarounds on test systems before making
   the changes in an operational environment. 

   6) The Customer SHOULD inform the Vendor and the Security Community
   if a patch, configuration change, or workaround does not appear to
   work properly. 

   7) The Customer SHOULD give preference to products whose Vendors
   follow responsible disclosure practices. 

3.7.5 Security Community Responsibilities

   1) The Security Community SHOULD publicly recognize all Vendors,
   Reporters, and Coordinators who follow responsible vulnerability
   disclosure. 

   2) The Security Community SHOULD adopt a set of terms that allows all
   parties to describe the inherent risk or impact of a vulnerability
   that can be interpreted in various environments, threat levels, and
   policies. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   Rationale: Customers have varying operational needs at different
   levels of security, which can make it difficult to define a "one size
   fits all" risk level for any vulnerability.  Current terminology
   often uses a "High, Medium, Low" breakdown, but there are no formal
   definitions.  As such, this terminology is used inconsistently,
   partially because it is based on the perspective of the entity who is
   using it.  It is also insufficient to capture the complexity and
   tradeoffs of vulnerabilities in today's environment. 

3.8 Follow-Up Phase

   1) The Vendor SHOULD clearly notify Customers and the Security
   Community when a resolution is (a) faulty, or (b) revised. 

   2) The Vendor SHOULD NOT re-release the same advisory for newly
   discovered, closely related vulnerabilities. 

   Rationale: The re-release of an advisory may not be noticed as well
   by Customers, which could cause the Customers to believe that their
   systems are secure because they applied the resolution that was
   identified in the original advisory. 

4 Policy Publication

4.1 Vendor Policy

   A Vendor SHOULD publish a policy and procedures statement that
   includes the following information:

   1) Where it complies (and does not comply) with the process outlined
   in this document. 

   2) The typical amount of time after notification that the Vendor
   requires to produce a resolution. 

   3) The Grace Period, if any, that the Vendor wishes to observe. 

   4) How the Vendor determines whether a reported problem is serious
   enough to merit a security advisory. 

4.2 Reporter Policy

   If a Reporter is a member of the Security Community and the Reporter
   frequently finds new vulnerabilities, then the Reporter SHOULD
   publish a policy and procedures statement that includes the following
   information:

   1) Where it complies (and does not comply) with the process outlined
   in this document. 


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   2) The maximum Grace Period that the Reporter is willing to follow. 

4.3 Coordinator Policy

   A Coordinator SHOULD publish a policy and procedures statement that
   includes the following information:

   1) Where the Coordinator complies (and does not comply) with the
   process outlined in this document. 

   2) The maximum Grace Period that the Coordinator is willing to
   follow. 

5 References

   Note: many of these references identify posted messages to
   security-related mailing lists.  These messages often resulted in
   long threads that explore the related issues in more depth. 

5.1 Disclosure Policies

   RFPolicy 2.0
   http://www.wiretrip.net/rfp/policy.html

   Bugtraq Frequently Asked Questions
   http://www.securityfocus.com/popups/forums/bugtraq/faq.shtml

   NTBugtraq Disclosure Policy
   http://ntbugtraq.ntadvice.com/default.asp?sid=1&pid=47&aid=48

   CERT/CC Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
   http://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/html/disclosure/

   ACROS ASPR Notification and Publishing Policy
   http://www.acros.si/aspr_policy.html

   NMRC policy
   http://www.nmrc.org/advise/policy.txt

   @stake Security Advisory Disclosure Policy
   http://www.atstake.com/research/policy/index.html

5.2 Commentary on Disclosure Details

   "Full Disclosure is a necessary evil"
   Elias Levy
   SecurityFocus web site
   August 16, 2001
   http://www.securityfocus.com/news/238


Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   "It's Time to End Information Anarchy"
   Scott Culp
   Microsoft web site
   October 2001
   http://www.microsoft.com/technet/columns/security/noarch.asp

   "Security in an Open Electronic Society"
   Elias Levy
   SecurityFocus web site
   October 21, 2001.
   http://www.securityfocus.com/news/270

   "Full Disclosure"
   Bruce Schneier
   Crypto-Gram Newsletter
   November 15, 2001
   http://www.counterpane.com/crypto-gram-0111.html#1

   "Script Kiddies Suck"
   Marcus Ranum
   Black Hat Briefings presentation
   July 2000
   http://web.ranum.com/usenix/blackhat-2000-keynote.mp3

   "The Network Police Blotter: The Slaughter of the Innocents"
   Marcus Ranum
   ;Login: magazine
   October 2000
   http://web.ranum.com/usenix/ranum_5_temp.pdf

5.3 Commentary on Disclosure Process

   "Bugs in the Disclosure Process"
   Ivan Arce
   TISC Insight, Volume 3, Issue 3
   February 9, 2001
   http://tisc.corecom.com/newsletters/33.html

   "SUMMARY: Bug announcement rule of thumb."
   Bill Stout
   NTBugtraq mailing list
   August 13, 1998
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=ntbugtraq&m=90310164223252&w=2








Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   "Microsoft admits IE security alert lapse"
   Wendy McAuliffe
   ZDNet
   November 19, 2001
   http://www.zdnet.com/filters/printerfriendly/
   0,6061,2825716-2,00.html

   "RFP2K03: Contemplations on dvwssr.dll and its affects on life"
   Rain Forest Puppy
   Bugtraq mailing list
   April 20, 2000
   http://www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/56394

   "Xato Advisory: Win2k/XP Terminal Services IP Spoofing"
   Xato
   Bugtraq mailing list
   November 14, 2001
   http://www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/240248

   "Vulnerability Escrow (was: Extreme Hacking)"
   Crispin Cowan
   NFR Wizards mailing list
   July 7, 1999
   http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/nfr-wizards/1999_2/0416.html

   "Can we afford full disclosure of security holes?"
   Richard M. Smith
   Bugtraq mailing list
   August 10, 2001
   http://www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/203499


   "Anti-Web 'Vulnerability' is a false alarm"
   Doug Hoyte
   Vuln-Dev mailing list
   December 1, 2001
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=vuln-dev&m=100732828128718&w=2

   "Windows of Vulnerability: A Case Study Analysis"
   William A. Arbaugh, William L. Fithen, John McHugh
   IEEE Computer
   December 2000

   "Sun denies Unix flaw"
   John Geralds
   vnunet.com
   November 20, 2001
   http://www.vnunet.com/News/1126973



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   "Open Response To Microsoft Security - RE: It's Time to End
   Information Anarchy"
   Steve Manzuik
   Vuln-Dev mailing list
   October 17, 2001
   http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/vuln-dev/2001-q4/0195.html

   "A Step Towards Information Anarchy: A Call To Arms"
   hellNbak
   Nomad Mobile Research Center
   November 2, 2001
   http://www.nmrc.org/InfoAnarchy/InfoAnarchy.htm

   "To Disclose or Not to Disclose, That Is the Question"
   Mark Joseph Edwards
   Windows 2000 Magazine
   June 27, 2001
   http://www.windowsitsecurity.com/Articles/Index.cfm?ArticleID=21618

   "Towards a responsible vulnerability process"
   David LeBlanc
   NTBugtraq mailing list
   November 3, 2001
   http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/ntbugtraq/2001-q4/0097.html

5.4 Commentary on Advisories

   "Writing security advisories"
   Kurt Seifried
   September 10, 2001
   http://www.seifried.org/security/articles/
        20010910-writing-security-advisories.html

   "Xato commentary on MS security bulletins"
   Xato
   Bugtraq mailing list
   December 7, 2000
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=97626305317046&w=2

5.5 Commentary on Vendor Accessibility

   "Getting to the Third Wave of Security Responsiveness"
   Scott Culp
   January 2001
   http://www.microsoft.com/technet/columns/security/thrdwave.asp






Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


   "An informal analysis of vendor acknowledgement of vulnerabilities"
   Steve Christey, Barbara Pease
   Bugtraq mailing list
   March 11, 2001
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=98438570915835&w=2

   "Shockwave Flash buffer overflow"
   Neal Krawetz
   Bugtraq mailing list
   December 29, 2000
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=97845942432045&w=2

   "Re: Shockwave Flash buffer overflow"
   Peter Santangeli
   Bugtraq mailing list
   January 5, 2001
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=97897439808223&w=2

   "Re: SafeWord Agent for SSH (secure shell) vulnerability"
   Leif Nixon
   Bugtraq mailing list
   November 29, 2001
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=100706579514862&w=2

5.6 Discovery of Issues in the Wild

   "sadmind"
   Nancy Lin
   SF-INCIDENTS mailing list
   December 9, 1999
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=incidents&m=94476722417209&w=2

   "sadmind exploits (remote sparc/x86)"
   Marcy Abene
   Bugtraq mailing list
   December 10, 1999
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=94486731225359&w=2

   "IIS %c1%1c remote command execution"
   Rain Forest Puppy
   Bugtraq mailing list
   October 17, 2000
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=97180137413891&w=2








Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


5.7 Researcher Credibility and Vulnerability Reproduction

   "vCard DoS on Outlook 2000"
   Joel Moses
   Bugtraq mailing list
   August 31, 2000
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=96774764029236&w=2

   "Microsoft Outlook 2000 vCard Buffer Overrun"
   @stake
   February 26, 2001
   http://www.atstake.com/research/advisories/2001/a022301-1.txt

   "Re: Microsoft Security Bulletin MS01-012"
   Joel Moses
   Bugtraq mailing list
   February 23, 2001
   http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=bugtraq&m=98322714210100&w=2

5.8 Miscellaneous

   "Vulnerability disclosure publications and discussion tracking"
   University of Oulu
   November 20, 2001
   http://www.ee.oulu.fi/research/ouspg/sage/disclosure-tracking/

   "Devil in the details - why package signing matters"
   Kurt Seifried
   October 24, 2001
   http://www.seifried.org/security/articles/
        20011023-devil-in-details.html

6 Acknowledgements

   We gratefully acknowledge the constructive comments received from
   several contributors.  Any errors or inconsistencies in this document
   are solely the responsibility of the authors, and not of the
   reviewers.  This document does not necessarily reflect the opinion of
   the reviewers or their parent organizations. 

   We would like to thank Andy Balinsky, Mary Ann Davidson, Elias Levy,
   Russ Cooper, Scott Blake, Seth Arnold, Rain Forest Puppy, Marcus
   Ranum, Lori Woeler, Adam Shostack, Mark Loveless, Scott Culp, and
   Shawn Hernan for their valuable input. 

7 Security Considerations

   This entire document discusses security issues. 



Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft    Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure     February 2002


8 Authors' Addresses

   Steve Christey
   The MITRE Corporation
   202 Burlington Road
   Bedford, MA 01730
   USA

   E-Mail: coley@mitre.org

   Chris Wysopal
   @stake, Inc.
   196 Broadway
   Cambridge, MA 02139-1902
   USA

   E-Mail: cwysopal@atstake.com

9 Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organisations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English. 

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

   This document expires August 12, 2002. 




Christey & Wysopal             Expires August 2002              [Page 27]

