Network Working Group                                             X. Xu 
Internet Draft                                                    H. Ni 
Category: Standard Track                                         Huawei 
                                                                              
                                                           M. Boucadair 
                                                           C. Jacquenet 
                                                         France Telecom 
                                                                       
                                                                  N. So 
                                                    Tata Communications 
 
                                                                 Y. Fan 
                                                          China Telecom 
                                                                        
                                                                              
Expires: July 2014                                     January 16, 2014 
                                                                                
                                      
                  Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  
                                      
                    draft-xu-idr-performance-routing-00 

Abstract 

   The current BGP specification doesn't use network performance 
   metrics (e.g., network latency) in the route selection decision 
   process. This document describes a performance-based BGP routing 
   mechanism in which network latency metric is taken as one of the 
   route selection criteria. This routing mechanism is useful for those 
   server providers with global reach to deliver low-latency network 
   connectivity services to their customers. 

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the   
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute   
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-   
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 


 
 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 16, 2014. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the   
   document authors.  All rights reserved.  

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal   
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents   
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of   
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents   
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction ................................................ 3 
   2. Terminology ................................................. 3 
   3. Performance Route Advertisement ............................. 4 
   4. Capability Advertisement .................................... 5 
   5. Performance Route Selection ................................. 6 
   6. Deployment Considerations ................................... 6 
   7. Security Considerations ..................................... 6 
   8. IANA Considerations ......................................... 7 
   9. Acknowledgements ............................................ 7 
   10. References ................................................. 7 
      10.1. Normative References .................................. 7 
      10.2. Informative References ................................ 7 
   Authors' Addresses ............................................. 8 









 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
    
1. Introduction 

   Network performance, especially network latency is widely recognized 
   as one of major obstacles in migrating business applications to the 
   cloud, especially in the case where the network paths between cloud 
   users and cloud data centers traverse more than one Autonomous 
   System (AS), and would therefore stretch the forwarding path. 
   However, the current Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) specification 
   [RFC4271] which is used for path selection across ASes (Autonomous 
   Systems) doesn't use network performance metrics (e.g., network 
   latency) in the route selection process. As such, the best route 
   selected based upon the existing BGP route selection criteria may 
   not be the best from the customer experience perspective.  

   This document describes a performance-based BGP routing mechanism in 
   which network performance metrics are conveyed as additional path 
   attributes of the Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) and 
   used in the route selection decisions. So far it's only the network 
   latency metric that would be used in the performance-based route 
   selection decisions. This mechanism is useful for those server 
   providers with global reach, which usually own more than one AS, to 
   deliver low-latency network connectivity services to their customers.  

   For the sake of simplicity, this document considers only one 
   performance metric that's the network latency metric. The support of 
   multiple attributes is out of scope of this document.  

   To make the performance routing paradigm and the vanilla routing 
   paradigm coexist, performance routes should be exchanged as labeled 
   routes as per [RFC3107] while using a specified Subsequent Address 
   Family Identifier (SAFI). As such, network providers deploying such 
   mechanism in their networks may provide the performance routing 
   service as a value-added service to those customers with low latency 
   need, while continually offering the vanilla routing service to the 
   remaining customers as before. 

   A variant of this performance-based BGP routing is implemented [URL: 
   http://www.ist-mescal.org/roadmap/qbgp-demo.avi]. 

2. Terminology 

   This memo makes use of the terms defined in [RFC4271].  

   Network latency indicates the amount of time it takes for a packet 
   to traverse a given network path [RFC2679]. Provided a packet was 
   forwarded along a path which contains multiple links and routers, 

 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
   the network latency would be the sum of the transmission latency of 
   each link (i.e., link latency), plus the sum of the internal delay 
   occurred within each router (i.e., router latency) which includes 
   queuing latency and processing latency. The sum of the link latency 
   is also known as the cumulative link latency. In today's service 
   provider networks which usually span across a wide geographical area, 
   the cumulative link latency becomes the major part of the network 
   latency since the total of the internal latency happened within each 
   high-capacity router seems trivial compared to the cumulative link 
   latency. In other words, the cumulative link latency could 
   approximately represent the network latency in the above networks.  

   Furthermore, since the link latency is more stable than the router 
   latency, such approximate network latency represented by the 
   cumulative link latency is more stable. Therefore, if there was a 
   way to calculate the cumulative link latency of a given network path, 
   it is strongly recommended to use such cumulative link latency to 
   approximately represent the network latency. Otherwise, the network 
   latency would have to be measured frequently by some means (e.g., 
   PING or other measurement tools).  

3. Performance Route Advertisement 

   Performance routes SHOULD be exchanged between BGP peers by using a 
   specified Subsequent Address Family Identifier (SAFI) of TBD (see 
   IANA Section). Meanwhile, these routes SHOULD be carried as labeled 
   routes as per [RFC3107].  

   A BGP speaker SHOULD NOT advertise performance routes to a 
   particular BGP peer unless that peer indicates, through BGP 
   capability advertisement (see Section 4), that it can process update 
   messages with the specified SAFI field.  

   Network latency metric is attached to the performance routes as one 
   additional path attribute, referred to as NETWORK_LATENCY path 
   attribute, which is a well-known mandatory attribute. This attribute 
   indicates the network latency in microseconds from the BGP speaker 
   depicted by the NEXT_HOP path attribute to the address depicted by 
   the NLRI prefix. The type code of this attribute is TBD (see IANA 
   Section), and the value field is 4 octets in length. In some 
   abnormal cases, if the cumulative link latency exceeds the maximum 
   value of 0xFFFFFFFF, the value field SHOULD be set to 0xFFFFFFFF. 

   A BGP speaker SHOULD be configurable to enable or disable the 
   origination/creation of performance routes. If enabled, a local 
   latency value for a given to-be-originated performance route MUST be 


 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
   configured to the BGP speaker so that it can be filled to the 
   NETWORK_LATENCY attribute of that performance route. 

   When distributing a selected performance route learnt from one BGP 
   peer to another, unless this BGP speaker has set itself as the 
   NEXT_HOP of such route, the NETWORK_LATENCY path attribute of such 
   route MUST NOT be modified. Otherwise when setting itself as the 
   NEXT_HOP of such route, this BGP speaker SHOULD increase the value 
   of the NETWORK_LATENCY path attribute by adding the network latency 
   value from itself to the previous NEXT_HOP of such route. It is 
   RECOMMENDED to use the cumulative link latency from this BGP speaker 
   to the NEXT_HOP to represent the network latency between them if 
   possible. Otherwise, the measured network latency between them can 
   be used instead. It is RECOMMENDED that the type of network latency 
   SHOULD be kept consistent across all these AS's (i.e., either 
   cumulative link latency or measured network latency, choose one).  

   As for how to obtain the network latency to a given BGP NEXT_HOP is 
   outside the scope of this document. However, note that the path 
   latency to the NEXT HOP SHOULD approximately represent the network 
   latency of the exact forwarding path towards the NEXT_HOP. For 
   example, if a BGP speaker uses a Traffic Engineering (TE) Label 
   Switching Path (LSP) from itself to the NEXT_HOP, rather than the 
   shortest path calculated by Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP), the 
   latency to the NEXT HOP SHOULD reflect the network latency of that 
   TE LSP path, rather than the IGP shortest path. 

   To keep performance routes stable enough, a BGP speaker SHOULD use a 
   configurable threshold of network latency fluctuation to suppress 
   any update which would otherwise be triggered just by a minor 
   network latency fluctuation below that threshold. 

4. Capability Advertisement 

   A BGP speaker that uses multiprotocol extensions to advertise 
   performance routes SHOULD use the Capabilities Optional Parameter, 
   as defined in [RFC5492], to inform its peers about this capability. 

   The MP_EXT Capability Code, as defined in [RFC4760], is used to 
   advertise the (AFI, SAFI) pairs available on a particular connection. 

   A BGP speaker that implements the Performance Routing Capability   
   MUST support the BGP Labeled Route Capability, as defined in 
   [RFC3107]. A BGP speaker that advertises the Performance Routing 
   Capability to a peer using BGP Capabilities advertisement [RFC5492] 
   does not have to advertise the BGP Labeled Route Capability to that 
   peer. 

 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
5. Performance Route Selection 

   Performance route selection only requires the following modification 
   to the tie-breaking procedures of the BGP route selection decision 
   (phase 2) described in [RFC4271]: network latency metric comparison 
   SHOULD be executed just ahead of the AS-Path Length comparison step.  

   Prior to executing the network latency metric comparison, the value 
   of the NETWORK_LATENCY path attribute SHOULD be increased by adding 
   the network latency from the BGP speaker to the NEXT_HOP of that 
   route. In the case where a router reflector is deployed without 
   next-hop-self enabled when reflecting received routes from one IBGP 
   peer to other IBGP peer, it is RECOMMENDED to enable such route 
   reflector to reflect all received performance routes by using some 
   mechanisms such as [ADD-PATH], rather than reflecting only the 
   performance route which is the best from its own perspective. 
   Otherwise, it may result in a non-optimal choice by its clients 
   and/or its IBGP peers. 

   The Loc-RIB of performance routing paradigm is independent from that 
   of vanilla routing paradigm. Accordingly, the routing table of 
   performance routing paradigm is independent from that of the vanilla 
   routing paradigm. Whether performance routing paradigm or vanilla 
   routing paradigm would be used for a given packet is a local policy 
   issue which is outside the scope of this document.   

6. Deployment Considerations 

   It is RECOMMENDED to deploy this performance-based BGP routing 
   mechanism across multiple ASes which are within a single 
   administrative domain. Within each AS, it is RECOMMENTED to deliver 
   a packet from a BGP speaker to the BGP NEXT_HOP via tunnels, 
   especially TE LSP tunnels. Furthermore, it is RECOMMENDED to use the 
   latency metric carried in Unidirectional Link Delay Sub-TLV [OSPF-
   TE-EXT] [ISIS-TE-EXT] if possible, rather than the TE metric 
   [RFC3630] [RFC5305] to perform the C-SPF calculation, unless the TE 
   metric has already been set to the link latency metric. In this way, 
   it could avoid the need for timely measurement of network latency 
   between IBGP peers. 

7. Security Considerations 

   In addition to the considerations discussed in [RFC4271], the 
   following items should be considered: 




 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
        Tweaking the value of the NETWORK_LATENCY by an illegitimate 
        party may influence the route selection process. Means to check 
        the integrity of BGP messages are RECOMMENDED. 

        Frequent updates of the NETWORK_LATENCY attribute may have a 
        severe impact on the stability of the routing system. Such 
        practice SHOULD be avoided.  

8. IANA Considerations 

   A new BGP Capability Code for the Performance Routing Capability, a 
   new SAFI specific for performance routing and a new path attribute 
   for NETWORK_LATENCY are required to be allocated by IANA. 

9. Acknowledgements 

   Thanks to Joel Halpern, Alvaro Retana, Jim Uttaro, Robert Raszuk, 
   Eric Rosen, Qing Zeng, Jie Dong and Mach Chen for their valuable 
   comments on the initial idea of this document. 

10. References 

   10.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate               
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC5226] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an           
             IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,            
             May 2008.  

   [RFC4271] Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway              
             Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.  

   [RFC3107] Rekhter, Y. and E. Rosen, "Carrying Label                     
             Information in BGP-4", RFC 3107, May 2001. 

   10.2. Informative References 

   [RFC5492] Chandra, R. and J. Scudder, "Capabilities Advertisement            
             with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009. 

   [RFC4760] Bates, T., Rekhter, Y, Chandra, R. and D. Katz,                 
             "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January 
             2007. 



 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
   [RFC2679] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way             
             Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999. 

   [OSPF-TE-EXT] Giacalone, S., Ward, D., Drake, J., Atlas, A., and S.          
             Previdi, "OSPF Traffic Engineering (TE) Metric              
             Extensions", draft-ietf-ospf-te-metric-extensions-02 (work         
             in progress), December 2012. 

   [ISIS-TE-EXT] Previdi, S., Giacalone, S., Ward, D., Drake, J., Atlas,       
             A., and C. Filsfils, "IS-IS Traffic Engineering (TE)              
             Metric Extensions", draft-previdi-isis-te-metric-
             extensions-02 (work in progress), October 2012. 

   [RFC3630] Katz, D., Kompella, K., Yeung, D., "Traffic             
             Engineering (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630,          
             September 2003. 

   [RFC5305] Li, T. and H. Smit, "IS-IS Extensions for Traffic              
             Engineering", RFC 5305, October 2008. 

   [ADD-PATH] D. Walton, A. Retana, E. Chen, J. Scudder, "Advertisement 
             of Multiple Paths in BGP", draft-ietf-idr-add-paths-09 
             (work in progress), October 2013. 

Authors' Addresses 

   Xiaohu Xu 
   Huawei Technologies, 
   Beijing, China 
   Phone: +86-10-60610041 
   Email: xuxiaohu@huawei.com 
    
    
   Hui Ni 
   Huawei Technologies, 
   Beijing, China 
   Phone: +86-10-606100212 
   Email: nihui@huawei.com 
    
    
   Mohamed Boucadair 
   France Telecom 
   Rennes, France 
   EMail: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com 
    
    
   Christian Jacquenet 

 
 
Xu, et al.              Expires July 16, 2014                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft    Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism  January 2014 
 
   Orange 
   Rennes France 
   Email: christian.jacquenet@orange.com 
    
    
   Ning So 
   Tata Communications 
   Plano, TX 75082, USA 
   Email: ning.so@tatacommunications.com 
    
    
   Yongbing Fan  
   China Telecom  
   Guangzhou, China.  
   Phone: +86 20 38639121  
   Email: fanyb@gsta.com 


























