Internet-Draft                                               Phil Macias
RFC:                                                           NOAA/GFDL
Updates: 1505, 561, 533, 2111                                6 June 2002
Category: Standards track


	    A Mail Header for Sequential Message Numbering
                    draft-macias-seq-numbering-00.txt


Status of this Memo


       This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
       provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work
     in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html




    This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
    the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
    for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
    "Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
    standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
    of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice    

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 

Abstract

    This memo describes a proposed mail header to allow tracking of
    message numbers for mail generated by listservs. Inclusion of the
    message number in the Subject: field confounds threading in
    archiving software.

Introduction

    Listservs such as majordomo allow multiple users to follow and
    respond to multiple subject threads.  Mail client software allows
    individuals to further organize list mail based on selection
    rules such as author and subject heading.  It is common that an
    individual will have split up the messages from a particular list
    into several mail folders making it difficult to find a particular
    list message.  Searching is further hindered by continued use of
    the "Reply" function of the mail client; many list messages have
    the same Subject:.
    
    If the listserv attaches a sequential message number to each
    list message it is possible to find a particular mail message
    knowing the list name and sequential message number.
    
    Message-IDs are in themselves too long to be of practical use to
    users in tracking messages.
    
    Message archiving software sort mail into threads based on either
    the Subject: or Message-ID:.  Attaching the sequential message
    number to the Subject: field confounds threading based on
    Subject:.
    
    The proposed header would be called "Message-number". 



Macias                         Standards track                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Sequential Message Numbering        6 June 2002

Format of the Message-number

    The format of the Message-number is:
    
        Message-number: <number>  := positive sequential integer

Normative References    

    Walden, David, "MESSAGE-ID NUMBER", RFC 533, July 1973
    
    Levinson, E., "Content-ID and Message-ID Uniform Resource
    Locator", RFC 2111, March 1997

Security Considerations    

    This RFC describes the Security Considerations sections of an RFC.

Authors' Addresses

    Phil Macias
    307 Trinity Court #9
    Princeton, NJ, 08540
    
    609 203 5874 (cell)
    
    pmacias@gfdl.noaa.gov

Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.
    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
    to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
    explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared,
    copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
    restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
    and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
    works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
    way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
    Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
    for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
    procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
    process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
    languages other than English.
    
    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
    be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
    
    This document and the information contained herein is provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
    THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
    PURPOSE."


Macias                         Standards track                  [Page 2]
