INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  G. White
draft-vaudreuil-futuredelivery-01.txt                   Comnet Messaging
Updates: RFC 3464                                           G. Vaudreuil
Expires: December 2003                               Lucent Technologies
                                                               June 2003


         SMTP Submission Service Extension for Future Delivery


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
   updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It
   is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
   cite them other than as a "work in progress".

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo defines an extension to the SMTP submission protocol for
   client indication of a future-delivery time.  This extension permits
   a client to use server-based storage for a message that should be
   held in queue until an appointed time in the future.  This is useful
   for clients which do not have local storage or are otherwise unable
   to release a message for delivery at an appointed time.














White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ..................................................  3
   2. Framework .....................................................  3
   3. Mechanism .....................................................  4
      3.1 Behavior ..................................................  5
      3.2 Interaction with the AUTH SMTP service extension ..........  6
      3.3 Interaction with the DSN SMTP service extension ...........  6
      3.4 Interaction with the DELIVERBY SMTP service extension .....  7
   4. Security Considerations .......................................  7
   5. Acknowledgments ...............................................  8
   6. References ....................................................  9
   7. Copyright Notice .............................................. 10
   8. Authors' Addresses ............................................ 10
   9. Change Log .................................................... 10







































White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


1. Introduction

   There is a widely-used feature within the voice messaging community
   to compose and send a message for delivery in the future.  This is
   useful for sending announcements to be heard at the beginning of a
   work day, to send birthday greetings a day or so ahead, or to use as
   a lightweight facility to build a personal reminder service.

   This extension uses the SMTP submission protocol [3] to allow an
   authenticated client to submit, to a Message Submission Agent (MSA),
   a message for future delivery.

2. Framework

   The Future Delivery service extension for SMTP submission uses the
   SMTP service extension mechanism [5] to extend the SMTP submission
   protocol [3].  The following SMTP submission service extension is
   hereby defined:

   The name of the SMTP submission service extension is "Future
   Delivery".

   1)  The EHLO keyword value associated with this service extension is
       "FUTUREDELIVERY".

   2) One optional parameter, the max-future-delivery-interval, is
      allowed with this EHLO keyword value.

      This value is a fixed, non-negative integer indicating the maximum
      amount of time (in seconds) for which the MSA will accept & hold
      messages for future delivery.  If this value is zero, there is no
      MSA-imposed limit to the maximum future delivery interval.  If the
      parameter is omitted, no information is conveyed about the maximum
      future delivery interval.

      Using Augmented BNF [2], the syntax of this parameter is as
      follows:

         futuredelivery-param         = max-future-delivery-interval
         max-future-delivery-interval = [1*9DIGIT]

   3) One required parameter, the future-delivery-interval, is added to
      the MAIL command using the keyword "AFTER".

      This value is a fixed, positive integer indicating the amount of
      time (in seconds) the message is to be held by the MSA before
      relay.

         future-delivery-interval-param = "AFTER="[1*9DIGIT]

      The absence of this parameter on the MAIL command does not imply a
      default value for this parameter.


White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


   4) The maximum length of a MAIL command is increased by 16 characters
      by the possible addition of the AFTER keyword and value.

   5) No additional SMTP verbs are defined by this extension.

   6) The FUTUREDELIVERY service extension can only be used in
      conjunction with the AUTH service extension [4].

   7) This service extension is appropriate only for the SMTP
      submission protocol [3].  This service extension is not
      appropriate for standard SMTP [5].

3. Mechanism

   An MSA that supports Future Delivery also supports the Authorization
   service extension [4].  An MSA that advertises support for Future
   Delivery also advertises support for Authorization in the same EHLO
   reply.  An MSA that advertises support for Future Delivery without
   advertising support for Authorization is error, and SMTP clients will
   not use Future Delivery on this MSA.

   An SMTP client wishing to use Future Delivery issues the EHLO command
   to start an SMTP session and determine if the MSA supports Future
   Delivery and Authorization.  If the MSA responds with reply code 250
   to the EHLO command, and the response includes the EHLO keywords
   FUTUREDELIVERY and AUTH, then Future Delivery is supported by the
   MSA.

   If a numeric value follows the FUTUREDELIVERY keyword, this value
   indicates the maximum amount of time (in seconds) the MSA is willing
   to hold a message for future delivery.  Messages submitted with a
   future-delivery-interval greater than this value are rejected by the
   MSA.

   If the MSA supports Future Delivery and Authorization, the SMTP
   client then issues the AUTH command.  If this command is rejected by
   the MSA, then the client is not allowed to issue a MAIL command
   containing a future-delivery-interval parameter.  Only after the MSA
   accepts an AUTH command is the client allowed to issue a MAIL command
   containing a future-delivery-interval parameter.

   The SMTP client then issues a MAIL command containing a future-
   delivery-interval parameter and an authorization parameter.  If the
   authorization parameter is invalid, the MSA rejects the MAIL command.
   If the value of the future-delivery-interval parameter is greater
   that the MSA's advertised max-future-delivery-interval, or is
   otherwise invalid, the MSA rejects the MAIL command.  If both
   parameters are valid, and there are no other errors on the MAIL
   command, the MSA accepts that command.

   The future-delivery-interval parameter is stated as a time interval
   to prevent problems associated with differences in system clocks


White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


   between SMTP clients and MSAs.  MSAs in receipt of a valid future-
   delivery-interval parameter are expected to convert the parameter
   into a locale-specific absolute time called the future-delivery-time.
   This is done by adding the future-delivery-interval to the locale-
   specific message receipt time.   The MSA is expected to assume that
   the transmission time of the MAIL command is instantaneous.

   If the MSA accepts a message with a future-delivery request, then the
   MSA delivers/relays the message after the MSA's system clock passes
   the future-delivery time.

3.1 Behavior

3.1.1 SMTP client behavior

   1) An SMTP client wishing to use Future Delivery MUST include a
      future-delivery-interval parameter with the MAIL command.

   2) An SMTP client MUST NOT send a MAIL command containing a future-
      delivery-interval parameter whose value is strictly larger than
      the value of the max-future-delivery-interval parameter advertised
      in the MSA's reply to the EHLO command.

3.1.2 MSA behavior

   1) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST comply with the SMTP
      submission protocol as described in [3].

   2) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST comply with the SMTP
      service extension mechanism as described in [5].

   3) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST advertise support for
      same by including the FUTUREDELIVERY keyword in its reply to the
      EHLO command.

   4) An MSA that supports Future Delivery and wishes to enforce a
      maximum amount of time that a message will be held for future
      delivery MUST advertise that amount of time by including a max-
      future-delivery-interval parameter with the FUTUREDELIVERY keyword
      in the reply to the EHLO command.

   5) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST accept a MAIL command
      containing a valid future-delivery-interval (given that the MAIL
      command contains no other errors).

   6) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST reject a MAIL command
      containing a future-delivery-interval parameter whose value is
      strictly greater than the value of the advertised max-future-
      delivery-interval parameter.

   7) An MSA that accepts a message with a request for Future Delivery
      MUST NOT attempt to deliver or relay the message until the amount


White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


      of time specified in the future-delivery-interval parameter
      elapses.

3.2 Interaction with the AUTH SMTP service extension

   The Authentication service extension is described in [4].

3.2.1 SMTP client interaction with AUTH

   1) An SMTP client wishing to use Future Delivery MUST use this
      extension only when the MSA advertises support for both
      Authentication AND Future Delivery in the same reply to an EHLO
      command.

   2) An SMTP client wishing to use Future Delivery MUST first become
      authenticated via the AUTH command mechanism described in [4].

   3) An SMTP client wishing to use Future Delivery MUST issue a MAIL
      command that includes a valid authorization parameter along with
      the aforementioned future-delivery-interval parameter.

3.2.2 MSA Interaction with AUTH

   1) An MSA that supports Future Delivery MUST also support
      Authentication.

   2) An MSA that advertises support for Future Delivery in the reply
      to an EHLO command MUST also advertise support for Authentication
      in the same reply.

   3) When an MSA receives a MAIL command containing a future-delivery-
      interval parameter, and the MSA has not yet authenticated the
      client via the AUTH command mechanism described in [4], then the
      MSA MUST reject the MAIL command for security reasons as described
      in [5].

   4) When an MSA receives a MAIL command containing an invalid
      authorization parameter, the MSA MUST reject the command for
      security reasons as described in [5].  The validity or invalidity
      of the associated future-delivery-interval parameter is immaterial
      in this case.

3.3 Interaction with the DSN SMTP service extension

   The Delivery Status Notification (DSN) service extension is described
   in [8], and DSN message format is described in [10].

3.3.1 SMTP client interaction with DSN

   1) An SMTP client MUST NOT request Future Delivery when sending a
      DSN to the MSA.



White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


3.3.2 MSA interaction with DSN

   1) When an MSA generates a DSN for a message that includes a future
      delivery request, the MSA MUST include an Arrival-Date: field in
      the machine-readable body part of the DSN.

   2) When an MSA generates a DSN for a message that includes a future
      delivery request, the MSA MUST include a Future-Delivery-Date:
      field in the machine-readable body part of the DSN.

      The Future-Delivery-Date: field is an extension to the set of DSN
      per-message fields described in [10].  Using Augmented BNF [2],
      the syntax of this new field is as follows:

         future-delivery-date-field = "Future-Delivery-Date:" date-time

      The date-time value is the absolute future-delivery-time the MSA
      calculated when the message was received.  The date-time format is
      described in [6].

3.4 Interaction with the DELIVERBY SMTP service extension

   If an MSA supports the Future Delivery and Deliver By service
   extensions, it is possible for an SMTP client to make simultaneous
   requests for future delivery and deliver-by times when submitting a
   message.  A problem will occur if the future-delivery-date is farther
   in the future than the deliver-by-date.  In order to honor the
   deliver-by request, the future-delivery request has to be ignored.
   In order to honor the future-delivery request, the deliver-by request
   has to be ignored.  This section addresses that problem.  The Deliver
   By extension is described in [7].

3.4.1 SMTP client interaction with DELIVERBY

   1) When an SMTP client wishes to use the Future Delivery and Deliver
      By extensions with the same message, the value of the future-
      delivery-interval parameter MUST be strictly less than the value
      of the accompanying by-time parameter.

3.4.2 MSA interaction with DELIVERBY

   1) If an MSA supports Future Delivery and Deliver By, and receives
      a MAIL command containing a future-delivery-interval parameter
      whose value is greater than or equal to the value of the by-time
      parameter, the MSA MUST reject that MAIL command.

4. Security Considerations

   The Future Delivery service extension presents a number of security
   considerations:

   1) Unauthenticated future delivery messages provide a means to


White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


      overwhelm the storage of an MSA.  The Future Delivery service
      extension must always be used in conjunction with the
      Authentication service extension.

   2) Authenticated future delivery without a per-user quota may also
      provide a way to overwhelm an MSA's storage.  It is highly
      recommended that the future-delivery storage be subject to a per-
      user quota.

   3) Some element of deception is inherent the future delivery concept.
      The message arrival time is intentionally delayed past the time it
      would otherwise be received.  This extension provides no mechanism
      for hiding this from the message recipient.  The RFC2822 message
      header, including the sent timestamp remain the same as they were
      submitted.  While a sending client may elect to place the future-
      delivery-time as the date in the RFC2822 Date: field, there is no
      requirement or expectation that the Received: fields and other
      trace information be modified by the transport system to further
      this deception.

5. Acknowledgments

   This document was written using [7], written by Dan Newman, as a
   template.  The document structure and many of the words have been
   recycled as appropriate.





























White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


6. References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [3]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission", RFC 2476,
        December 1998.

   [4]  Myers, J., "SMTP Service Extension for Authentication", RFC
        2554, March 1999.

   [5]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821, April
        2001.

   [6]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822, April 2001.

   [7]  Newman, D., "Deliver By SMTP Service Extension", RFC 2852, June
        2000.

   [8]  Moore, K., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
        Extension for Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs)", RFC 3461,
        January 2003.

   [9]  Vaudreuil, G., "Enhanced Mail System Status Codes", RFC 3463,
        January 2003.

   [10] Moore, K. and G. Vaudreuil, " An Extensible Message Format for
        Delivery Status Notifications", RFC 3464, January 2003.























White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT            SMTP Future Delivery                 June 2003


7. Copyright Notice

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process MUST be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

8. Authors' Addresses

   Gregory A. White
   Comnet Messaging
   Richardson, TX
   USA
   Voice: +1-972-201-0193
   E-Mail: gregwhite@lucent.com

   Gregory M. Vaudreuil
   Lucent Technologies
   Dallas, TX
   USA
   Voice: +1-972-733-2722
   E-Mail: gregv@ieee.org

9. Change Log

Changes from -00.txt to -01.txt:

   1) Removed all of the IMAP4 references.

   2) Filled in all of the reference numbers.



White & Vaudreuil        Expires December 2003                 [Page 10]
