


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: June 7, 2009                                         Technology
                                                        December 4, 2008


                Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-cbhe-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 7, 2009.

Abstract

   This document describes a convention for representing Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) endpoint identifiers in a
   compressed manner within the primary blocks of bundles.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].





Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Compression convention  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.1.  Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.2.  Reception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8





































Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a convention for representing Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] endpoint identifiers
   in a compressed manner within the primary blocks of bundles.

   Each DTN bundle's primary block contains four BP endpoint identifiers
   (EIDs), of which any two, any three, or even all four may be
   lexically identical: the endpoint identifiers of the source, the
   destination, the report-to endpoint, and the current custodian.  Each
   EID is a Uniform Record Identifier (URI) as defined by [RFC3986].

   A degree of block compression is provided by the design of the
   primary block: the scheme names and scheme-specific parts of the four
   endpoints' IDs - up to eight NULL-terminated strings - are
   concatenated at the end of the block in a variable-length character
   array called a "dictionary", enabling each EID to be represented by a
   pair of integers indicating the offsets (within the dictionary) of
   the EID's scheme name and scheme-specific part.  Duplicate strings
   may be omitted from the dictionary, so the actual number of
   concatenated NULL-terminated strings in the dictionary may be less
   than eight and two or more of the scheme name or scheme-specific part
   offsets in the block may have the same value.  Moreover, the eight
   offsets in the primary block are encoded as self-delimiting numeric
   values (SDNVs), which shrink to fit the encoded values; when the
   total length of the dictionary is less than 127 bytes, all eight
   offsets can be encoded into just eight bytes.

   However, these strategems do not prevent the scheme names and scheme-
   specific parts themselves from being arbitrarily lengthy strings of
   ASCII text.  It is therefore still possible for the length of a
   bundle's primary header to be a very large fraction of the total
   length of the bundle when the bundle's payload is relatively small,
   as is anticipated for a number of DTN applications such as space
   flight operations.

   The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) convention was developed
   to improve DTN transmission efficiency for such applications by
   further reducing the number of bytes used to express EIDs in the
   primary blocks of bundles.


2.  Compression convention

2.1.  Constraints

   Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) is possible only when all
   non-null endpoint IDs in the primary block of a given bundle (that



Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


   is, all endpoint IDs in the primary block that are not "dtn:none")
   are "CBHE-conformant".

   Two classes of endpoint IDs are CBHE-conformant.

   First, any endpoint ID whose scheme name is "ipn" is CBHE-conformant.
   The scheme specification for the "ipn" scheme requires that the hier-
   part be a path-rootless of the form NODE_NUMBER.SERVICE_NUMBER.  For
   example, "ipn:9.37" would be a valid URI and a CBHE-conformant
   endpoint ID.

   Second, any endpoint ID whose scheme name is "dtn" and whose
   authority component is "cbhe.ccsds.org" is CBHE-conformant.  The
   scheme specification for the "dtn" scheme requires that the path
   component of each URI formed within the "dtn" scheme that is
   characterized by authority component "cbhe.ccsds.org" be a path-
   absolute of the form /NODE_NUMBER.SERVICE_NUMBER.  For example,
   "dtn://cbhe.ccsds.org/9.37" would be a valid URI and a CBHE-
   conformant endpoint ID.

   CBHE-conformant endpoint IDs of both classes that have the same node
   number and service number are equivalent and interchangeable
   identifiers for the same endpoint.

   By convention, node number is some non-negative integer that
   identifies a BP node.  In a spacecraft flight operations context, for
   example, spacecraft identifier might be used as node number.

   Node number zero is used to indicate the null endpoint.  Any CBHE-
   conformant EID whose node number is zero, regardless of service
   number, is interpreted as an alternative representation of the
   standard null endpoint ID "dtn:none".

   By convention, service number is a non-negative integer that
   functions as a de-multiplexing token.  When the protocol encapsulated
   within BP has its own de-multiplexing identifiers, the service number
   may function in a manner similar to that of the protocol number in an
   IP packet, characterizing the bundle payload; alternatively, the
   service number may function in a manner similar to that of the port
   number in a UDP datagram.  Service numbers enable inbound bundles'
   application data units to be de-multiplexed to instances of
   application functionality that are designed to process them, so that
   effective communication relationships can be developed between bundle
   producers and consumers.

   Service number zero is reserved for BP administrative traffic, i.e.,
   custody signals and bundle status reports.  Service number must be
   zero whenever a CBHE-conformant EID is used as the source or



Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


   destination EID of a custody signal.  Service number may be zero
   whenever a CBHE-conformant EID is used as the source or destination
   EID of a bundle status report.

   Conversion of a CBHE-conformant EID to and from a tuple of two
   integers is therefore straightforward.  This ease of conversion
   enables an array of integers to serve the same function as a
   dictionary of EID ASCII strings.

2.2.  Method

   When the constraints summarized above are met, the CBHE block
   compression method can be applied.  In a CBHE-compressed primary
   block, the eight SDNVs that normally contain EIDs' offsets within the
   dictionary are instead used to contain the eight integer values
   listed below, in the order shown:

   1.  The node number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   2.  The service number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   3.  The node number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the source
       endpoint is the null endpoint.

   4.  The service number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the
       source endpoint is the null endpoint.

   5.  The node number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   6.  The service number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   7.  The node number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero if
       the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   8.  The constant BP administration service number zero.

   Further, the dictionary is omitted from the primary block and the
   primary block's dictionary length is set to zero.

   This compression method is applied at the convergence layer: the
   transmitting convergence-layer adaptation compresses the primary
   block as shown above.  Upon reception the receiving convergence-layer
   adaptation de-compresses the block by simply reversing the process;
   the scheme of each resulting endpoint identifier may be either "ipn"



Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


   or "dtn", an implementation choice.


3.  Specification

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

   Bundle Protocol convergence-layer adapters that conform to the CBHE
   specification must implement the following procedures.

3.1.  Transmission

   When and only when required by the bundle protocol agent to transmit
   to some CBHE-conformant convergence-layer adapter a bundle whose
   primary block's endpoint IDs satisfy the constraints identified in
   section 2.1 above and whose extension blocks (if any) contain no
   citations of endpoint IDs that are contained in the primary block's
   dictionary, the convergence layer adapter may encode the primary
   block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE compression
   convention described in section 2.2 above.

3.2.  Reception

   Upon receiving a bundle whose dictionary length is zero (and only in
   this circumstance), the convergence layer adapter must decode the
   primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE compression
   convention described in section 2.2 above before delivering it to the
   bundle protocol agent.


4.  IANA Considerations

   Permanent registration of the scheme name "ipn" will be requested.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


5.  Security Considerations

   CBHE introduces no new security considerations beyond those discussed
   in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Bundle Security Protocol
   specifications.




Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov




























Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     December 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Burleigh                  Expires June 7, 2009                  [Page 8]


