

CCAMP Working Group                                    D. Papadimitriou
Internet Draft                                                  Alcatel
Document: draft-lin-ccamp-gmpls-ason-rqts-00.txt 
                                                                 Z. Lin
                                                                 Lucent

                                                          O. Aboul-Magd
                                                                 Nortel

                                                          D. Pendarakis
                                                                Tellium
 
Expiration Date: February 2003                              August 2002
 
 
     Requirements for Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Usage and Extensions 
           For Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   The GMPLS suite of protocol specifications has been defined to 
   provide support for different technologies as well as different 
   applications. These include support for requesting TDM connections 
   based on SDH/SONET as well as Optical Transport Networks (OTNs).  
    



  
Lin                                                                  1 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   This document concentrates on the signaling aspects of the GMPLS 
   suite of protocols. It identifies functions to be covered by these 
   signaling protocols to support the capabilities of an ASON network. 
    
   This document provides additional requirements on the GMPLS signaling 
   protocols to support the ASON functionality. 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. Introduction 
    
   The GMPLS suite of protocol specifications has been defined to 
   provide support for different technologies as well as different 
   applications. These include support for requesting TDM connections 
   based on SDH/SONET as well as Optical Transport Networks (OTNs), and 
   for setting up connections with monitoring capabilities. In addition, 
   there are certain capabilities that are needed to support 
   applications as described in ITU-T ASTN (Automatically Switched 
   Transport Networks) Requirements [G807], ASON (Automatically Switched 
   Optical Networks) Architecture and Requirements [G8080], Distributed 
   Connection Management [G7713]. These include generic capabilities 
   such as call and connection separation and more specific capabilities 
   such as support of soft permanent connections. More details about 
   these requirements may also be found in [IPO-RQTS] and [ASON-RQTS]. 
    
   This document concentrates on the signaling aspects of the GMPLS 
   suite of protocols. It discusses functional requirements that would 
   lead to additional extensions to GMPLS to support the capabilities as 
   specified in the above referenced documents. 
    
    
3.1 Relationship of ASON to GMPLS 
    
   The Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON) architecture (as 
   specified by various ITU-T Recommendations) describes the application 
   of an automated control plane for supporting connection management 
   services for the transport plane. The ASON architecture is described 
   based on the functions supported, and the interactions of various 
   functions with each other. These include specification of the call 
   and connection controllers, as well as link resource managers (for a 

  
Lin                                                                  2 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   detailed description see [G8080]). The ASON control plane 
   specification is meant to be applicable to different transport 
   technologies (e.g., SDH/SONET, OTN) in various networking 
   environments (e.g., inter-carrier, intra-carrier), supporting 
   different types of interfaces (e.g., Interior NNI (I-NNI), Exterior 
   NNI (E-NNI), UNI). The ASTN meta-modeling framework and the ASON 
   architectural model provided in ITU-T may be used as a foundation for 
   developing and/or extending the protocols to support specific 
   functions of ASON. A full description of the ASON terms and 
   relationship between ASON model and GMPLS protocol suite may be found 
   in [IPO-RQTS].  
    
   Automation of the connection management services may be realized in a 
   number of ways, including the use of the suite of GMPLS protocols to 
   support distributed connection management.  
    
    
3.2 Applicability of GMPLS to ASON 
    
   Most of the applicability statements regarding how the GMPLS suite of 
   protocols may be applied to the ASON architecture can be found in 
   [IPO-RQTS], which includes a summary of the ASON functions as well as 
   a detailed discussion of the applicability of the GMPLS protocol 
   suite.  
    
   Note: Because ITU-T is currently specifying additional capabilities 
   to the ASON architecture, additional extensions may be needed in the 
   future. This is however beyond the scope of this document.  
    
    
3.3 Soft Permanent Connection (SPC): A Synopsis 
    
   An SPC is a combination of a permanent connection at the source user-
   to-network side, a permanent connection at the destination user-to-
   network side, and a switched connection within the network. 
   Establishment of the switched connection within the network is 
   typically initiated by an EMS or NMS, which communicates with the 
   ingress node and instructs it to set-up the connection using the 
   distributed signaling protocol. For the SPC, the communication method 
   between the EMS/NMS and the ingress node is beyond the scope of this 
   document. 
    
   The user end-to-end connection is thus created by associating the 
   incoming interface of the switched connection initiating (also 
   referred to as ingress node) network node with the switched 
   connection within the network and the outgoing interface of the 

  
Lin                                                                  3 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   switched connection terminating (also referred to as egress node) 
   network node. An SPC connection is illustrated in the following 
   Figure, which shows user's node A connected to a provider's node B 
   via link #1, user's node Z connected to a provider's node Y via link 
   #3, and a (abstract) link #2 connecting provider's node B and node Y.  
    
   +---+     +---+               +---+     +---+ 
   | A |--1--| B |-----2-//------| Y |--3--| Z | 
   +---+     +---+               +---+     +---+ 
    
   In this instance, the connection on link #1 and link #3 are both 
   provisioned (permanent connections that may be simple links), i.e., 
   they are set up by means beyond the distributed control plane. In 
   contrast, the connection over link #2 is set up using the distributed 
   control plane. Thus the SPC is composed of the concatenation of link 
   #1, #2 and #3.  
    
   Thus to support the capability to request a SPC connection: 
    
   -    The GMPLS signaling protocol must be capable of supporting the 
        ability to indicate the label information used when setting up 
        the destination provisioned connection.  
   -    In addition because of the multi-domain nature of ASON networks, 
        the GMPLS signaling protocol must also be capable of supporting 
        indicating the service level and diversity requested for the SPC 
        (see [OIF-UNI1] for a definition). In the case where a SPC may 
        span multiple domains in an ASON network there may also be a 
        need to indicate both the source and destination controllers 
        managing the SPC request. These may be done via the source and 
        destination controller addresses. 
    
    
3.4 Call: A Synopsis 
    
   A call may be simply described as: "An association between endpoints 
   that supports an instance of a service" [G8080]. Thus a call can be 
   considered as a service provided to the user endpoints, where 
   multiple calls may exist between any two endpoints. Each call may 
   have multiple connections. The call concept provides an abstract 
   relationship between two users, where this relationship describes (or 
   verifies) the extent to which the users are willing to offer (or 
   accept) service to each other. A call therefore does not provide the 
   actual connectivity for transmitting user traffic, but only builds a 
   relationship by which future connections may be made. 
    


  
Lin                                                                  4 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   A property of a call is its ability to contain multiple connections, 
   where each connection may be of a different type and where each 
   connection may exist independently of other connections within the 
   call, i.e., each connection is setup and released with separate 
   Path/Resv messages. For example, a call may contain a mix of basic 
   connection, virtual concatenated connections and contiguous 
   concatenated connections (see [GMPLS-SDHSONET] for corresponding 
   connection signaling extensions). 
    
   The concept of the call allows for a better flexibility in how users 
   set up connections and how network offers services to users. In 
   essence, a call allows: 
    
   -    Support for virtual concatenation where each connection can 
        travel on different diverse paths 
   -    allows the use of a public and private addressing space (hosts 
        using public space while network using only internal private 
        addressing space) 
   -    Better upgrading strategy for service provider control plane 
        operation, where a call control (service provisioning) may be 
        separate from switches and connections (where the connection 
        control may reside) 
   -    Verification and authentication of a call (with both network 
        call controller as well as destination user) prior to 
        connection, which may result in less wasted resources 
   -    General treatment of multiple connections which may be 
        associated for the purpose of recovery; for example a pair of 
        primary and backup connections may belong to the same call. 
    
   Thus to support the introduction of the call concept, the GMPLS 
   signaling protocol must be extended to include a call identifier and 
   extended to include specifying the call capability.  
    
   A possible structure for the call identifier (to guarantee global 
   uniqueness) is to concatenate a globally unique fixed ID (e.g., may 
   be composed of country code, carrier code) with an operator specific 
   ID (where the operator specific ID may be composed of a unique access 
   point code û such as source LSR address û and a local identifier). 
   Therefore, a foreseeable structure may be <global id> + <operator 
   specific id>. 
    
    
4. Support For Behaviors during Control Plane Failures 
    
   Various types of control plane failures may occur within an 
   automatically switched optical network. These failures may impact the 

  
Lin                                                                  5 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   control plane as well as the data plane. Requirements placed on the 
   control plane by [G8080] and [G7713] include: 
    
   -    Any control plane failure must not result in releasing an 
        established transport plane connection 
   -    The management system should be allowed to override the default 
        behaviors of the control plane 
   -    Upon recovery from a control plane failure, the recovered 
        control plane node must have the ability to recover the status 
        of the established transport plane connections 
   -    Upon recovery from a control plane failure, the recovered 
        control plane node must have the ability to recover the 
        connectivity information of its neighbors 
   -    Upon recovery from a control plane failure, connections in the 
        process of been established (i.e. pending connection setup 
        requests) may be released 
   -    Upon recovery from a control plane failure, connections in the 
        process of been released must be released 
    
    
5. Support For Label Usage 
    
   Labels are defined in GMPLS to provide information on the resources 
   used on link local basis for a particular connection. The labels may 
   range from specifying a particular timeslot, a particular wavelength 
   to a particular port/fiber. In the context of the automatic switched 
   optical network, the value of a label MAY not be consistently the 
   same across a link. For example, the figure below illustrates the 
   case where two GMPLS/ASON-enabled nodes (A and Z) are interconnected 
   across two non-GMPLS/ASON-enabled nodes (B and C), where these nodes 
   are all SDH/SONET nodes providing, e.g., a VC-4 service. 
    
   +-----+                   +-----+ 
   |     |   +---+   +---+   |     | 
   |  A  |---| B |---| C |---|  Z  | 
   |     |   +---+   +---+   |     | 
   +-----+                   +-----+ 
    
   Labels have an associated structure imposed on them for local use 
   based on [GMPLS-SDHSONET] and [GMPLS-OTN]. Once the local label is 
   exchanged with its neighboring control plane node, the structure of 
   the local label MAY not be significant to the neighbor node since the 
   association between the local and the remote label may not 
   necessarily be the same. This issue does not present a problem in a 
   simple point-to-point connections between two control plane-enabled 
   nodes where the timeslots are mapped 1:1 across the interface. 

  
Lin                                                                  6 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   However, in the scope of the ASON, once a non-GMPLS capable sub-
   network is introduced between these nodes (as in the above figure, 
   where the sub-network provides re-arrangement capability for the 
   timeslots) label scoping MAY become an issue.  
    
   In this context, there is an implicit assumption that the data plane 
   connections between the GMPLS capable edges already exist prior to 
   any connection request. For instance node A's outgoing VC-4's 
   timeslot #1 (with SUKLM label=[1,0,0,0,0]) as defined in [GMPLS-
   SONETSDH]) may be mapped onto node BÆs outgoing VC-4's timeslot #6 
   (label=[6,0,0,0,0]) may be mapped onto node C's outgoing VC-4's 
   timeslot #4 (label=[4,0,0,0,0]). Thus by the time node Z receives the 
   request from node A with label=[1,0,0,0,0], the node Z's local label 
   and the timeslot no longer corresponds to the received label and 
   timeslot information.  
    
   As such to support the general case, the scope of the label value is 
   considered local to a control plane node. A label association 
   function can be used by the control plane node to map the received 
   (remote) label into a locally significant label. The information 
   necessary to allow mapping from received label value to a locally 
   significant label value may be derived in several ways: 
    
   -    Via manual provisioning of the label association 
   -    Via discovery of the label association 
    
   Either method may be used. In the case of dynamic association, this 
   implies that the discovery mechanism operates at the timeslot/label 
   level before the connection request is processed at the ingress node. 
   Note that in the simple case where two nodes are directly connected, 
   no association may be necessary (in particular, for directly 
   connected TDM interfaces no mapping function is required due to the 
   label structure (see [GMPLS-SDHSONET] and [GMPLS-OTN]). In such 
   instances, the label association function provides a one-to-one 
   mapping of the received to local label values. 
    
    
6. Additional Error Cases 
    
   To support the ASON network, the following additional category of 
   error cases are defined: 
    
   -    Errors associated with basic call and soft permanent connection 
        support. For example, these may include incorrect assignment of 
        IDs for the Call or an invalid interface ID for the soft 
        permanent connection. 

  
Lin                                                                  7 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   -    Errors associated with policy failure during processing of the 
        new call and soft permanent connection capabilities. These may 
        include unauthorized request for the particular capability. 
   -    Errors associated with incorrect specification of the service 
        level and diversity. 
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   The separation of the call and connection as required for the ASON 
   model will introduce a new level of management hierarchy to the 
   connection setup. A connection cannot be established until a call 
   with the same call identifier value has been set up. Policy and 
   authentication procedures can be applied to the establishment of the 
   call and then can be restricted to connection establishment within 
   the context of a call. 
    
    
8. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors would like to thank Jerry Ash, Greg Bernstein, Adrian 
   Farrel, Nic Larkin, and Lyndon Ong for their comments and 
   contributions to the draft. 
    
    
9. References 
    
9.1 Normative References 
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [G8080]   ITU-T Rec. G.8080/Y.1304, Architecture for the 
   Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON), November 2001 
    
   [G7713]   ITU-T Rec. G.7713/Y.1704, Distributed Call and Connection 
   Management (DCM), November 2001 
    
   [OIF-UNI1]   OIF-UNI-01.0, User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0 Signaling 
   Specification 
    


  
Lin                                                                  8 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
   [GMPLS-SIG]   P. Ashwood-Smith, Generalized MPLS - Signaling 
   Functional Description, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-08.txt, 
   April 2002, Work in progress 
    
   [GMPLS-SDHSONET]   E. Mannie and D.Papadimitriou (Editors), GMPLS 
   Extensions for SONET and SDH Control, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-
   sdh-05.txt, June 2002, Work in progress 
    
   [GMPLS-OTN]   D. Papadimitriou, GMPLS Signalling Extensions for G.709 
   Optical Transport Networks Control, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-g709-
   01.txt, June 2002, Work in progress 
    
    

9.2 Informative References 
    
   [G807]   ITU-T Rec. G.807/Y.1301, Requirements For Automatic Switched 
   Transport Networks (ASTN), July 2001 
    
   [GMPLS-SDHSONETEXT]   E. Mannie and D.Papadimitriou (Editors), GMPLS 
   Extensions to Control Non-Standard SONET and SDH Features, draft-
   ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-extensions-03.txt, June 2002, Work in 
   progress 
    
   [IPO-RQTS]   O. Aboul-Magd, Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON) 
   Architecture and Its Related Protocols, draft-ietf-ipo-ason-02.txt, 
   March 2002, Work in progress 
    
   [ASON-RQTS]   Y. Xue, Carrier Optical Services Requirements, draft-
   ietf-ipo-carrier-requirements-02.txt, March 2002 
    
    
10. Author's Addresses 
    
   Osama Aboul-Magd  
   Nortel Networks  
   P.O. Box 3511, Station "C"  
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada  
   K1Y-4H7  
   Tel: + 1 613 763 5827  
   Email: osama@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Sergio Belotti 
   Alcatel 
   Via Trento 30, 
   I-20059 Vimercate, Italy 
   Email: sergio.belotti@netit.alcatel.it 

  
Lin                                                                  9 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
    
   Zhi-Wei Lin 
   Lucent 
   101 Crawfords Corner Road 
   Holmdel, NJ 07733 USA 
   Email: zwlin@lucent.com 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Alcatel 
   Francis Wellesplein 1, 
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
   Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be 
    
   Dimitrios Pendarakis 
   Tellium 
   2 Crescent Place  
   Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901 
   Email: dpendarakis@tellium.com 
    































  
Lin                                                                 10 

                     ASON Requirements for GMPLS          August 2002 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.  
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    




















  
Lin                                                                 11 
