

Transport Area                                            P. Koskelainen
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: December 22, 2003                                 June 23, 2003


          Requirements for Conference Policy Control Protocol
                  draft-koskelainen-xcon-cpcp-reqs-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 22, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The conference policy server allows clients to manipulate and
   interact with the conference policy. One mechanism to manipulate the
   policy is to use conference policy control protocol (CPCP). This
   document gives the requirements for CPCP.












Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Integration with Floor Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Conference Policy Data Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  CPCP Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.1 Conference creation, termination and joining . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.2 Manipulating general conference attributes . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.3 Authentication and Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.4 Application and media manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.5 ACL manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.6 Floor control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.7 Inviting and ejecting users  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.8 User Privileges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.9 General Protocol Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Notifications and Subscriptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 16




























Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


1. Introduction

   The conferencing framework document [3] describes the overall
   architecture, terminology, and protocol components needed for multi-
   party conferencing. It defines a logical function called a conference
   policy server (CPS) which can store and manipulate rules associated
   with participation in a conference.  These rules include directives
   on the lifespan of the conference, who can and cannot join the
   conference, definitions of roles available in the conference and the
   responsibilities associated with those roles, and policies on who is
   allowed to request which roles.

   The conference policy control protocol (CPCP) is a client-server
   protocol that can be used by users to manipulate the rules associated
   with the conference.

   The conference policy is represented by a URI. There is a unique
   conference policy for each conference. The conference policy URI
   points to a conference policy server which can manipulate that
   conference policy.

   Conferencing framework describes also conference notification service
   that is a logical function provided by the focus. It means that the
   focus can act as a notifier, accepting subscriptions to the
   conference state.

   Note that CPCP is not the only mechanism to manipulate conference
   policy, but other mechanisms exists as well, such as Web interface.

   This document can be used with other documents, such as Conferencing
   framework document [3].

   Moreover, [4] and [6] give useful background information about
   conferencing and floor control.

















Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


2. Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.














































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


3. Terminology

   This document uses the definitions from [3].

   Additional definitions:

      ACL

         Access control list (ACL) defines users who can join to a
         conference. Users may have allow, blocked or pending status in
         the list. Each conference has its own ACL.

      Moderator

         A special (privileged) role for a user that is allowed to
         manipulate conference policy and override policy decisions made
         by other users.

      Floor control

         Floor control is a mechanism that enables applications or users
         to gain safe and mutually exclusive or non-exclusive access to
         the shared object or resource in a conference.

      Privilege

         A privilege is a right to perform a manipulation operation for
         a conference. It is user permission such as "MODIFY ACL",
         "TERMINATE CONFERENCE", "INVITE USERS", "EJECT USERS", "MODIFY
         FLOOR POLICY", "MODIFY MEDIA POLICY", "HAND OFF A PRIVILEGE TO
         ANOTHER USER" (assuming that privileges are individual instead
         of group based e.g. senior-members have all privileges)



















Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


4. Integration with Floor Control

   Floor control is an optional feature often used by conferencing
   applications.  It enables applications or users to gain safe and
   mutually exclusive or non-exclusive input access to a shared object
   or resource. We define a floor as the temporary permission for a
   conference participant to access or manipulate a specific shared
   resource or group of resources.

   We assume that the ability of users to create floors is governed by
   the conference policy. Privileged conference user may use floor
   control protocol (see e.g. [5]) or some other mechanism to create
   floors.

   The conference policy defines who is allowed to create, change, and
   remove floors using the floor control protocol.

   Floor chair is also appointed using the floor control protocol when
   the floor is created.  Typically, only conference moderators are
   allowed to use these commands.

   The conference moderator can remove the floor at any time using floor
   control protocol (so that the resources are no longer floor-
   controlled), or change the floor chair or the floor parameters.

   The floor chair just controls the access to the floor, according to
   the floor policy, defined at a time when the floor is created.
























Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


5. Conference Policy Data Model

   Conference policy data is relative static. It is not updated
   frequently as e.g. participant list is not part of conference policy.
   Users with sufficient privileges are able to manipulate conference
   policy.  For example, a user with sufficient privileges may
   manipulate conference's access control list by adding a user into the
   ACL white list.











































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


6. CPCP Requirements

   This section describes conference policy requirements.

6.1 Conference creation, termination and joining

   REQ-A1: It MUST be possible to create a new conference at focus,
   resulting in a URI.

   REQ-A2: It MUST be possible to associate policy attributes to a
   conference URI.

   REQ-A3: It MUST be possible to reserve a conference URI from the
   focus for future use with or without associating policy attributes to
   it.

   REQ-A4: It MUST be possible for a user to fetch some or all
   components of the conference policy for a given conference URI,
   during and before joining the conference.

   REQ-A5: It MUST be possible to delete the existing conference URI and
   release all resources associated with it.

   REQ-A6: It SHOULD be possible to join anonymously to the conference
   and still be able to send and receive data and private 1-to-1 SIP
   messages anonymously.

6.2 Manipulating general conference attributes

   REQ-B2: It MUST be possible to set and modify conference Subject that
   can be seen e.g. in web page, SDP s line or SIP Subject header.

   REQ-B3: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference URI
   display name.

   REQ-B4: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference
   creator information (as is seen e.g. in SDP o line).

   REQ-B5: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference URI
   link for more information (as used e.g. in SDP u line).

   REQ-B6: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference host
   contact information (as used e.g. in SDP e and p lines).

   REQ-B7: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete short
   conference session description (as used e.g. in SDP i line).  This
   can be per session or per media.




Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


   REQ-B8: It MAY be possible to set, modify and delete the parameter
   for max number of conference participants. This defines how many
   users at max can be present at the same time.

   OPEN ISSUE: This is typical parameter in PSTN conferences, but does
   this make sense in IP world (and with different codecs) ?

   REQ-B9: It MUST be possible to set whether the conference is public
   or hidden (if hidden, focus does not return description to outsiders
   for OPTIONS or other requests).

   REQ-B10: Conference policy MUST have an attribute that defines
   whether the conference is active or inactive. (If active, users can
   join etc).  [This is needed if start/end times are not used]

   REQ-B11: It MUST be possible to give the list of invited users into
   the conference (dial-out case).

   REQ-B-12: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference
   Keywords. (This may be useful e.g. for search engines).

6.3 Authentication and Security

   REQ-C1: It MUST be possible to define the authentication mechanism,
   and passwords for user joins.

   REQ-C2: It MUST be possible to use sips: scheme as a conference URI.

   REQ-C3: It MUST be possible to define encryption keys for media data.
   [OPEN ISSUE: Does this belong to media policy?]

6.4 Application and media manipulation

   REQ-D1:  It MUST be possible to assign and de-assign the users who
   are allowed to manipulate media policy.

6.5 ACL manipulation

   REQ-E1: It MUST be possible to add and delete users into and from ACL
   white list (allowed to join), ACL black list (not allowed to join)
   and ACL pending list (further authorization needed).

   REQ-E2: ACL conflicts MUST be solved in a well-defined way (e.g. what
   if user appears both in black list and in white list) e.g. by
   mandating the order in which ACL definitions are evaluated (e.g. most
   specific expression first).

   REQ-E3: It MUST be possible to use wildcards in user part in ACL



Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


   (such as sip:*@example.com in white list).

   REQ-E4: It MUST be possible to allow and disallow anonymous and
   hidden joins to the conference.

   REQ-E5: ACL MUST have default policy for those users that no matching
   rule is found.

6.6 Floor control

   REQ-F1: It MUST be possible to assign and de-assign the users who are
   allowed to manipulate floor policy.

6.7 Inviting and ejecting users

   REQ-G1: It MUST be possible to invite one or more users into the
   conference (including so called "mass invitation" operation).

   REQ-G2: It MUST be possible eject one or more users from the
   conference (including so called "mass ejection" operation).

6.8 User Privileges

   REQ-H1: It MUST be possible to give a privilege to a user.  (A
   privilege may be operation, such as right to expel, right to modify
   conference ACL, right to hand off all or some privileges to another
   user).

   REQ-H2: It MUST be possible to remove a privilege from a user.

   REQ-H3: It MAY be possible to support user privilege groups (e.g.
   senior-members) and to group privileges together, such as
   senior-members can eject users and manipulate ACL.

   REQ-H4: It MAY be possible that default privileges (e.g. only the
   creator can delete conference) are defined by the Conference Policy
   Control Protocol that can be changed by the conference policy.

   REQ-H5: It MUST be possible to authorize users who have the right to
   subscribe to specific events, such as ACL changes.

   REQ-H6: It MAY be possible request new privileges from the conference
   policy server via CPCP.

   REQ-H7: It SHOULD be possible to define who is allowed to subscribe
   to conference related events.

   REQ-H8: It MAY be possible that default privileges are defined for



Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


   new conference, such as conference creator has all privileges
   available and others do not have have any of them.

6.9 General Protocol Requirements

   REQ-CP-1: Protocol behaviour:  CPCP protocol SHOULD be a reliable
   client-server protocol. Hence, it SHOULD have a positive response
   indicating that the request has been received, or error response if
   an error has occurred.  The sending UA takes care of retransmission
   in the case of packet loss.

   REQ-CP-2: Manipulations of the policy collection MUST exhibit the
   ACID property; that is, they MUST be atomic, be consistent, durable,
   and operate independently.

   REQ-CP-3: It MAY be possible for the client to batch multiple
   operations (such as add a user to ACL black list, or remove a user
   from ACL white list) into a single request that is processed
   atomically.

   REQ-CP-4: It MUST be possible for the server to authenticate the
   client.

   REQ-CP-5: It MUST be possible for the client to authenticate the
   server.

   REQ-CP-6: It MUST be possible for message integrity to be ensured
   between the client and the server.

   REQ-CP-7: It MUST be possible for privacy to be ensured between the
   client and server.




















Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


7. Notifications and Subscriptions

   It is necessary to have a notification mechanism in addition to CPCP,
   e.g. SIP. For example, conference owner (or a user with sufficient
   privileges) may subscribe to the conference management event, and get
   notified when there is a need to do policy manipulation, such as ACL
   manipulation for on-going join attempt. It is also necessary to
   authenticate who is allowed to subscribe to these events.











































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


8. Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Eric Burger, Xiaotao Wu, Henning
   Schulzrinne, Simo Veikkolainen and IETF conferencing design team for
   their feedback.














































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCD 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Rosenberg et al., J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC
        3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the Session
        Initiation Protocol",
        draft-rosenberg-sipping-conferencing-framework-01 (work in
        progress), February 2003.







































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


Informative References

   [4]  Koskelainen, P., Schulzrinne, H. and X. Wu, "Additional
        Requirements to Conferencing", October 2002.

   [5]  Wu, X., Schulzrinne, H. and P. Koskelainen, "Use of SIP and SOAP
        for conference floor control", January 2003.

   [6]  Koskelainen, P., Schulzrinne, H. and X. Wu, "A sip-based
        conference control framework", Nossdav'2002 Miami Beach, May
        2002.


Author's Address

   Petri Koskelainen
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33721
   Finland

   EMail: petri.koskelainen@nokia.com





























Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                       June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Koskelainen            Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 17]

