

ECRIT Working Group                                          James Polk
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems
Expires: January 25th, 2008                             July 25th, 2007
Intended Status: Standards Track (as PS)
                                                     


            IANA Registering a SIP Resource Priority Header 
              Namespace for Local Emergency Communications
           draft-polk-ecrit-local-emergency-rph-namespace-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 25th, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document creates and IANA registers the new Session Initiation 
   Protocol (SIP) Resource Priority header (RPH) namespace "sos" for 
   local emergency usage to a public safety answering point (PSAP), 
   between PSAPs, and between a PSAP and first responders and their 
   organizations.






Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
   in [RFC2119].

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Rules of Usage of the Resource Priority Header  . . . . . . .  3
   3.  "SOS" Namespace Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1   Namespace Definition Rules and Guidelines . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2   The "sos" Namespace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1   IANA Resource-Priority Namespace Registration . . . . . .  4
     4.2   IANA Priority-Value Registrations . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     7.1   Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     7.2   Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . .  6


1.  Introduction

   This document creates and IANA registers the new Session Initiation 
   Protocol (SIP) Resource Priority header (RPH) namespace "sos" for 
   local emergency usage.  The SIP Resource-Priority header is defined 
   in RFC 4412 [RFC4412]. This new namespace can be from a caller in 
   distress, or added at the entry server into a emergency services 
   managed network.  This new namespace can be used between PSAPs, and 
   between a PSAP and first responders and their organizations.  

   Within controlled environments, such as an IMS infrastructure or 
   Emergency Services network (ESInet), where misuse can be reduced to 
   a minimum where possible, providing an explicit priority indication 
   facilitates treatment of emergency SIP messages according to local 
   policy.  

   Usage of the "sos" namespace is to be defined in a future 
   document(s). This document merely creates the namespace, per the 
   rules within [RFC4412] necessitating of a Standards Track RFC for 
   IANA registering new RPH namespaces and their relative 
   priority-value order.   [RFC4412] further states that modifying the 
   order or the number of priority-values to a registered namespace 
   SHOULD NOT occur, due to interoperability issues with dissimilar 
   implementations. 

   From this fact about RFC 4412, and the possibility that within 
   emergency services networks, a Multilevel Precedence and Preemption 


Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007

   (MLPP)-like behavior can be desired - ensuring more important calls 
   are established or retained, the "sos" namespace is given 5 
   priority-levels.  MLPP-like SIP signaling is not defined in this 
   document for 911/112/999 style emergency calling, but it is not 
   prevented either.


2.  Rules of Usage of the Resource Priority Header

   This document does not extent the usage or treatment options of 
   [RFC4412] at this time.  However, usage of this namespace does not 
   have a normal, or routine call level.  In other words, there is not 
   a "namespace.0" like namespace.priority-value that 
   joe_public@example.com is going to use in SIP messages when 
   communicating to a destination other than a PSAP or equivalent.  
   Every use of this namespace will be in times of an emergency, where 
   at least one end of the communication is with a local emergency 
   organization.

   The "sos" namespace has 5 priority-values, in a specified relative 
   priority order, and is a queue-based treatment namespace [RFC4412]. 
   Individual jurisdictions MAY configure their SIP entities for 
   preemption treatment, but this is optional, and a local policy 
   decision.


3.  "SOS" Namespace Definition

   One thing to keep in mind for now is the fact that this namespace 
   shouldn't be considered just "EMERGENCY" because there are a lot of 
   different kinds of emergencies, some on a military scale ([RFC4412] 
   defines 3 of these), some on a national scale ([RFC4412] defines 2 
   of these), some on an international scale.  These types of 
   emergencies can also have their own namespaces, and although there 
   are 5 defined for other uses, more are possible - so the 911/112/999
   style of public user emergency calling for police or fire or 
   ambulance (etc) does not have a monopoly on the word "emergency".

   Therefore the namespace "sos" has been chosen, as it is most 
   recognizable as that of citizen calling for help from a public 
   authority type of organization.  This namespace will also be used 
   for communications between emergency authorities, and MAY be used 
   for emergency authorities calling public citizens.  An example of 
   the later is a PSAP operator calling back someone who previously 
   called 9111/112/999 and the communication was terminated before it 
   should have been (in the operator's judgment).

   Here is an example of a Resource-Priority header using the sos 
   namespace:

      Resource-Priority: sos.0



Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007


3.1.  Namespace Definition Rules and Guidelines

   This specification defines one unique namespace for emergency 
   calling scenarios, "sos", constituting its registration with IANA. 
   This IANA registration contains the facets defined in Section 9 of 
   [RFC4412].  

3.2.  The "sos" Namespace

   Per the rules of [RFC4412], each namespace has a finite set of 
   relative priority-value(s), listed (below) from lowest priority to 
   highest priority.  In an attempt to not limit this namespace's use 
   in the future, more than one priority-value is assigned to the "sos"
   namespace.  This document does not RECOMMEND which priority-value is
   used where.  That is for another document to specify.  This document
   does RECOMMEND the choice within a national jurisdiction be 
   coordinated by all sub-jurisdictions to maintain uniform SIP 
   behavior throughout an emergency calling system.

   The relative priority order for the "sos" namespace is as follows:

      (lowest)  sos.0
                sos.1
                sos.2
                sos.3
      (highest) sos.4

   The "sos" namespace will be assigned into the priority queuing 
   algorithm (Section 4.5.2 of [RFC4412]) from the public user to the 
   PSAP.  This does not limit its usage to only the priority queue 
   algorithm; meaning the preemption algorithm can be used where the 
   local jurisdiction preferred to preempt normal calls in lieu of 
   completing emergency calls.  This document is not RECOMMENDING this 
   usage, merely pointing out that behaviors are a matter of local 
   policy.

   NOTE: at this time, there has not been sufficient discussion about 
   whether or not preemption will be used for communications between 
   PSAPs or between PSAPs and First responders (and their 
   organizations).


4.  IANA Considerations

4.1  IANA Resource-Priority Namespace Registration

   Within the "Resource-Priority Namespaces" of the sip-parameters 
   section of IANA (created by [RFC4412]), the following entries will 
   be added to this table:




Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007

                        Intended      New warn-   New resp.
   Namespace  Levels    Algorithm     code        code      Reference
   ---------  ------  --------------  ---------   --------- ---------
     sos        5        queue           no          no     [This doc]


4.2  IANA Priority-Value Registrations

   Within the Resource-Priority Priority-values registry of the 
   sip-parameters section of IANA, the following (below) is to be added 
   to the table:

   Namespace: sos
   Reference: (this document)
   Priority-Values (least to greatest): "0", "1","2", "3", "4"


5.  Security Considerations

   The Security considerations that apply to RFC 4412 [RFC4412] apply 
   here.  This document introduces no new security issues relative to 
   RFC 4412.

   That said, since this SIP header, used for emergency calling can 
   have a great impact on local communications, providers should use 
   caution when deciding if they want to use a preemption algorithm 
   within the public space for 911/112/999 type calling.  As 
   potentially already limited communications bandwidth might starve 
   out all other types of calls in a location.  This decision might be 
   desired; but this effect might not be desired.

6.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ken Carlberg, Janet Gunn and Fred Baker for help with this 
   doc.


7.  References

7.1  Normative References

 [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997

 [RFC4412] Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., "Communications Resource 
           Priority for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 
           4411, Feb 2006

7.2  Informative References

   none



Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007


Author's Address

   James M. Polk
   3913 Treemont Circle
   Colleyville, Texas  76034
   USA

   Phone: +1-817-271-3552
   Email: jmpolk@cisco.com


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights

   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at


Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies     July 2007

   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).















































Polk                      Expires January 2008                 [Page 7]
