

Network Working Group                                       J. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Expires: August 22, 2005                               February 21, 2005


          What's in a Name: False Assumptions about DNS Names
                      draft-iab-dns-assumptions-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 22, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The Domain Name System (DNS) provides an essential service on the
   Internet, mapping structured names to a variety of data, usually IP
   addresses.  These names appear in email addresses, URIs, and other
   application layer identifiers that are often rendered to human users.
   Because of this, there has been a strong demand to acquire names that
   have significance to people, through equivalence to registered
   trademarks, company names, types of services, and so on.  A danger of
   this trend is that the humans and automata which consume and use



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   these identifiers will make assumptions about the services that are
   or should be provided by the hosts associated with these identifiers.
   This document discusses this problem in more detail and makes
   recommendations on how it can be avoided.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Modeling Usage of the DNS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Possible Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1   By the User  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2   By the Client  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3   By the Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Consequences of False Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Reasons why the Assumptions can be False . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1   Evolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2   Leakage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.3   Sub Delegation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.4   Human Error  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  IAB Members  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10.   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 15

























Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


1.  Introduction

   The Domain Name System (DNS) [1] provides an essential service on the
   Internet, mapping structured names to a variety of different types of
   data.  Most often it is used to obtain the IP address of a host
   associated with that name [2][1][3].  However, it can be used to
   obtain other information, and proposals have been made for nearly
   everything, including geographic information [4].

   Domain names are most often used in identifiers used by application
   protocols.  The most well known include email addresses and URIs,
   such as the HTTP URL [5], RTSP URL [6] and SIP URI [7].  These
   identifiers are ubiquitous, appearing on business cards, web pages,
   street signs, and so on.  Because of this, there has been a strong
   demand to acquire domain names that have significance to people
   through equivalence to registered trademarks, company names, types of
   services, and so on.  Such identifiers serve many business purposes,
   including extension of brand, advertising, and so on.

   People often make assumptions about the type of service that is or
   should be provided by a host associated with that name, based on
   their expectations and understanding of what the name implies.  This,
   in turn, triggers attempts by organizations to register domain names
   based on that presumed user expectation.  Examples of this are the
   various proposals for a TLD that could be associated with adult
   content [8], the requests for creation of TLDs associated with mobile
   devices and services, and even phishing attacks.

   When these assumptions are wrong, as they often are, the user might
   be surprised, but the system works, and the human can do something
   different having realized that its assumption was false.

   When an automaton makes similar assumptions, the system might fail,
   and it might fail systematically.  For this reason, this document
   focuses primarily on assumptions that might be made by client and
   server automata about the service that is or should be provided by a
   host associated with a DNS name.  In this context, an "assumption" is
   defined as any behavior that is expected when accessing a service at
   a domain name, even though the behavior is not explicitly codified in
   protocol specifications.

   Based on this definition, behavior hinted at by records in the DNS
   also represents an assumption.  RFC 2219 [19] defines well known
   aliases that can be used to construct domain names for reaching
   various well-known services in a domain.  This approach was later
   followed by the definition of a new resource record, the SRV record
   [2], which specifies that a particular service is running on a server
   in a domain.  Although both of these mechanisms are useful as a hint



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   that a particular service is running in a domain, both of them
   represent assumptions that may be false.  Indeed, RFC 2219 calls this
   out explicitly.  Unfortunately, the only way to determine with
   certainty that a service is running on a host is to initiate a
   connection to the port for that service, and check.

   Although the DNS can contain data besides host identifiers (i.e., IP
   addresses), we only consider the usage of the DNS for the purposes of
   translating a name to a host address for the purposes of accessing a
   service.

2.  Modeling Usage of the DNS


                       +--------+
                       |        |
                       |        |
                       |  DNS   |
                       |Service |
                       |        |
                       +--------+
                         ^   |
                         |   |
                         |   |
                         |   |
          /--\           |   |
         |    |          |   V
         |    |        +--------+                     +--------+
          \--/         |        |                     |        |
            |          |        |                     |        |
         ---+---       | Client |-------------------->| Server |
            |          |        |                     |        |
            |          |        |                     |        |
           /\          +--------+                     +--------+
          /  \
         /    \

         User


                                Figure 1

   Figure 1 shows a simple conceptual model of how the DNS is used by
   applications.  A user of the application obtains an identifier for
   particular content or service it wishes to obtain.  This identifier
   is often a URL or URI that contains a domain name.  The user enters
   this identifier into their client application (for example, by typing
   in the URL in a web browser window).  The client is the automaton (a



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   software and/or hardware system) that contacts a server for that
   application in order to provide service to the user.  To do that, it
   contacts a DNS server to resolve the domain name in the identifier to
   an IP address.  It then contacts the server at that IP address.  This
   simple model applies to application protocols such as HTTP [5], SIP
   [7], RTSP [6], and SMTP [9].

   From this model, it is clear that three entities in the system can
   potentially make false assumptions about the service provided by the
   server.  The human user may form expectations relating to the content
   of the service based on a parsing of the host name from which the
   content originated.  The server might assume that the client
   connecting to it supports protocols that it does not, can process
   content that it cannot, or has capabilities that it does not.
   Similarly, the client might assume that the server supports
   protocols, content, or capabilities that it does not.

3.  Possible Assumptions

   For each of the three elements, there are many types of false
   assumptions that can be made.

3.1  By the User

   The set of possible assumptions here is nearly boundless.  A user
   might assume that an HTTP URL that looks like a company name maps to
   a server run by that company.  They might assume that an email from a
   email address in the .gov TLD is actually from a government employee.
   They might assume that the content obtained from a web server within
   a TLD labeled as containing adult materials (for example, .sex)
   actually contains adult content [8].  These assumptions are
   unavoidable, may all be false, and not the focus of this document.

3.2  By the Client

   Even though the client is an automaton, it can make some of the same
   assumptions that a human user might make.  For example, many clients
   assume that any host with a hostname that begins with "www" is a web
   server, even though this assumption may be false.

   In addition, the client concerns itself with the protocols needed to
   communicate with the server.  As a result, it might make assumptions
   about the operation of the protocols for communicating with the
   server.  These assumptions manifest themselves in an implementation
   through the replacement of a standardized protocol negotiation
   technique for an ill-defined rule for determining some kind of
   protocol parameter.  The result is often a loss of interoperability,
   degradation in reliability and worsening of user experience.



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   Authentication Algorithm: Though a protocol might support a
      multiplicity of authentication techniques, a client might assume
      that a server always supports one that is only optional according
      to the protocol.  For example, a SIP client contacting a SIP
      server in a domain that appeared to be used to identify mobile
      devices (for example, www.example.cellular) might assume it
      supports the optional AKA digest technique [10].  As another
      example, a web client might assume that a server with the name
      https.example.com supports HTTP over TLS [16].

   Data Formats: Though a protocol might allow a multiplicity of data
      formats to be sent from the server to the client, the client might
      assume a specific one, rather than using the content labeling and
      negotiation capabilities of the underlying protocol.  For example,
      an RTSP client might assume that all audio content delivered to it
      from media.example.cellular uses a low bandwidth codec.  As
      another example, a mail client might assume that the contents of
      messages it retrieves from a mail server at mail.example.cellular
      are always text, instead of checking the MIME headers [11] in the
      message to determine the actual content type.

   Protocol Extensions: The client attempts an operation on the server
      which requires the server to support an optional protocol
      extension.  However, the client merely assumes that this extension
      is supported, rather than implementing the fallback logic
      necessary if it is not.  As an example, a SIP client requires
      reliable provisional responses to its request (RFC 3262 [17]), and
      it assumes that this extension is supported on servers in the
      domain sip.example.telecom.  Furthermore, the client has not
      implemented the fallback behavior defined in RFC 3262, since it
      assumes that all servers it will communicate with are in this
      domain, and that all support this extension.  However, this
      assumption proves wrong.  The result is that the client is unable
      to make any phone calls.

   Languages: The client supports facilities for processing text content
      differently depending on the language of the text.  Rather than
      determining the language from markers in the message from the
      server, the client assumes a language based on the domain name.
      This assumption can easily be wrong.  For example, a client might
      assume that any text in a web page retrieved from a server within
      the .de ccTLD is in German, and attempt a translation to Finnish.
      This would fail dramatically if the text was actually in French.


3.3  By the Server

   The server, like the client, is an automaton.  It is servicing a



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   particular domain - www.company.cellular, for example.  It might
   assume that all clients connecting to this domain support particular
   capabilities, rather than using the underlying protocol to make this
   determination.  Some examples include:

   Authentication Algorithm: The server can assume that a client
      supports a particular, optional, authentication technique, and it
      therefore does not support the mandatory one.

   Data Formats: The server can assume that the client supports a
      particular set of MIME types, and is only capable of sending ones
      within that set.  When it generates content in a protocol
      response, it ignores any content negotiation headers that were
      present in the request.  For example, a web server might ignore
      the Accept HTTP header field and send a specific image format.

   Protocol Extensions: The server might assume that the client supports
      a particular optional protocol extension, and so it does not
      support the fallback behavior necessary in the case where it does
      not.

   Client Characteristics: The server might assume certain things about
      the physical characteristics of its clients, such as memory
      footprint, processing power, screen sizes, screen colors, pointing
      devices, and so on.  Based on these assumptions, it might choose
      specific behaviors when processing a request.  For example, a web
      server might always assume that clients connect through cell
      phones, and therefore return content that lacks images and is
      tuned for such devices.


4.  Consequences of False Assumptions

   There are numerous negative outcomes that can arise from the various
   false assumptions that users, servers and clients can make.  These
   include:

   Interoperability Failure: In these cases, the client or server
      assumed some kind of protocol operation, and this assumption was
      wrong.  The result is that the two are unable to communicate, and
      the user receives some kind of an error.  This represents a total
      interoperability failure, manifesting itself as a lack of service
      to users of the system.  Unfortunately, this kind of failure
      persists.  Repeated attempts over time by the client to access the
      service will fail.  Only a change in the server or client software
      can fix this problem.





Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   System Failure: In these cases, the client or server mis-interpreted
      a protocol operation, and this mis-interpretation was serious
      enough to uncover a bug in the implementation.  The bug causes a
      system crash or some kind of outage, either transient or permanent
      (until user reset).  If this failure occurs in a server, not only
      will the connecting client lose service, but other clients
      attempting to connect will not get service.  As an example, if a
      web server assumes that content passed to it from a client
      (created, for example, by a digital camera) is of a particular
      content type, and it always passes image content to a codec for
      de-compression prior to storage, the codec might crash when it
      unexpectedly receives an image compressed in a different format.
      Of course, it might crash even if the Content-Type was correct,
      but the compressed bitstream was invalid.  False assumptions
      merely introduce additional failure cases.

   Poor User Experience: In these cases, the client and server
      communicate, but the user receives a diminished user experience.
      For example, if a client on a PC connects to a web site that
      provides content for mobile devices, the content may be
      underwhelming when viewed on the PC.  Or, a client accessing a
      streaming media service may receive content of very low bitrate,
      even though the client supported better codecs.  Indeed, if a user
      wishes to access content from both a cellular device and a PC
      using a shared address book (that is, an address book shared
      across multiple devices), they would need two entries in that
      address book, and would need to use the right one from the right
      device.  This is a poor user experience.


5.  Reasons why the Assumptions can be False

   Assumptions made by clients and servers about the operation of
   protocols when contacting a particular domain are brittle, and can be
   wrong for many reasons.  On the server side, many of the assumptions
   are based on the notion that a domain name will only be given to, or
   used by, a restricted set of clients.  If the holder of the domain
   name assumes something about those clients, and can assume that only
   those clients use the domain name, that it can configure or program
   the server to operate specifically for those clients.  Both parts of
   this assumption can be wrong, as discussed in more detail below.

   On the client side, the notion is similar, being based on the
   assumption that a server within a particular domain will provide a
   specific type of service.  Sub-delegation and evolution, both
   discussed below, can make these assumptions wrong.





Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


5.1  Evolution

   The Internet, and the devices which access it, are constantly
   evolving, often at a rapid pace.  Unfortunately, there is a tendency
   to build for the here and now, and then worry about the future at a
   later time.  Many of the assumptions above are predicated on
   characteristics of today's clients and servers.  Support for specific
   protocols, authentication techniques or content are based on today's
   standards and today's devices.  Even though they may, for the most
   part, be true, they won't always be.  An excellent example is mobile
   devices.  A server servicing a domain accessed by mobile devices
   might try to make assumptions about the protocols, protocol
   extensions, security mechanisms, screen sizes or processor power of
   such devices.  However, all of these characteristics can and will
   change over time.

   When they do change, the change is usually evolutionary.  The result
   is that the assumptions remain valid in some cases, but not in
   others.  It is difficult to fix such systems, since it requires the
   server to detect what type of client is connecting, and what its
   capabilities are.  Unless the system is built and deployed with these
   capability negotiation techniques built in to begin with, such
   detection can be extremely difficult.  In fact, fixing it will often
   require the addition of such capability negotiation features which,
   if they had been in place and used to begin with, would have avoided
   the problem altogether.

5.2  Leakage

   Servers also make assumptions because of the belief that they will
   only be accessed by specific clients, and in particular, those which
   are configured or provisioned to use the domain name.  In essence,
   there is an assumption of community - that a specific community knows
   and uses the domain name, while others outside of the community do
   not.

   The problem is that this notion of community is a false one.  The
   Internet is global.  The DNS is global.  There is no technical
   barrier that separates those inside of the community from those
   outside.  The ease with which information propagates across the
   Internet makes it extremely likely that such domain names will
   eventually find their way into clients outside of the presumed
   community.  The ubiquitous presence of domain names in various URI
   formats, coupled with the ease of conveyance of URIs, makes such
   leakage merely a matter of time.  Furthermore, since the DNS is
   global, and since it can only have one root [12], it becomes possible
   for clients outside of the community to search and find and use such
   "special" domain names.



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


5.3  Sub Delegation

   Clients and users make assumptions about domains because of the
   notion that there is some kind of centralized control that can
   enforce those assumptions.  However, the DNS is not centralized, it
   is distributed.  If a domain doesn't delegate its sub-domains and has
   its records within a single zone, it is possible to maintain a
   centralized policy about operation of its domain.  However, once a
   domain gets sufficiently large that the domain administrators begin
   to delegate sub-domains to other authorities, it becomes increasingly
   difficult to maintain any kind of central control on the nature of
   the service provided in each sub-domain.  Not that it is not
   possible, since there are many examples of successful administration
   of policies across sub-domains many levels deep.  However, it takes
   an increasing amount of effort to ensure this result, as it requires
   human intervention and the creation of process and procedure.
   Automated validation of aherance to policies is very difficult to do,
   as there is no way to automatically verify many policies that might
   be put into place.

   A less costly process for providing centralized management of
   policies is to just hope that any centralized policies are being
   followed, and then wait for complaints or perform random audits.
   Those approaches have many problems.

   The invalidation of assumptions due to sub-delegation is discussed in
   further detail in Section 4.1.3 of [8] and in Section 3.3 of [20].

   As a result of the fragility of policy continuity across
   sub-delegations, if a client or user assumes some kind of property
   associated with a TLD (such as ".wifi"), it becomes increasingly more
   likely with the number of sub-domains that this property will not
   exist in a server identified by a particular name.  For example, in
   "store.chain.company.provider.wifi", there may be four levels of
   delegation from ".wifi", making it quite likely that, unless the
   holder of ".wifi" is working diligently, the properties which the
   holder of ".wifi" wishes to enforce are not present.  These
   properties may not be present due to human error or due to a willful
   decision not to adhere to them.

5.4  Human Error

   Of course, human error can be the source of errors in any system, and
   the same is true here.  There are many examples relevant to the
   problem under discussion.

   A client implementation may make the assumption that, just because a
   DNS SRV record exists for a particular protocol in a particular



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   domain, indicating that the service is available on some port, that
   the service is, in fact, running there.  This assumption could be
   wrong because the SRV records haven't been updated by the system
   administrators to reflect the services currently running.  As another
   example, a client might assume that a particular domain policy
   applies to all sub-domains.  However, a system administrator might
   have omitted to apply the policy to servers running in one of those
   sub-domains.

6.  Recommendations

   Based on these problems, the clear conclusion is that clients,
   servers and users should not make assumptions on the nature of the
   service provided to, or by, a domain.  More specifically, however,
   the following can be said:

   Follow the Specifications: When specifications define mandatory
      baseline procedures and formats, those should be implemented and
      supported, even if the expectation is that optional procedures
      will most often be used.  For example, if a specification mandates
      a particular baseline authentication technique, but allows others
      to be negotiated and used, implementations need to implement the
      baseline authentication algorithm even if the other ones are used
      most of the time.

   Use Capability Negotiation: Many protocols are engineered with
      capability negotiation mechanisms.  For example, a content
      negotiation framework has been defined for protocols using MIME
      content [13][14][15].  SIP allows for clients to negotiate the
      media types used in the multimedia session, as well as protocol
      parameters.  HTTP allows for clients to negotiate the media types
      returned in requests for content.  When such features are
      available in a protocol, client and servers should make use of
      them rather than making assumptions about supported capabilities.
      A corollary is that protocol designers should include such
      mechanisms when evolution is expected in the usage of the
      protocol.

   The DNS Record are Hints, not Law: DNS records that give explicit
      indication about the type or nature of a service at a domain, such
      as those defined in RFC 2219 or RFC 2782, are valuable tools for
      optimization and bootstrapping.  However, they can only be
      considered hints, at best.  Implementations need to be careful to
      not codify any behaviors that cause failures should the
      information provided in the record actually be false.  This
      borders on common sense for robust implementations, but it is
      valuable to raise this point explicitly.




Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


   To summarize - there is never a need to make assumptions.  Rather
   than doing so, utilize the specifications and the negotiation
   capabilities they provide, and the overall system will be robust and
   interoperable.

7.  Security Considerations

   One of the assumptions that can be made by clients or servers is the
   availability and usage (or lack thereof) of certain security
   protocols and algorithms.  For example, a client accessing a service
   in a particular domain might assume a specific authentication
   algorithm or hash function in the application protocol.  It is
   possible that, over time, weaknesses are found in such a technique,
   requiring usage of a different mechanism.  Similarly, a system might
   start with an insecure mechanism, and then decide later on to use a
   secure one.  In either case, assumptions made on security properties
   can result in interoperability failures, or worse yet, providing
   service in an insecure way, even though the client asked for, and
   thought it would get, secure service.  This kinds of assumptions are
   fundamentally unsound even if the records themselves are secured with
   DNSSEC.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The IAB would like to thank Brian Carpenter, John Klensin and Peter
   Koch for their comments.

9.  IAB Members

   Internet Architecture Board members at the time of writing of this
   document are:

      Bernard Aboba

      Harald Alvestrand

      Rob Austein

      Leslie Daigle

      Patrik Faltstrom

      Sally Floyd

      Mark Handley






Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


      Bob Hinden

      Geoff Huston

      Jun-ichiro Itojun Hagino

      Eric Rescorla

      Pete Resnick

      Jonathan Rosenberg


10  Informative References

   [1]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities", STD
         13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [2]   Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P. and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
         specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
         February 2000.

   [3]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403,
         October 2002.

   [4]   Davis, C., Vixie, P., Goodwin, T. and I. Dickinson, "A Means
         for Expressing Location Information in the Domain Name System",
         RFC 1876, January 1996.

   [5]   Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
         Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
         HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [6]   Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A. and R. Lanphier, "Real Time Streaming
         Protocol (RTSP)", RFC 2326, April 1998.

   [7]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [8]   Eastlake, D., ".sex Considered Dangerous", RFC 3675, February
         2004.

   [9]   Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821, April
         2001.

   [10]  Niemi, A., Arkko, J. and V. Torvinen, "Hypertext Transfer



Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


         Protocol (HTTP) Digest Authentication Using Authentication and
         Key Agreement (AKA)", RFC 3310, September 2002.

   [11]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies",
         RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [12]  Internet Architecture Board, "IAB Technical Comment on the
         Unique DNS Root", RFC 2826, May 2000.

   [13]  Klyne, G., "Indicating Media Features for MIME Content", RFC
         2912, September 2000.

   [14]  Klyne, G., "A Syntax for Describing Media Feature Sets", RFC
         2533, March 1999.

   [15]  Klyne, G., "Protocol-independent Content Negotiation
         Framework", RFC 2703, September 1999.

   [16]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [17]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Reliability of Provisional
         Responses in Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3262, June
         2002.

   [18]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation Protocol
         (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June 2002.

   [19]  Hamilton, M. and R. Wright, "Use of DNS Aliases for Network
         Services", BCP 17, RFC 2219, October 1997.

   [20]  Faltstrom, P. and R. Austein, "Design Choices When Expanding
         DNS", draft-iab-dns-choices-00 (work in progress), October
         2004.


Author's Address

   Jonathan Rosenberg, Editor
   IAB
   600 Lanidex Plaza
   Parsippany, NJ  07054
   US

   Phone: +1 973 952-5000
   EMail: jdrosen@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.jdrosen.net




Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Name Assumptions               February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Rosenberg               Expires August 22, 2005                [Page 15]

