



ABFAB                                                           R. Smith
Internet-Draft                                        Cardiff University
Intended status: Informational                               M. Donnelly
Expires: September 22, 2016                            Painless Security
                                                          March 21, 2016


 Application Bridging for Federated Access Beyond web (ABFAB) Usability
                   and User Interface Considerations
            draft-ietf-abfab-usability-ui-considerations-04

Abstract

   The real world use of ABFAB-based technologies requires that any
   identity that is to be used for authentication has to be configured
   on the ABFAB-enabled client device.  Achieving this requires software
   on that device (either built into the operating system or a
   standalone utility) that will interact with the user, managing their
   identity information and identity-to-service mappings.  All designers
   of software to fulfil this role will face the same set of challenges.
   This document aims to document these challenges with the aim of
   producing well-thought out UIs with some degree of consistency
   between implementations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Considerations around Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Identity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Identity to Service Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Considerations around Management of Identities  . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  Information associated with each Identity . . . . . . . .   7
     6.2.  Information associated with each Identity Provider  . . .   8
     6.3.  Storage of Identity Information . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.4.  Adding/Association of an Identity . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       6.4.1.  Identity Provider Addition  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       6.4.2.  Identity Addition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.5.  Modifying Identity Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       6.5.1.  Manual Modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       6.5.2.  Automated Modification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.6.  Verifying an identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.7.  Removing an Identity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       6.7.1.  Manual Removal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       6.7.2.  Automated Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     6.8.  Storing an Identity with or without credentials . . . . .  16
   7.  Considerations around Management of Service to Identity
       Mappings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     7.1.  Associating a Service with an Identity  . . . . . . . . .  17
       7.1.1.  User-driven Manual Association  . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       7.1.2.  Automated Rules-based Association . . . . . . . . . .  17
       7.1.3.  Association Conflicts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     7.2.  Disassociating a Service with an Identity . . . . . . . .  18
     7.3.  Listing Services and Identities . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     7.4.  Showing the Service that is requesting Authentication . .  19
     7.5.  Showing the Identity currently in use . . . . . . . . . .  19
     7.6.  Multiple Identities for a Particular Service  . . . . . .  20
     7.7.  Not using ABFAB for a Particular Service  . . . . . . . .  20
   8.  Handling of Errors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     8.1.  Errors in GSS-API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       8.1.1.  Log of Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


     8.2.  Examples of errors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   9.  Handling of Successes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     9.1.  Reporting Authentication Success on First Use of Identity  22
     9.2.  Reporting Authentication Success  . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   10. Other Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     10.1.  Identity Selector Taking Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     10.2.  Import/Export of Credentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   12. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   13. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   14. Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   15. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   16. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     16.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     16.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   Appendix B.  Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29

1.  Introduction

   The use of ABFAB-based technologies requires that any identity that
   is to be used for authentication has to be configured on the client
   device.  Achieving this requires software on that device (either
   built into the operating system or a standalone utility) that will
   interact with the user, and manage the user's identities and
   credential-to-service mappings.  Anyone designing that software will
   face the same set of challenges.

   This document does not intend to supplant evidence-based UI design
   guidelines; implementers of identity selectors are strongly
   encouraged to understand the latest in HCI and UX thought and
   practice.  Instead, it aims to document the common challenges faced
   by implementers with the aim of providing a common starting point for
   implementers in the hope that this aids in producing well-thought out
   UIs with some degree of consistency.

2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Terminology

   Various items of terminology used in the document are heavily
   overloaded in that they mean a variety of different things to
   different people.  In an attempt to minimise this problem, this



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   section gives a brief description of the main items of terminology
   used in order to aid a consistent understanding of this document.

   o  NAI: Network Access Identifier - a standard way of identifying a
      user and assisting in the routing of an authentication request
      (see [RFC4282]).

   o  Identity: In this context, an identity is a credential given to a
      user by a particular organisation with which they have an
      association.  A user may have multiple identities - potentially
      multiple identities per organisation, and also across multiple
      organisations.  Each identity will consist of an NAI, alongside
      other information that supports authentication.  Note that in
      other contexts the usual use of "identity" would match our use of
      "user", whereas the usual use of "identifier" matches our use of
      identity.

   o  Service: The thing that the user is attempting to authenticate to
      via ABFAB technology.  See [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases] for some
      example ABFAB use cases.  Also known as the Relying Party.

   o  Identity Provider: The thing able to make access management
      decisions about the Identity.

   o  Identity Selector: A piece of software that enables the process by
      which the GSS-API acquires the identity to use with a particular
      service.  An Identity Selector typically would allow the user to
      configure a set of identities along with service to identity
      mappings.

   o  Trust anchor: An authoritative source of verification of a
      particular ABFAB Identity Provider, used to allow authentication
      of an Identity Provider using X.509 [RFC5280].  Typically this
      will be a commercial CA to allow authentication via chain of
      trust, or a preconfigured non-commercial certificate (e.g. self-
      signed).

   o  Credential: Whatever is used by the user to authenticate
      themselves with a particular NAI.  What exactly this will be will
      be dependent on the EAP method being used, but is likely to be
      something like a password or a certificate.

4.  Context

   When using the ABFAB architecture (see [I-D.ietf-abfab-arch]) to
   perform federated authentication to some service, a user will need to
   provide identity information that they wish to use to authenticate to
   that particular service.  This will happen through a process of the



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   application calling the GSS-API, which will in turn gather the user's
   credentials through some process.  We will call this process the
   "identity selector" in this document (though note that this is not a
   recommendation on terminology for the process).

   The simplest way to achieve the desired effect would be a process
   that simply takes the credentials from the currently logged in user
   (e.g. the Windows Domain Credentials) and uses those for all services
   that request authenticate through ABFAB.  This approach gives
   ultimate simplicity in terms of UI (it wouldn't have one) but the
   least flexibility (the user has to use a single identity for
   everything).  If there is ever to be a requirement for a user to use
   a different set of credentials for a service, or a requirement for
   the user to use ABFAB to authenticate to the operating system, then
   something more complex will be needed.

   Where there is a requirement for multiple credentials to be
   supported, there are at least two methods that could be employed to
   configure identities and associated information:

   o  They could be configured manually by the user in a configuration
      file that could be edited by hand or some such simple process, and
      read by the GSS-API mechanism.  While this could work very well
      functionally, in practice only a small subset of users would be
      happy with - and able to - configure their identities in such a
      manner.

   o  They could be configured through some interactive process.  For
      ease of use this should have a simple UI, although to support some
      use cases a headless mode (i.e. a way of interacting with the
      identity selector when there is no GUI present) may need to be
      supported.

   When designing an identity selector with a UI (or indeed, with a
   headless mode), any implementer will share a common set of usability
   considerations inherent to the context.  This document aims to
   explore these considerations, and provide advice and guidance on
   addressing them where possible.

5.  Considerations around Terminology

   Anyone designing an identity selector will have to grapple with
   choosing terminology that the average user has some chance of
   understanding.  This terminology can split into a few main functional
   areas, as discussed next.






Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


5.1.  Identity

   The first area where terminology is needed is around the identity/
   identities of the user.  Users are typically used to seeing a variety
   of terms for aspects of their identity in the federated sense, and an
   even larger variety in the wider Internet sense.  For example, in the
   federated sense some of these terms include "username", "login",
   "network account", "institutional account", "home organisation
   account", "credentials", and a myriad of other such terms.  However,
   NAI - the technically correct name for their identity in an ABFAB
   sense - is highly unlikely to be one of these terms that users are
   used to seeing.  Further, given that the NAI superficially looks like
   an email address, there is a definite potential for confusion.

   Implementers of an identity selector will need to carefully consider
   their intended audience for both their level of technical capability
   and the existing terminology that they may have been exposed to.

   Beyond terminology, careful thought needs to be given to the paradigm
   to use when presenting identity to users, as identities and services
   are abstract concepts that some users may not find easily
   understandable.  Implementers may wish to keep such abstract concepts
   despite this, or may wish to examine attempts to map to real world
   paradigms, e.g. the idea of using "Identity Cards" that are held in
   the user's "Wallet", as used by the now defunct Microsoft Cardspace
   ([MS-CS]).

5.2.  Services

   Terminology around services is likely to be less of a problem than
   identity, but it will actually depend on what the service is.  For
   example, each service could be simply described as "server",
   "system", etc.  But for simplicity just the word "service" will
   probably usually suffice.

5.3.  Identity to Service Mapping

   The basic functionality of the Identity Selector is to create the
   correct combination of Identity and Service, so that the correct
   identity is chosen to create the credential for the GSS-EAP
   connection with the given service.  Mapping is the process of
   creating this relationship between identity and service.

   Depending on your perspective either each identity may be mapped to
   multiple services, or each service has multiple identities mapped to
   it.  Thus any UI could present either perspective, or both.





Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


6.  Considerations around Management of Identities

   One of the core features of an identity selector is the management of
   a user's identities.  This section first looks at what information
   associated with an identity will need to manage, and then looks in
   detail at various usability considerations of this area.

6.1.  Information associated with each Identity

   The bare minimum set of information that MUST be stored about each
   identity to allow ABFAB authentication to take place is a single
   item:

   o  NAI: The user's Network Access Identifier (see [RFC4282]) for this
      particular credential.  For example, "joe@example.com".  Note that
      the identity selector MUST NOT store different identities that use
      the same NAI.  This is required as the NAI is the unique key that
      is used by the identity selector when interacting with the GSS-API
      mechanism for various reasons, for example, to allow the GSS-API
      mechanism to report back error or success statuses or to allow the
      application to request the use of a specific identity.

   Next up is a small set of information that SHOULD be stored about
   each identity to allow the user to effectively select a particular
   identity:

   o  Identity provider realm: The ABFAB realm of the identity provider.
      This is used as a key to look up the identity provider from the
      identity selector's list of identity providers, in order to access
      the trust anchor during verification of the identity provider.

   o  Credential: Whatever is used by the users to authenticate
      themselves with a particular NAI.  What exactly this will be will
      be dependent on the EAP method being used, but is likely to be
      something like a password or a certificate.  Note that the
      identity selector SHOULD allow a user to store the credential.
      However, there are use cases where a user may specifically opt for
      this not to be "remembered", so the identity selector MUST NOT
      store the credential without confirmation from the user.

   Finally, there is a set of optional information that MAY be stored
   about each identity that represent useful information for the user to
   have and could make an identity selector more usable.  Note that this
   list is neither intended to be exhaustive or even particularly
   correct; any implementer is free to use whatever make sense in their
   implementation and conforms to good HCI/UX guidelines.  Instead, it
   is simply a suggested starting point.




Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   o  Friendly name for identity: To allow the user to differentiate
      between the set of identities represented in the Identity
      Selector.  This should be editable by the user.  The only
      restriction on this name is that it MUST be unique within that
      particular user's set of identities.  For example: "Student
      username", "Google Account", "Work Login", etc.

   o  Friendly icon for identity: To allow the user to differentiate
      between the set of identities they have they should be able to set
      an icon for that particular identity.

   o  Password changing URL: The URL the user should visit should they
      need to change their password for this particular identity.  For
      example, "http://www.example.com/passwordreset?identifier=myId".

   o  Helpdesk URL: The URL this particular identity should visit to get
      contact details for the helpdesk of the organisation that issued
      this particular identity for when the user encounters issues and
      needs help.  For example, https://www.example.com/
      helpdesk?identifier=myId.

6.2.  Information associated with each Identity Provider

   Identity providers are entities that may be shared across multiple
   identities.  For instance, a person at a university may have one
   identity as a student and another identity as an employee, but a
   single identity provider makes access management decisions about
   both.  In these cases, the identity selector MUST consider it an
   error if the trust anchor for the identity provider is different
   between the various identities managed by the single identity
   provider.

   The bare minimum set of information that MUST be stored about each
   identity provider is:

   o  Realm: The realm of the identity provider.  This will uniquely
      identify the identity realm.

   o  Trust anchor: For the identity selector to be able to verify that
      the Identity Provider it is going to talk to and attempt to
      authenticate against is the Identity Provider that it is
      expecting, and that it is not being spoofed in some way.  This is
      likely to be an X.509 certificate [RFC5280], or a tuple of
      (trusted root certificate, servername in Subject or
      subjectAltName).  Storing a credential without a relevant trust
      anchor allows for the possibility of a malicious attacker
      intercepting traffic and masquerading as the Identity Provider in
      question.



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   Identity providers also have a set of optional information that MAY
   be stored about each identify provider.  This set includes, but is
   not limited to:

   o  Friendly name for the identity provider: To allow the user to
      differentiate between the set of identity providers represented in
      the Identity Selector.  This should be editable by the user.  The
      only restriction on this name is that it MUST be unique within
      that particular user's set of identity providers.  For example:
      "My University", "Google", etc.

   o  Friendly icon for the identity provider: To allow the user to
      differentiate between the set of identity providers they have they
      should be able to set an icon for that particular identity
      provider.

   o  Password changing URL: The URL the user should visit should they
      need to change passwords for identities in this realm.  For
      example, "http://www.example.com/passwordreset".

   o  Helpdesk URL: The URL the user should visit to get contact details
      for the helpdesk of the organisation that issued this particular
      identity for when the user encounters issues and needs help.  For
      example, https://www.example.com/helpdesk.

   Note that the password changing URL and helpdesk URL somewhat mirror
   the definitions of the same fields in the identity.  The distinction
   is that the URLs in the identity SHOULD apply to the individual
   identity, whereas the URLs in the identity provider SHOULD apply to
   all identities that the identity provider defines.  For example, an
   identity password change URL would provide a personalized experience
   of changing the password for the given identity, but the identity
   provider password change URL would direct the user to a page where
   the user would need to enter the individual identity that needs a new
   password.

   If the identity contains no password change URL or helpdesk URL, the
   identity selector MAY present any corresponding URL from the identity
   selector instead.  However, if the identity contains the URL, the
   identity selector SHOULD present the URL from the identity.

6.3.  Storage of Identity Information

   Since some of the information that makes up the identity is sensitive
   in nature (e.g. containing passwords), then this information SHOULD
   be stored and accessed securely.  This might involve ensuring the
   credential information is held in encrypted form on device and
   accessed using a passphrase.  For deeper integration into the system,



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   this could be done by using existing secure storage on the system
   such as Keychain on a Mac, the GNOME keyring on a GNOME based Linux
   device, or the Credentials Manager on Windows.

6.4.  Adding/Association of an Identity

   Users will have one or more identities given to them by organisations
   that they have a relationship with.  One of the core tasks of an
   identity selector will be to learn about these identities and their
   identity providers in order to use them when it comes to
   authenticating to services on behalf of the user.  Adding these
   identities could be done in one of three ways: manual addition,
   automated addition that is manually triggered, or automated addition
   that is automatically triggered.  Each of these are discussed in more
   detail next.

   Note that the term "association" or "addition" of an identity is used
   rather than "provisioning" of an identity, because while we actually
   are provisioning identities into the UI, provisioning is an
   overloaded term in the identity and access management space and could
   easily be confused with identity provisioning in the sense of the
   creation of the identity by the home organisation's identity
   management procedures.

6.4.1.  Identity Provider Addition

6.4.1.1.  Manual Identity Provider Addition

   Allowing users to add an identity provider manually is technically
   the easiest method to get this information, but it is a method that
   has the greatest usability drawbacks - including some that create
   potential security issues.  Most of the information required is
   relatively technical and finding some way of explaining what each
   field is to an non-technical audience is challenging (to say the
   least).  This especially is the case for trust anchor information.
   Thus this method should be considered as a power-user option only, or
   as a fall-back should the other methods not be applicable.
   Implementers may well decide not to offer the manual option due to
   these drawbacks.

   When this method is used, careful consideration should be given to
   the UI presented to the user.  The UI will have to ask for all of the
   information detailed in Section 6.2.

   Trust anchors present a particularly onerous challenge for the user
   to enter.  For this reason, many identity selectors will want to
   implement a leap-of-faith acquisition of the trust anchor.  For these
   leap of faith acquisitions, the identity selector SHOULD present the



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   user with the name of the realm that the identity selector is
   attempting to reach, the subject of the trust anchor certificate,
   details of the certification chain, and a fingerprint of the
   certificate.  If the realm does not match the subject of the
   certificate, the identity selector MUST inform the user of the
   discrepency.  The identity selector MAY reject the leap-of-faith on
   its own, or MAY allow the user to proceed anyway.  If the user
   proceeds anyway, the identity selector SHOULD urge the user to reject
   the leap-of-faith.

   The area of verification of trust anchors is very important.  An
   Identity Selector that allows for manual addition of identity
   provider information SHOULD try to ensure that trust anchor
   information is gathered and checked in a secure a manner as possible
   - where users have to enter and confirm all trust anchor information,
   or be required to explicitly agree to an insecure configuration if
   this is not done properly.

6.4.1.2.  Manually Triggered Automated Identity Provider Addition

   One way to bypass the need for manual addition of an identity
   provider - and all of the usability and security issues inherent with
   that approach - is to provide some sort of manually triggered, but
   automated, addition process.  One approach to accomplishing this, for
   example, could be for an organisation to have a section on their
   website where their users could visit and be given piece of data that
   contains much or all of the relevant identity provider information
   for importing into the identity selector.

   Additionally, the user SHOULD be given the opportunity to:

   o  Supply or change the default friendly name and friendly icon for
      that identity provider - to allow the user to customise the
      identifier they use for that identity provider;

   o  Reject the addition of the identity provider completely - to allow
      the user to back out of the association process in an intuitive
      way.

   In this case, trust anchors would be directly provided through the
   automated addition process to help establish the trust relationship
   in a secure manner.

6.4.1.3.  Fully Automated Identity Provider Addition

   Many organisations manage the machines of their users using
   enterprise management tools.  Such organisations may wish to be able
   to automatically add a particular user's identity provider to the



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   identity selector on their machine/network account so that the user
   has to do nothing.

   This represents the best usability for the user - who wouldn't
   actually have to do anything.  However, it can only work on machines
   centrally managed by the organisation.

6.4.2.  Identity Addition

6.4.2.1.  Manual Identity Addition

   Allowing users to add an identity manually is relatively easy in
   comparison to adding an identity provider manually.  If the identity
   provider is already known in the identity selector, then the identity
   selector can construct the NAI from the identity provider and a
   username.  Thus the manual addition of an identity in a known realm
   needs to prompt the user only to pick the realm, to enter the
   username, and to enter the credential.  If the identity provider is
   not known to the identity selector, the identity selector will
   provide the user with a way to define a new one as part of the
   identity addition.

   There are two points at which a user could manually add an identity:

   o  Asynchronously: the user could be allowed to, at any time, trigger
      a workflow of manually adding an identity.  This represents the
      most flexible way of adding an identity since a user can perform
      this at any time.  It does, however, also have inherent issues
      when it comes to verifying the newly added identity - see
      Section 6.6.

   o  Just In Time: when connecting to a service which has no mapping to
      an existing identity, the user could be given an option to add a
      new one, as well as associating with an existing one.  This seems
      to present a better user experience when it comes to verifying the
      newly added identity (see Section 6.6), however, it represents a
      less direct method of adding an identity.  Users who have not yet
      added the appropriate identity to their identity selector may find
      it difficult to understand that they must try to access a
      particular service in order to add an identity.

   Of course, implementers could support both styles of identity
   addition to gain the benefits of both and give flexibility to the
   user.







Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


6.4.2.2.  Manually Triggered Automated Identity Addition

   Much like in the case of the manually triggered automated identity
   provider addition Section 6.4.1.2, an identity could be added to the
   identity selector through a user-initiated mechanism.  To follow the
   example in the identity provider section above, the organization
   could enhance the identity provider addition web service to prompt
   for the user part of the NAI.  The web service could then generate
   all of the data needed for adding both the identity provider and the
   identity.

   It is reasonable to assume that any such automated addition service
   is likely to be organisation specific, so that the Issuing
   Organisation and realm part of the NAI will be constant, as would be
   the trust anchor information.  The user part of their NAI will have
   been input on the web service.  The password could be provided as a
   part of the provided data or the identity selector could prompt the
   user to enter it.

   If the identity provider data contained in this identity to be added
   conflicts with an existing identity provider known to the identity
   selector, the identity selector SHOULD present the discrepency to the
   user.  The identity selector MAY reject the identity provider and
   identity on its own, or MAY allow the user to proceed anyway.  If the
   identity selector allows the user to proceed anyway, the identity
   selector SHOULD urge the user to reject the leap-of-faith, and
   require the user to confirm the intent to proceed before proceeding.

   Additionally, the user SHOULD be given the opportunity to:

   o  Supply or change the default friendly name for that identity - to
      allow the user to customise the identifier they use for that
      identity;

   o  Indicate whether or not the identity selector should always ask
      before using services with this identity - to customise the way in
      which the identity selector interacts with the user with this
      particular identity;

   o  Reject the addition of the identity completely - to allow the user
      to back out of the association process in an intuitive way.

6.4.2.3.  Fully Automated Identity Addition

   Section Section 6.4.1.3 introduced the concept of using enterprise
   management tools to add an identity provider to the identity
   selector.  These enterprise management tools could be used to add an
   identity that uses the identity provider added in the above manner.



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   The user would not need to decipher difficult to understand data
   entry screens.

   However, having an identity automatically provided, including its
   password, does have some particular usability issues.  Users are used
   to having to provide their username and password to access remote
   services.  When attempting to access services, authenticating to them
   completely transparently to the user could represent a source of
   confusion.  User training within an organisation to explain that
   automated population of their identity has been enabled is the only
   way to counter this.

6.5.  Modifying Identity Information

   This process is conceptually fairly similar to adding an identity,
   and thus shares many of the usability issues with that process.  Some
   particular things are discussed here.

6.5.1.  Manual Modification

   An identity selector may allow a user to manually modify some or all
   of the information associated with each identity.  The obvious items
   that SHOULD be allowed to be changed by the user are the friendly
   name, the friendly icon, and the credential, or password, associated
   with the identity.

   The identity selector should restrict other modification of the
   information:

   o  Identity Selectors SHOULD NOT allow the editing of the NAI of an
      identity or the trust anchor of an identity provider for items
      that have been added through automated means (Section 6.4.1.2,
      Section 6.4.1.3, Section 6.4.2.2 and Section 6.4.2.3).

   o  Identity Selectors MAY allow the update of the trust anchor of
      identity providers that have stored the trust anchor through just
      in time manual addition, using another just in time retrieval of
      the trust anchor.  Any identity selector that allows this update
      MUST inform the user of the change in the trust anchor, and advise
      the user that any unexpected change should be assumed to be an
      attack.

   o  Identity Selectors SHOULD NOT allow manual modification of the
      password changing URL.

   o  Identity Selectors SHOULD NOT allow manual modification of the
      helpdesk URL.




Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


6.5.2.  Automated Modification

   To ease usability, organisations may wish to automatically provide
   updates to identity provider or identity information.  For example,
   if the user's password changes it could automatically update the
   password for the identity in the user's identity selector, or if the
   trust anchor information changes (e.g. if a certificate is changed)
   it could be automatically pushed out to all users.

6.6.  Verifying an identity

   An inherent by-product of the ABFAB architecture is that an identity
   cannot be verified during the addition process; it can only be
   verified while it is in use with a real service.  This represents a
   definite usability issue no matter which method of identity addition
   is used (see Section 6.4):

   o  If the user has manually added the identity (see Section 6.4) they
      may have gone through the whole manual process with no errors and
      so believe the identity has been set up correctly.  However, when
      they attempt to access a service, they may be given an error
      message, thus causing some amount of confusion.

   o  If the user has had the identity populated into their identity
      selector, then there is a much greater chance of the identity
      information being correct.  However, if any of the information is
      not correct, then there is the potential for confusion as the user
      did not add the information in the first place.

   Also, if the identity information is incorrect the user may not know
   where the error lies, and the error messages provided by the process
   may not be helpful enough to indicate the error and how to fix it
   (see Section 8).

6.7.  Removing an Identity

   This is fairly similar to adding or modifying an identity, and thus
   shares many of the usability issues with those processes.  Some
   particular things are discussed here.

6.7.1.  Manual Removal

   Allowing the user to manually delete an identity is probably the best
   way to achieve the goal.  Any UI should allow for this option.







Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


6.7.2.  Automated Removal

   While automated removal of an identity is a way of achieving the goal
   without having to interact with the user, the consequence is that
   things may disappear from the user's identity selector without them
   realising.

6.8.  Storing an Identity with or without credentials

   Sometimes, a user may wish to have the identity they wish to use with
   a service stored by the identity selector, but not the credential
   (e.g. password) that goes along with that Identity.  The consequence
   of this is that when a user attempts to authenticate to a service for
   which an identity, but no credential, is stored, then the user would
   need to be prompted to manually enter the credential.

7.  Considerations around Management of Service to Identity Mappings

   A service to identity mapping tells the identity selector which
   identity should be used for a particular service.  There is
   potentially a many-to-many association between identities and
   services since a user may wish to use one of their identities for
   many services, or more than one identity for a single service (e.g.
   if they have multiple roles on that service).

   This potentially complex many-to-many association between identities
   and services is not easily comprehended by the user, and allowing the
   user to both manipulate it and control can be challenging.  These
   obstacles are especially common when errors occur after an
   association has been made.  In this scenario it is important that an
   identity can be disassociated with a service.

   To further complicate the picture, users may wish for:

   1.  The identity to service mapping to be stored along with the
       credential, i.e. the user should always be authenticated to a
       particular service with a particular identity with no prompting.

   2.  The identity to service mapping to be stored but not the
       credential, i.e. the user should not be prompted to choose the
       identity for a particular service, but should be prompted to
       enter their credential for that identity.

   3.  The identity to service mapping to not be stored, i.e. the user
       should be asked which identity to use every time they
       authenticate to a particular service.





Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


7.1.  Associating a Service with an Identity

   There needs to be a way for the user to create the service to
   identity association.  It is advisable that this link be made only
   after the identity in question has authenticated with the service
   without any error.

   There are a few ways this association could happen.

7.1.1.  User-driven Manual Association

   There are two ways in which manual association of an identity to a
   service could happen:

   1.  The identity selector MAY allow the user to associate a
       particular service with a particular identity manually, using the
       identity selector before they first attempt to use the service.
       This method is inadvisable, however, because not only might the
       identity in question not yet have authenticated successfully, the
       user would also need to know all the required technical details
       of that service beforehand, such as its GSS Acceptor Name.

   2.  On encountering a service new to the identity selector, the
       identity selector SHOULD pop up a dialogue box to the user asking
       if they would like to use an existing identity for this service
       (and might also allow them to create a new identity and use
       that).

7.1.2.  Automated Rules-based Association

   It would be beneficial from a usability perspective to minimise - or
   avoid entirely - situations where the user has to pick an identity
   for a particular service.  This could be accomplished by having rules
   to describe services and their mapping to identities.  Such a rule
   could match, for example, a particular identity for all IMAP servers,
   or a particular identity for all services in a given service realm.
   These rules could be configured as a part of the automated identity
   addition process described in Section 6.4.2.2 or Section 6.4.2.3.

7.1.3.  Association Conflicts

   The presence of rules-based associations brings with it potential
   conflicts in the rules.  A non-exhaustive list of conflicts includes:

   o  One rule applies to all services of a particular type, while
      another rule applies to all services within a particular domain.
      For example, one rule applies identity A to all IMAP services,




Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


      while another rule applies identity B to all services in the
      example.com domain.

   o  One rule originates from enterprise management tools as described
      in Section 6.4.2.3, and another rule originates from manual
      addition.

   o  The user has associated an identity with a service upon
      encountering the service for the first time, and later creates a
      rule that matches all services within that service's realm.

   Identity selectors MUST order the precedence of rules as follows:

   1.  Manually created rules matching specific services and realms

   2.  Enterprise created rules matching specific services and realms

   3.  Manually created rules matching any service in a single realm

   4.  Enterprise created rules matching any service in a single realm

   5.  Manually created rules matching a single service in any realm

   6.  Enterprise created rules matching a single service in any realm

   Identity selectors SHOULD notify the user whenever a new rule will
   take precedence over an existing rule.

7.2.  Disassociating a Service with an Identity

   A user MUST be able to disassociate an identity with a service - that
   is, to be able to remove the mapping without having to remove the
   identity.

   For serious authentication errors, the identity selector SHOULD
   prompt the user to choose whether to disassociate the identity from
   the service or retain the association.  The prompt SHOULD explain the
   nature of the error.

   When such a serious authentication error occurs and the identity is
   selected by a rules-based association (Section 7.1.2), any
   disassociation prompt MUST inform the user that the identity was
   selected by a rule.  The prompt SHOULD allow the user to retain the
   association, or to disassociate the rule altogether.  The prompt MAY
   include a third choice, to create an exception so that the rule does
   not apply to this specific service.





Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   As of this writing, there are no authentication failures that should
   cause the disassociation of an identity from a service.

7.3.  Listing Services and Identities

   A service listing should be considered in the identity selector which
   is both searchable and editable by the user.

7.4.  Showing the Service that is requesting Authentication

   When a user is attempting to authenticate to a service for the first
   time, there should be some indication given to the user as to which
   service is requesting authentication.  In many cases, the service may
   be obvious (where the user has started the process of attempting to
   authenticate to a particular service), but in other cases this may
   not be obvious (e.g. if an authentication attempt is triggered by a
   timer or a specific event), and for this scenario some indication as
   to the requesting service is necessary.

7.5.  Showing the Identity currently in use

   It would be beneficial if, when using a service, the identity
   currently in use could be made visible to the user while they are
   using a specific service.  This allows the user to identify which
   identity is used with a particular service at a particular time (the
   user may have more than one identity that they could use with a
   particular service) - so that they can then disassociate the pairing.
   This is especially useful when the identity is selected without any
   user prompt, because of a previous association.

   Implementing such a feature may be hard, however, due to the layered
   nature of the ABFAB transaction - the identity selector will
   certainly know when successful (or failed) authentications to a
   particular service have happened, but after that it typically plays
   no further part in the use of the service.  Therefore, knowing that a
   particular service is still using a particular identity in order to
   indicate this to the user would be challenging.

   One approach that could be used would be to display OS notifications
   when an identity is used.  The notification could include information
   such as the application requesting the identity, the service
   receiving the identity, and the identity used.  Another approach
   could be for the identity selector to maintain a history of identity
   use.







Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


7.6.  Multiple Identities for a Particular Service

   An Identity Selector should be able to deal with the case where a
   user has multiple identities associated with a single service.  For
   example, upon receiving a request for authentication to a service
   that multiple identities are configured for, ask the user which of
   the identities should be used in this instance.

7.7.  Not using ABFAB for a Particular Service

   There may be cases where a user does not wish to use ABFAB based
   authentication at all to a particular service, even though it is
   ABFAB enabled.  To support this, the identity selector would have to
   allow the user to choose not to use ABFAB when they attempt to
   authenticate to a service.  It would be desirable if the user could
   also flag that this should be remembered.

8.  Handling of Errors

   Errors during the ABFAB authentication process can happen at any of
   the many layers - they could be GSS-API errors, EAP errors, RADIUS/
   RadSec errors, SAML errors, application errors, etc.  ABFAB based
   technologies are limited in error handling by the limitations in the
   protocols used.

8.1.  Errors in GSS-API

   All GSS-API calls are necessarily instantiated from within the
   calling application.  For this reason, when an error occurs the error
   is passed back to the application in order for it to deal with it.
   To retry, the application needs to re-initiate the GSS-API call.
   Unless the application has been written to deal with this properly,
   this process can be very tedious for a user and cause them opt out of
   what they are trying to accomplish.  In addition to this, the
   application may not display the error messages to the user.  Even
   when the application does display the errors, the messages themselves
   may not be useful enough for the user to decipher what has gone
   wrong.

   Two extensions to GSS-API are suggested for the consideration of the
   kitten working group:

   o  GSS-API should provide a method for applications to invoke to
      indicate that the application has displayed the last error to the
      user.






Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   o  GSS-API should provide a method for applications to invoke to
      indicate that the authentication succeeded, but is insufficient
      for the task at hand and needs to be retried.

8.1.1.  Log of Errors

   The Identity Selector can improve the general GSS-API error reporting
   experience by displaying a list of errors experienced by ABFAB
   applications.  When an application error occurs, the EAP mechanism
   MAY record that error.  If the mechanism records these errors, the
   Identity Selector MAY display these errors to the user.  Thus, the
   user will have a single place to go to view all of the errors that a
   user experiences across all applications.  Therefore, an Identity
   Selector that implements an error display SHOULD present the user
   with the context of the error, including the calling application and
   the time.

8.2.  Examples of errors

   To give an idea of the range of errors that might be seen, consider
   the following non-exhaustive set of potential errors.

   Identity Association/Verification Errors:

   o  The credentials presented to the IdP were not able to be verified
      - e.g. wrong username/password.

   o  The Trust Anchor for the IdP was invalid.

   Service Errors:

   o  The IdP recognizes the client, but decides not to authorize it for
      this service.

   o  The EAP session succeeds, but the RADIUS system sends access-
      reject to the Relying Party

   o  The RADIUS system succeeds, but the Relying Party rejects the
      session.  For instance, the SAML part of the session could contain
      an error that causes the Relying Party to reject the client.

   o  The Identity might have been successfully authenticated, but the
      user might not have authorisation to use the service or privilege
      levels within the service they are attempting to use.  For
      instance, the Identity could authorise the use of an operating
      system as an unprivileged user, which would prevent the user's
      goal of managing the hard drives.




Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   Other Errors:

   o  The IdP didn't respond to the Service.

   o  The IdP didn't respond to the Client.

   o  Network errors.

   o  Timing errors.

9.  Handling of Successes

   It is of course hoped that the identity selector will have to
   occasionally handle successes as well as errors.  This section has
   some brief discussion about some areas you might want to think about.

9.1.  Reporting Authentication Success on First Use of Identity

   The first time an identity is used with a service, it would be good
   practice to visually indicate in some way that the process has been
   successful, in order that the user understands what is happening and
   is then prepared for future authentication attempts.

9.2.  Reporting Authentication Success

   On an on-going basis you may or may not wish to indicate visually to
   the user a successful authentication to a service.  This relates to
   Section 7.5.

10.  Other Considerations

   This section briefly discusses other considerations that you might
   want to think about that don't fit in any of the other categories.

10.1.  Identity Selector Taking Focus

   When an ABFAB authentication request is triggered, and where it needs
   input from the user, the Identity Selector should take focus in some
   way so that it is clear to the user that they need to do something to
   proceed.

10.2.  Import/Export of Credentials

   For various reasons, an identity selector implementation might want
   to include functionality that allows for the export/import of
   identities and service to identity mappings.  This could be for
   backup purposes, to allow a degree of mobility between identity
   selector instances, etc.



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   If providing this functionality, it would be advisable that the
   credential store that is the result of the export should be secure -
   encrypted and password protected - given the nature of the
   information.

11.  Security Considerations

   Most security considerations are ones relevant to the use of GSS-EAP
   and are detailed in [I-D.ietf-abfab-arch].  There are, however, a few
   specific sets of security considerations related to the UI
   implementation.

   First, as discussed earlier, the Identity Selector should use a Trust
   Anchor to authenticate the IdP before it sends the users credentials
   to it.  Having no Trust Anchor information at all, or an incorrect
   Trust Anchor, can enable the possibility of someone spoofing the IdP
   and harvesting credentials sent to it.  So, how this Trust Anchor is
   configured and managed can have major security implications:

   o  The most secure way for a Trust Anchor to be configured is to have
      it provisioned alongside the other identity information in an
      enterprise provisioning scenario.  This allows for the correct
      Trust Anchor to be configured with no user input required.
      However, thought needs to be given to Trust Anchor expiry and
      consequent requirement for regular reprovisioning of identity
      information.

   o  Another way that is potentially secure would be to allow the user
      to discover the Trust Anchor information out of band and manually
      input this information into the Identity Selector.  This is only
      secure, however, for those users who understand what they're doing
      in this scenario; pragmatically, this is unlikely to be the case
      for many users so is not a recommended approach for the average
      user.

   o  A pragmatic approach would be leap of faith, whereby no Trust
      Anchor information is initially provisioned, and the first time
      the Identity Selector connects to the IdP it remembers the Trust
      Anchor information for future use.  This doesn't mitigate against
      spoofing of an IdP in the first instance, but would enable
      mitigation against it for all future connections.

   o  Finally, there may be interesting ways to leverage technologies
      such as DANE [RFC6698] to store the Trust Anchor for an IdP in
      DNS.

   Secondly, the storage of the user's credentials by the Identity
   Selector should be done in a secure manner to mitigate against people



Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   taking unauthorised control of the device being able to gather these
   credentials.  Use of a secure credential storage mechanism, such as
   the GNOME Keyring on Linux, or Keychain on the Mac, are recommended.

12.  Privacy Considerations

   Since the ABFAB system facilitates the sharing of identifying
   information about a user, the undesired sharing of information is a
   real concern.  Most of the privacy considerations lie outside the
   scope of the Identity Selector UI, which neither controls nor sees
   which attributes of an identity will be shared with a service.  In
   essence, the only control that the Identity Selector has is whether
   or not a given identity will be shared with the service.

   However, the selection of identity does warrant privacy
   considerations.  Any automated choice of identity for a service will
   share information, potentially inappropriately.  Examples of this
   include:

   o  Rules that apply to a service across all realms will cause an
      identity choice, even for realms the user would actually prefer to
      avoid interacting with at all.

   o  Storing a default for a particular service and realm will cause
      the identity to be selected in that situation going forward, even
      if the situation or application does not warrant that.  For
      instance, a web browser in privacy mode ideally should not know of
      any saved identity association choices.

   Even appropriate choices of sharing an identity with a service leaks
   information about the user.  The desired service and the identity
   provider must communicate with each other to perform an
   authentication.  Even if the authentication fails, the service will
   know the realm of the user credential, and the Identity Provider will
   know the realm, and maybe the service, that the user tried to access.
   For services with fallback authentication mechanisms, the system may
   try and fail to authenticate the user, thus sharing the realm
   information noted above, without the user being aware this has
   happened.

13.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.








Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


14.  Contributors

   The following individuals made important contributions to the text of
   this document: Sam Hartman (Painless Security LLC), and Maria Turk
   (Codethink Ltd).

15.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Jim Schaad, Stefan Winter, David Chadwick, Kevin Wasserman,
   Alejandro Perez-Mendez, Ken Klingenstein, and Dave Crocker for
   feedback and suggestions.

16.  References

16.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4282]  Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The
              Network Access Identifier", RFC 4282,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4282, December 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4282>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, DOI 10.17487/RFC6698, August
              2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6698>.

   [I-D.ietf-abfab-arch]
              Howlett, J., Hartman, S., Tschofenig, H., Lear, E., and J.
              Schaad, "Application Bridging for Federated Access Beyond
              Web (ABFAB) Architecture", draft-ietf-abfab-arch-12 (work
              in progress), February 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases]
              Smith, R., "Application Bridging for Federated Access
              Beyond web (ABFAB) Use Cases", draft-ietf-abfab-
              usecases-05 (work in progress), September 2012.




Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


16.2.  Informative References

   [MS-CS]    Brown, K., "The InfoCard Identity Revolution", July 2006,
              <https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/
              magazine/2006.07.infocard.aspx>.














































Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


Appendix A.  Change Log

   Note to RFC Editor: if this document does not obsolete an existing
   RFC, please remove this appendix before publication as an RFC.

   IETF draft -03 to ietf draft -04

   1.  Document service errors.

   2.  Document GSS error handling, including a request for a couple of
       new GSS methods, and maintaining a log of all GSS errors for
       later viewing.

   IETF draft -02 to ietf draft -03

   1.  Tidying up language throughout.

   2.  Added the idea of an identity provider object within the identity
       selector, and moved the trust anchor property from the identity
       to the identity provider.

   3.  Added restrictions on manual modification of automatically added
       identities and identity providers.

   4.  Added precedence between identity association rules.

   5.  Incorporated many comments from the mailing list.

   6.  Added privacy considerations section.

   IETF draft -01 to ietf draft -02

   1.  Tidying up language throughout.

   2.  Finished remaining TODOs - largely in the error handling section.

   3.  Added security considerations section.

   IETF draft -00 to ietf draft -01

   1.  Tidying up language throughout

   2.  Doing some of the TODOs

   3.  Added language that tries to explain that this document is not a
       substitute for good HCI/UX design.





Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


   4.  Changed terminology slightly to avoid confusion between an
       identity selector "mechanism" and a GSS-API mechanism.

   5.  Added a caveat about the potential for the UI to show the
       identity currently in use for a particular service.

   6.  Added a requirement that the identity selector must not store the
       same NAI for multiple identities.

   7.  Stopped talking about "provisioning" after saying that I wouldn't
       talk about "provisioning".

   Draft -04 to ietf draft -00

   1.  Adding brief discussion of identities vs identifiers (Ken).

   2.  Changing assumption about credentials having a password in favour
       of more generic text for other auth types.

   3.  Adding discussion of storage of identity information.

   4.  Added sections on dealing with multiple identities per service,
       remembering credentials, remembering not to use ABFAB.

   5.  Added small section on ID selector needing to take focus in some
       way.

   Draft -03 to draft -04

   1.  Addressing various comments from Jim and Stefan.

   Draft -02 to draft -03

   1.  Bumping version to keep it alive.

   Draft -01 to draft -02

   1.  Completed the major consideration sections, lots of rewording
       throughout.

   Draft -00 to draft -01

   1.  None, republishing to refresh the document.  Other than adding
       this comment...







Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft           ABFAB UI Considerations              March 2016


Appendix B.  Open Issues

   Note to RFC Editor: please remove this appendix before publication as
   an RFC.

Authors' Addresses

   Dr. Rhys Smith
   Cardiff University
   39-41 Park Place
   Cardiff  CF10 3BB
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 29 2087 0126
   EMail: smith@cardiff.ac.uk


   Mark Donnelly
   Painless Security
   14 Summer Street
   Suite 202
   Malden, Massachusetts  02176
   United States

   EMail: mark@painless-security.com


























Smith & Donnelly       Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 29]
