INTERNET DRAFT
draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt



                                                 S. Deering (Xerox PARC)
                                                        P. Francis (NTT)
                                                  R. Govindan (Bellcore)
                                                           February 1994


                 Simple Internet Protocol Plus (SIPP):
                         Routing and Addressing



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts).

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
   Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.


Changes From Last Version

   Actually, this was intended to be the first version of the ROAD spec,
   but the previous version was sent to the Internet Drafts secretariat
   before it was completely reviewed, and in the confusion was mistak-
   enly posted in the Internet Drafts repository.  The previous version
   is dated January 1994.

   This version contains numerous minor changes not mentioned here.  The
   major changes in this version are:

   1.   Routers are no longer required to recognize prefixes they ini-
        tiate in routing algorithms as identifying themselves.



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 1]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   2.   The Flow ID/Source Identifying Address pair no longer needs to
        be unique for a given route header.  The Flow ID is not set
        unless an explicit flow has been established.

   3.   The X and S bits in the Local-Use address have been repositioned
        to reflect where they actually lay according to canonical for-
        mat.




1.  INTRODUCTION

   This specification defines the routing and addressing architecture of
   SIPP.  It describes the address formats for SIPP, and the rules for
   handling address sequences for both hosts and routers.

   The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Jim Bound
   (DEC), Bob Gilligan (Sun), Bob Hinden (Sun), Christian Huitema
   (INRIA), and Erik Nordmark (Sun), and Sue Thomson (Bellcore).


1.1.  Terminology

   The terminology defined in the SIPP Specification [4] applies to this
   document.  New terms are defined as follows:

   address: A 64-bit SIPP layer identifier for a node or set of nodes.
            An address can be used for both routing and identification
            purposes.  (This definition is an augmentation of that given
            in the SIPP Specification.)

   uniqueness scope: The topologically defined region over which an
            address may be assigned to no more than one node or set
            of nodes.

   routing scope: The topologically defined region over which hosts
            and routers have sufficient routing information to forward
            a packet toward the node(s) identified by that address.

   route sequence: The sequence of addresses consisting of the source
            address, the destination address, and the addresses encoded
            in the optional Routing Header of the SIPP packet.

   address sequence: A sequence of addresses that forms part of the
            route sequence.  The address sequence is used for the
            purpose of routing to a node in the case where a single
            (64-bit) address has insufficient routing scope.



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 2]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   identifying address: The low-order address in an address sequence.
            Of the addresses in an address sequence, only the
            identifying address is used to identify the source and
            destination of a packet (for instance, by the transport
            protocol).

   extended address: The use of an address sequence to extend the SIPP
            address space beyond 64 bits.


2.  SIPP ADDRESSING

   SIPP addresses are 64-bit identifiers for nodes and sets of nodes.
   There are two types of addresses:


   Unicast:   Causes a packet to be sent to a single node.

   Multicast: Identifies a set of nodes, and causes the packet to be
              sent to all of those nodes.

   There are no broadcast addresses in SIPP, their function being super-
   seded by multicast addresses.

   Nodes may have multiple unicast addresses and multiple multicast
   addresses.  Each of a node's addresses is said to be "bound" to zero
   or more of that node's interfaces.  Whether or not an address may be
   bound to an interface depends on the routing environment in which the
   node is situated.  As one example, consider a host (i.e., a non-
   router) with three interfaces, connected to two links (e.g., two Eth-
   ernets) as illustrated here:


           ================================== Link X
                          |    |
                        i1|    |i2
                       +----------+
                       |   Host   |
                       +----------+
                           i3|
                             |
           ================================== Link Y



   Assume the host has been allocated a unicast address with subnet pre-
   fix S.  That address may be bound to EITHER or BOTH interfaces i1 and
   i2 only if at least one router attached to link X is advertising



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 3]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   prefix S on that link (using ICMP Router Advertisement messages, as
   specified in [6]). The same address may be bound to interface i3 only
   if at least one router on link Y is advertising prefix S.  If the
   prefix S is being advertised on both link X and link Y, the same
   address may be bound to any or all of the three interfaces.

   Even though an address MAY be bound to an interface, it is not
   REQUIRED to be bound to that interface.  If it is desired that a dif-
   ferent address be bound to each each interface, as with IP, a node
   may be so configured.  However, SIPP's relaxation of IP's strict
   one-address-per-interface model provides greater flexibility in con-
   figuring and managing addresses and subnets, allows conservation of
   addresses (as is sometimes accomplished in IP routers, through the
   use of "unnumbered" or "not separately numbered" interfaces), and
   supports some new capabilities such as singly-addressed, multiply-
   attached servers and dynamic changing of address bindings to dif-
   ferent links by mobile hosts.

   From the addressing example above, it can also be noted that SIPP
   supports the use of the same subnet prefix across more than one link.
   Although subnets in IP were originally designed to map one-to-one
   with links, de facto usage of IP has frequently violated that model,
   allowing one subnet to span multiple links (e.g., using proxy ARP)
   and more than one subnet to be assigned to the same link.  SIPP
   adopts the less stringent model: subnets in SIPP are a logical con-
   struct -- the lowest-level (i.e., finest-grain) aggregation of
   addresses under a common address prefix -- independent of the physi-
   cal topology of links.  A network administrator is free to assign one
   subnet per link if desired, but that is not a requirement of the pro-
   tocol.

   One further relaxation of the IP addressing model is that two SIPP
   nodes attached to the same link need not belong to the same subnet in
   order to communicate directly, i.e., they are not forced to communi-
   cate via an intermediate router on the common link.

   A SIPP address serves two purposes.  One is to uniquely identify the
   node (or set of nodes) to which the address belongs.  The other is to
   specify the location of the addressed node(s) in the internet topol-
   ogy, to facilitate routing.

   A SIPP address is said to have a certain "routing scope", which is
   the topological region over which nodes have sufficient routing
   information to deliver a packet to the node(s) identified by that
   address.  Most SIPP addresses have global routing scope, meaning they
   are routable from anywhere in the internet.  However, some addresses
   have less than global routing scope.  For example, during bootstrap-
   ping a SIPP node may use an address derived from its link-level



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 4]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   address (e.g., an Ethernet address) that is only locally routable.

   Every SIPP packet contains two Identifying Addresses, identifying the
   source and destination nodes of the packet.  The transport-layer
   pseudo-header checksum for the packet is calculated using the two
   Identifying Addresses.

   The two Identifying Addresses may or may not contain sufficient loca-
   tion information to route the packet to its destination(s) (or to
   route an error message back to its source).  When they are insuffi-
   cient, an optional SIPP Routing Header is included in the packet to
   carry the additional addressing information required for routing.
   These additional addresses may be viewed as high-order extensions of
   the Identifying Addresses.  The additional addresses and the Identi-
   fying Address, taken together, are called an address sequence.

   For instance, an address sequence can be used for a mobile node that
   is attached to a place in the internet other than the location speci-
   fied by its Identifying Address.  Or, an address sequence can be used
   if the routing scope of the Identifying Address is not sufficient (as
   may happen if the internet grows too large to assign globally-
   routable addresses to all nodes).  This way, the address sequence can
   be used to achieve the effect of a variable length address.  Even
   when the address sequence is used to extend the address length beyond
   64 bits, however, the identification function uses only the "low
   order" 64 bits (the Identifying Address).


2.1.  Text Representation of Addresses

   There are two conventional forms for representing SIPP addresses as
   text strings:

   1.   the preferred form is x:x:x:x, where the 'x's are the hexade-
        cimal values of the four 16-bit pieces of the address.  Exam-
        ples:

                              FEDC:BA98:7654:3210
                              40D7:0:D01:4403


   2.   an alternative form that is sometimes more convenient when deal-
        ing with a mixed environment of IP and SIPP nodes is
        x:x:d.d.d.d, where the 'x's are the hexadecimal values of the
        two high-order 16-bit pieces of the address, and the 'd's are
        the decimal values of the four low-order 8-bit pieces of the
        address (standard IP representation).  Examples:




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 5]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


                              FEDC:BA98:118.84.50.16
                              40D7:0:13.1.68.3


   If a multi-part address sequence is used, the multiple addresses are
   separated by double colons.  Examples:

               0123:4567:89AB:CDEF::FEDC:BA98:7654:3210
               0123:4567:89AB:CDEF::FEDC:BA98:118.84.50.16



2.2.  Unicast Addresses

   Unicast addresses are distinguished from multicast addresses by the
   value of the high-order octet of the addresses:  a value of 7F
   (01111111) or FF (11111111) identifies an address as a multicast
   address; any other value identifies an address as a unicast address.

   The SIPP unicast address is contiguous bit-wise maskable, similar to
   IP addresses under CIDR [1].  The SIPP address sequence is also con-
   tiguous bit-wise maskable, with the exception that a "field" (for
   instance, one level of a hierarchical address) within the extended
   address cannot straddle individual SIPP addresses.

   There are several forms of unicast address assignment in SIPP,
   including the global hierarchical unicast address, the cluster
   address, the local-use address, and the IP-only host address.

2.2.1.  Global Hierarchical Unicast Addresses

   The global unicast address is initially assigned as follows [5]:

     |1|      n bits       |        m bits       |   p bits  | 63-n-m-p|
     +-+-------------------+---------------------+-----------+---------+
     |C|    provider ID    |    subscriber ID    | subnet ID | node ID |
     +-+-------------------+---------------------+-----------+---------+

   The first bit is the IP compatibility bit, or C-bit [3].  It indi-
   cates if the node represented by the address is IP-only or SIPP [4].

   SIPP addresses are provider-oriented [5].  That is, the high-order
   part of the address is assigned to providers, which then assign por-
   tions of the address space to subscribers, etc.  The term "provider
   prefix" refers to the high-order part of the address up to and
   including the provider ID.  This is similar to assignment of IP
   addresses under the CIDR scheme [1].




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 6]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   The subscriber ID distinguishes among multiple subscribers attached
   to the provider identified by the provider ID.  The term "subscriber
   prefix" refers to the high-order part of the address up to and
   including the subscriber ID.

   The subnet ID identifies a topologically connected group of nodes
   within the subscriber network identified by the subscriber prefix.
   The group of nodes identified by the subnet ID may all be attached to
   the same link, or may be spread among multiple links.  The term "sub-
   net prefix" refers to the high-order part of the address up to and
   including the subnet ID.  The term "link prefix" can be used in place
   of the term subnet prefix in the case where the group of nodes iden-
   tified by the subnet ID are attached to the same link.

   The node ID identifies a single node among the group of nodes identi-
   fied by the subnet prefix.

   Different SIPP nodes have greater or lesser knowledge of the internal
   structure of the SIPP address, depending on the role the node plays
   (for instance, host versus router).  At a minimum, a node may con-
   sider that unicast addresses (including its own) have no internal
   structure:

    |                            64 bits                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                          node address                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+


   A slightly sophisticated host (but still rather simple) may addition-
   ally be aware of link or subnet prefix(es) for the link(s) it is
   attached to, where different addresses may have different values for
   n:

    |                         n bits                    |  64-n bits  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+-------------+
    |                  link or subnet prefix            |   node ID   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+-------------+


   The link prefix allows the host to deduce that another host with the
   same link prefix is on the same link.  (Note that there can be multi-
   ple link prefixes per link.) The host acquires this information
   through manual configuration or the operation of routing or confi-
   guration protocols.

   Still more sophisticated hosts may be aware of other hierarchical
   boundaries in the unicast address, primarily in the form of cluster



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 7]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   addresses.  These include but are not limited to mobility-scope clus-
   ter addresses, subscriber cluster addresses, and provider cluster
   addresses, and are discussed later.

   Though a very simple router may have no knowledge of the internal
   structure of SIPP unicast addresses, routers will more generally have
   knowledge of one or more of the hierarchical boundaries for the
   operation of routing protocols.  The known boundaries will differ
   from router to router, depending on what positions the router holds
   in the hierarchy.

   2.2.2.  Local-use SIPP Unicast Address

   A local-use address is a unicast address that has only local routa-
   bility scope (within the subnet or within a subscriber network), and
   may have local or global uniqueness scope.  Local-use addresses with
   local uniqueness scope can be reused in other domains.

   Local-use address have the following format:

    | 4  |
    |bits|    12 bits    |                 48 bits                    |
    +----+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
    |0110|   subnet ID   |                 node ID                    |
    +----+---------------+--------+-+-+-------------------------------+
                         | 6 bits |S|X|            40 bits            |


   The seventh and eighth bits of the 48-bit node ID are the S and X
   flag respectively.  The S flag is 0 if the node ID has global unique-
   ness scope, and is 1 if it has only local uniqueness scope.  If the S
   flag is 0, then the node ID is a "universally administered" IEEE-802
   address, of length 48 bits.  (This bit of the IEEE-802 address is
   always 0 for "universally administered" IEEE-802 addresses.) If the S
   flag is 1, then the node ID can be any value, including a "locally
   administered" IEEE-802 address.

   With one exception, the X flag must always be 0.  (This bit of the
   IEEE-802 address indicates whether the address is group or indivi-
   dual.  A group address as the node-ID in the local-use unicast
   address is illegal.) That exception is the node ID value of 01-00-
   00-00-00-00.  This value is reserved to mean "unassigned".  It can be
   used to indicate that the system in question has not been assigned
   (or assigned itself) a local-use address.  It must not be used in the
   Destination Address field or in the Routing Header.

   The local-use address does not have global routing scope because the
   address does not indicate which subscriber network the node is in.



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 8]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   The 12 bit subnet ID can be used to indicate which subnet, within the
   local subscriber network, the node is in.

   When an IEEE-802 address is used as the node ID, it can come from an
   actual IEEE-802 interface, or from some other IEEE-802 address, for
   instance one given to the CPU card of the node.  In any event, it
   must not be assumed that the IEEE-802 address in the node ID field
   matches the IEEE-802 address of the node's IEEE-802 interface, should
   the node have one at all.  In general, it is preferable that the
   IEEE-802 address used to form the local-use unicast address be as
   permanent as possible.  Thus, the use of an IEEE-802 address from the
   CPU card is preferable to one used from an IEEE-802 interface.

   Local-use addresses have two primary benefits.  First, for sites or
   organizations that are not (yet) connected to the global Internet,
   there is no need to request or "steal" an address prefix from the
   global Internet address space -- local-use addresses can be used
   instead.  If the organization connects to the global Internet, it
   must then form addresses with global routability scope.  If the
   local-use address has only local uniqueness scope, then it must
   assign new addresses that have global uniqueness scope.  If the
   local-use address has global uniqueness scope, then it either assign
   new addresses, or extend the existing local-use address using an
   address sequence.  The resulting address sequence has global routing
   scope and can be used for global communications.

   The second benefit of local-use addresses is that they can hold much
   larger node IDs, which makes possible a very simple form of auto-
   configuration of addresses.  In particular, a node may discover a
   subnet ID by listening to Router Advertisement messages on its
   attached link(s), and then fabricating a SIPP address for itself by
   using its link-level address as the node ID on that subnet (if the
   link-level address can fit in the node ID field).

   An auto-configured local-use address may be used by a node as its own
   identification for communication within the local domain, possibly
   including communication with a local address server to obtain a glo-
   bal SIPP address.  The details of host auto-configuration are
   described elsewhere [7].


2.2.3.  Cluster Addresses

   Cluster addresses are unicast addresses that may be used to reach the
   "nearest" one (according to unicast routing's notion of nearest) of
   the set of boundary routers of a cluster of nodes identified by a
   common prefix in the SIPP unicast routing hierarchy.  A boundary
   router of cluster C has at least one address with prefix C and at



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                  [Page 9]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   least one link to a node with a prefix other than C.

   Cluster addresses have the general form:

    |              n bits             |           64-n bits           |
    +---------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |          cluster prefix         |0000000000000000000000000000000|
    +---------------------------------+-------------------------------+

   For example, to reach the nearest boundary router for the routing
   domain identified by subscriber prefix S, a packet may be sent to the
   following cluster address:

    |                  m bits               |        64-m bits        |
    +---------------------------------------+-------------------------+
    |         subscriber prefix = S         |0000000000000000000000000|
    +---------------------------------------+-------------------------+


   and to reach the nearest boundary router for subnet T of subscriber
   S, a packet may be sent to the following cluster address:

    |                  m bits               |    p bits   |64-m-p bits|
    +---------------------------------------+-------------+-----------+
    |          subscriber prefix = S        |subnet ID = T|00000000000|
    +---------------------------------------+-------------+-----------+


   Cluster boundary routers are required to know that they are boundary
   routers and to accept packets addressed to the corresponding cluster
   address as being addressed to themselves.

   Cluster addresses are most commonly used as intermediate addresses in
   a SIPP Routing Header, to cause a packet to be routed to one or more
   specific clusters on the way to its final destination.

   The value zero is reserved at each level of the unicast address
   hierarchy for use in formulating cluster addresses.

   Cluster addresses may not be used as source addresses in SIPP pack-
   ets.

   Note that when an extended address is used, the cluster prefix may
   completely fill a single (64-bit) address.  (Subsequent addresses in
   the cluster address sequence are, conceptually, all zeros.  Such
   all-zero addresses, however, would not actually appear in a packet
   header.)




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 10]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   2.2.4.  The Loopback Address

   The unicast address 0:0:0:1 is called the loopback address. It may be
   used by a node to send a SIPP packet to itself.  It may never be
   bound to any interface.

   The loopback address may not be used as the source address in SIPP
   packets that are sent outside of a single node.

   2.2.5.  The Unspecified Address

   The address 0:0:0:0 is called the unspecified address.  It shall
   never be assigned to any node.  It may be used anywhere an address
   appears, to indicate the absence of an address.  One example of its
   use is in the Source Address field of any SIPP packets sent by an
   initializing host before it has learned its own address.

   The unspecified address may not be used as the destination address of
   SIPP packets or in SIPP Routing Headers.


   2.2.6.  SIPP Addresses for IP-Only Nodes

   SIPP unicast addresses are assigned to IP-only hosts as part of the
   IPAE [IPAE] scheme for transition from IP to SIPP.  Such addresses
   have the following form:

    |1|            31 bits           |             32 bits            |
    +-+------------------------------+--------------------------------+
    |1|   higher-order SIPP prefix   |           IP address           |
    +-+------------------------------+--------------------------------+

   The highest-order bit of a SIPP address is called the IP compatibil-
   ity bit or the C bit. A C bit value of 1 identifies an address as
   belonging to an IP-only node.

   The IP node's 32-bit IP address is carried in the low-order 32 bits
   of the SIPP address.  The remaining 31 bits are used to carry
   higher-order SIPP prefixes, such as a service-provider ID.


   2.3.  Multicast Addresses

   A SIPP multicast address is an identifier for a group of nodes.  A
   node may belong to any number of multicast groups.  Multicast
   addresses have the following format:





SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 11]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994



    |1|   7   |  4 |  4 |                  48 bits                    |
    +-+-------+----+----+---------------------------------------------+
    |C|1111111|flgs|scop|                  group ID                   |
    +-+-------+----+----+---------------------------------------------+

   where:

        C = IP compatibility bit; see [IPAE].

        1111111 in the rest of the first octet identifies the address as
        being a multicast address.

                                        +-+-+-+-+
          flgs is a set of 4 flags:     |0|0|0|T|
                                        +-+-+-+-+


        the high-order 3 flags are reserved, and must be initialized to
        0.

        T = 0 indicates a permanently-assigned ("well-known") multicast
        address, assigned by the global internet numbering authority.

        T = 1 indicates a non-permanently-assigned ("transient") multi-
        cast address.

        scop is a 4-bit multicast scope value:

            0  reserved
            1  intra-node scope
            2  intra-link scope
            3  (unassigned)
            4  (unassigned)
            5  intra-site scope
            6  (unassigned)
            7  (unassigned)
            8  intra-organization scope
            9  (unassigned)
            A  (unassigned)
            B  intra-community scope
            C  (unassigned)
            D  (unassigned)
            E  global scope
            F  reserved


        group ID identifies the multicast group, either permanent or



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 12]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


        transient, within the given scope.

   The "meaning" of a permanently-assigned multicast address is indepen-
   dent of the scope value.  For example, if the "NTP servers group" is
   assigned a permanent multicast address with a group ID of 43 (hex),
   then:
      7F01:0:0:43 means all NTP servers on the same node as the sender.

      7F02:0:0:43 means all NTP servers on the same link as the sender.

      7F05:0:0:43 means all NTP servers at the same site as the sender.

      7F0E:0:0:43 means all NTP servers in the internet.


   Non-permanently-assigned multicast addresses are meaningful only
   within a given scope.  For example, a group identified by the non-
   permanent, intra-site multicast address 7F15:0:0:43 at one site bears
   no relationship to a group using the same address at a different
   site, nor to a non-permanent group using the same group ID with dif-
   ferent scope, nor to a permanent group with the same group ID.

   Multicast addresses must not be used as source addresses in SIPP
   packets.  A given route sequence must have zero or one multicast
   address in it, but no more.  The active address in a route sequence
   must never be advanced beyond a multicast address.  In other words,
   if a SIPP node receives a packet with a multicast address in the des-
   tination address field, the node must not advance the routing header,
   even if the node is a member of that multicast group and the route
   sequence has not yet been exhausted.

   2.3.1.  Pre-Defined Multicast Addresses

   The following well-known multicast addresses are pre-defined:
     The Reserved Multicast Addresses:   7F0s:0:0:0

       These multicast addresses (with any scope value, s) are reserved, and
       shall never be assigned to any multicast group.

     The All Nodes Addresses:    7F01:0:0:1
                                 7F02:0:0:1

       These multicast addresses identify the group of all SIPP nodes,
       within scope 1 (intra-node) or 2 (intra-link).

     The All Hosts Addresses:     7F01:0:0:2
                                  7F02:0:0:2




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 13]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


       These multicast addresses identify the group of all SIPP hosts,
       within scope 1 (intra-node) or 2 (intra-link).

     The All Routers Addresses:   7F01:0:0:3
                                  7F02:0:0:3

       These multicast addresses identify the group of all SIPP routers,
       within scope 1 (intra-node) or 2 (intra-link).

   2.4.  A Node's Required Addresses

   A host is required to recognize the following addresses as identify-
   ing itself: its own unicast addresses, the loopback address, the All
   Nodes and All Hosts multicast addresses, and the multicast addresses
   of any other groups to which the host belongs.

   A router is required to recognize the following addresses as identi-
   fying itself: its own unicast addresses, the cluster addresses of all
   clusters for which the router is a boundary router, the loopback
   address, the All Nodes and All Routers multicast addresses, and any
   other multicast addresses to which the router belongs.

   Nodes must also know their own address sequences, primarily for the
   purpose of inserting them in packets that they transmit.


3.  ADDRESS SEQUENCE HANDLING BY NODES

   For address sequences to be an effective means of extending SIPP
   addresses or enriching SIPP routing semantics for use in provider
   selection, mobility, auto-readdressing, etc., nodes must be able to
   manipulate address sequences appropriately.  A node must be able to
   recognize that its own addresses and other nodes' addresses may be
   represented as address sequences, for instance in transmitted and
   received packets and in DNS.  A node must also be able to reverse
   address sequences for sending return packets.

3.1.  Address Sequence Notation

   The SIPP mechanism for encoding address sequences is the optional
   Routing Header.  With this mechanism, the active address of the
   optional Routing Header is in the destination address field of the
   SIPP header, and the remaining addresses in the address sequence
   (those that were previously active and those that will be active) are
   in the Routing Header.  Thus, the fields of the Routing Header rotate
   through the destination address field as each becomes active.

   Notated literally, the mechanism would look like this:



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 14]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


                source address   dest address   Routing Header
                --------------   ------------   ------------
     initial          S               A          >B  D
        next          S               B           A >D
       final          S               D           A  B >

   This shows a packet from S, routed through A and B on its way to D.
   The '>' symbol indicates which field is next in the Routing Header
   (i.e., the field pointed to by the Next Addr field of the Routing
   Header).  While this notation accurately depicts what happens in the
   packet header, it is unwieldy, so the following equivalent notation
   is used instead:

     initial     S,*A, B, D
        next     S, A,*B, D
       final     S, A, B,*D

   In this notation, the first element is in the source address field of
   the SIPP header.  The '*' denotes the active element of the Routing
   Header, which is in the destination address field.  The remaining
   elements are in the Routing Header, with the Next Addr field pointing
   to the element after the active one.

3.2.  Node Formation of Address Sequences

   This section describes a simple set of rules for the handling of
   address sequences.  These rules allow nodes to form and transmit SIPP
   packets with traditional IP address semantics.  More importantly,
   they allow nodes to receive and "reverse" SIPP packets with advanced
   routing and addressing semantics, such as policy routing.  Thus nodes
   that do not understand advanced routing semantics can still operate
   appropriately when receiving packets from a node that does.

   Every node has a set of address sequences that it considers its own.
   Each such address sequence is a series of 64-bit addresses of the
   form <Si, Si-1, Si-2, ..., S0>, where S0 is the low-order address and
   also the Identifying Address, and Si is the high-order address.  Note
   that the terms low-order and high-order do not necessarily indicate
   that the high-order terms are hierarchically above the low-order
   terms.  Rather, the implication is that the high-order terms must
   come first in an address sequence.

   All nodes must be capable of handling an address sequence of at least
   three addresses.  A node may be able to handle longer address
   sequences if desired.

   An address sequence of a node constitutes the sum total of informa-
   tion needed in the packet header to route the packet to that node.



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 15]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   Only the low-order address is required to identify the node.  Some of
   a node's address sequences are source-capable and others are not.  A
   source-capable address sequence is one that can validly be used as a
   "source address" in a transmitted packet.  For instance, unicast
   address sequences are source-capable and multicast address sequences
   are not, though both can be considered by the node to be its own
   address sequences.

   A route sequence may contain a number of components, such as a source
   address sequence, a destination address sequence, a policy route, the
   address of the router serving as a host's mobile host base station,
   or a multicast tree core address.  From the perspective of a "simple"
   node, however, a route sequence contains only two parts, the source
   address sequence and the destination address sequence:

           <S0, S1, ..., Si, Dj, Dj-1, ..., D0>

   For a transmitted packet, the source address sequence is one of the
   node's own source-capable address sequences, and the destination
   address sequence is everything else.  For a received packet, the des-
   tination address sequence is (or at least should be) any of the
   node's own address sequences, and the source address sequence is
   everything else.

   In an address sequence, the addresses of the source address sequence
   are ordered with the "low order" parts first, while the addresses of
   the destination address sequence are ordered in the opposite direc-
   tion, with the "high-order" parts first.  Thus the first and last
   addresses are always the identifying addresses--the "low order" parts
   of the source and destination address sequences.

   In the common case with a single-component source and destination
   address, the complete route sequence simply has the form: <S0, D0>.
   Such packets contain no Routing Header.

   When a node has an "association" with another node (such as a TCP or
   an application "connection" running over UDP), it must maintain the
   following information with respect to the correspondent node (the
   node with which it has the association):

   1.   The source and destination Identifying Addresses for the entire
        association.

   2.   The source and destination address sequences currently in use.

   The low-order parts of the source and destination address sequences
   must match the Identifying Addresses.




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 16]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   When a node initiates an association, it will normally learn the des-
   tination address sequence through DNS or from local means (for
   instance, the user typing it in).  It extracts the destination Iden-
   tifying Address for the association from the low-order part of the
   destination address sequence.  It chooses from among its source-
   capable address sequences for the source address sequence, and forms
   the header as indicated above.

   When a node is not the initiator of an association, it must extract
   the appropriate information from the received packet.  This occurs in
   two cases, where a node is the destination of the packet, and where
   the node is a router that has encountered an error in processing a
   packet and must return an ICMP error message.

   3.2.1.  Destination Node Reversal of Route Sequence

   Let the route sequence in the received packet be <R0, R1, R2, ...,
   Rn>.  The receiving node compares its own address sequences against
   the tail of the received route sequence, looking for the best match.
   (Note that the multicast groups that the node belongs to are included
   in its list of address sequences for this comparison process.)

   The best match is the one where the largest number of addresses in
   the tail of the received route sequence match the corresponding
   addresses in the node's own address sequence.  For instance, assume
   the node has an address sequence of <Si, Si-1, Si-2, ..., S0>.  The
   best match is the one with the highest x for which S0 = Rn, S1 = Rn-
   1,..., Sx = Rn-x.  Note that it is not necessary for the node's com-
   plete address sequence to match the tail of the received route
   sequence.  For instance, the case where S0 = Rn and S1 = Rn-1 but Si
   != Rn-i is still considered a match.  At a minimum, the node's Iden-
   tifying Address, S0, must match the destination Identifying Address
   from the received route sequence, Rn.

   The node then strips from the route sequence the addresses that best
   matched its source address sequence, resulting in <R0, R1, ..., Rj>,
   where j < n.  The resulting sequence is reversed, giving <Rj, Rj-1,
   ..., R0>.  This sequence is then prepended with one of the node's
   source-capable address sequences, preferably the one that matched the
   tail of the incoming route sequence, resulting in <S0, S1, ..., Sk,
   Rj, Rj-1, ..., R0>.  If the destination Identifying Address of the
   incoming route sequence, Rn, is source-capable, then the source Iden-
   tifying Address of the reversed route sequence, S0, must be equal to
   Rn.

   Finally, the active address (that is, the address to which the Next
   Addr field of the Routing Header points) is set to be Rj, the first
   address after the node's address sequence.



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 17]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   Every node must implement these reversal rules.  Even if a node has
   no notion of, say, provider selection, it will successfully return
   packets to a node that does if it implements these rules.

   3.2.2.  Intermediate Node Reversal of Route Sequence

   Let the route sequence in the invoking packet be <R0, R1, R2, ...,
   Rn>, where R0 is the source's Identifying Address and Rn the
   destination's Identifying Address.  Let Rj be the active element in
   the route sequence.  Note that j is always >= 1.

   The route sequence in the ICMP error message MUST be <r0, r1, ...,
   rk, Rj-1, ..., R2, R1, R0>, where <rk, ..., r1, r0> is any source-
   capable address sequence for the router generating the ICMP error
   message.  The active element in this route sequence is Rj-1.  Intui-
   tively, the "consumed" portion of the invoking packet's route
   sequence is used to route the error message back to the source.


4.  ROUTING ALGORITHMS

   SIPP routing algorithms are identical to those used with the CIDR
   version of IP, except that the address used is 64 bits rather than 32
   (for instance, [8]).  This is true even when extended addresses are
   in use.  This is possible because a SIPP unicast forwarding table
   lookup is made by looking at only a single (64-bit) address.  The
   result of such a forwarding table lookup may be to advance the route
   header, causing the router to look at the subsequent address.  The
   routing table lookup on this subsequent address, however, is made
   without consideration of the previous lookup.  In other words, every
   "atomic" forwarding table access for unicast routing requires only a
   single address.

   Because the forwarding table lookup only involves a single address,
   the routing algorithm only need carry a single address.  If extended
   addresses are used, however, care must be taken in the distribution
   of routing information.  (For this reason, when extended addresses
   are used, it may be desirable, though not necessary, that routing
   algorithms carry extended addresses.  Routing algorithms can be thus
   enhanced in the future if desired.) In particular, routing informa-
   tion cannot be leaked across routing hierarchy boundaries that coin-
   cide with the boundary between two SIPP addresses in an extended
   address.

   For instance, consider the case where the subscriber prefix is
   encoded in the upper address of an extended address, and the subnet
   and host ID is encoded in the lower address of an extended address.
   The boundary between the upper and lower address coincides with the



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 18]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   boundary between the subscriber network and the provider network (or,
   with the subscriber network and another subscriber network).  Because
   subnet IDs are not by themselves globally unique, if the lower
   address were advertised outside of the subscriber network, it could
   overlap with subnet numbers in the outside network, and routing would
   fail.

   The only mechanism required to make extended addresses work with
   single-address routing algorithms is that routers recognize addresses
   that identify themselves (see Section 2.4), and advance the route
   header upon receiving such an address.


4.0.1.  Handling Address Sequences in Source Addresses

   For certain types of multicast routing--namely those based on build-
   ing multicast trees from the source--it is necessary for a router to
   examine the source address as well as the destination (multicast)
   address when forwarding a packet.  Since the source address in SIPP
   may also be extended, the router must also know how to examine it in
   order of high order address to low order address.

   All of the addresses of the extended source address except for the
   identifying address are in the routing header.  To examine the source
   address, the router starts at the address immediately preceding the
   active address (in terms of the address sequence notation).  In terms
   of packet header format, this is the address in the routing header
   immediately preceding the address indicated by the Next Addr field,
   if any, and the address in the source address field otherwise.

   If, upon examining an address in the source address sequence, the
   router finds that it must examine the next lower-order address in the
   sequence, the router examines the address in the route header immedi-
   ately preceding the address it just examined, if any, and examines
   the address in the source address field otherwise.



References


[1]  V. Fuller, T. Li, K. Varadhan, J. Yu, "Supernetting: an Address
     Assignment and Aggregation Strategy", RFC 1338.

[2]  S. Deering, "Host Extensions for IP multicasting", RFC 1112.

[3]  R. Gilligan et al, "SIPP Transition Mechanisms", Internet Draft.




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 19]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


[4]  S. Deering, "Simple Internet Protocol Plus (SIPP) Specification",
     Internet Draft, work in progress.

[5]  P. Francis, "SIPP Address Assignment", Internet Draft.

[6]  R. Govindan and S. Deering, "ICMP and IGMP for the Simple Internet
     Protocol Plus", Internet-Draft in preparation.

[7]  S. Thomson, "Automatic Host Address Assignment in SIPP", Internet
     Draft in preparation.

[8]  P. Francis, "OSPF for SIPP", Internet Draft.





     Author's Addresses

     Steve Deering, deering@parc.xerox.com
     Paul Francis, francis@cactus.ntt.jp
     Ramesh Govindan, rxg@thumper.bellcore.com





























SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 20]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


APPENDIX A: EXAMPLES



5.  UNICAST EXAMPLES

   In this section, we give several typical unicast examples that demon-
   strate the use of the Routing Header mechanism for provider selection
   and address extension.  Later sections give typical examples for
   mobility, multicast, and auto-configuration.

   The examples assume the following topology.  Subscriber domain D con-
   tains node H.  Subscriber domain E contains node I.  Domain D is
   attached to providers P and Q.  Domain E is attached to providers Q
   and R.

5.1.  Simple (Non-Extended) Addresses

   Assume that the addresses of node H are P.D.H and Q.D.H, and the
   addresses of node I are Q.E.I and R.E.I, where the notation "a.b.c"
   represents a 64-bit SIPP address.  (Note that the 'D' of P.D.H and
   Q.D.H are subscriber numbers assigned by P and Q respectively, and
   are therefore in general not the same value.) H initiates an associa-
   tion with I by querying DNS and learning the two addresses for I.
   Assume that H chooses Q.E.I, since it has the best "match" with its
   own addresses.  H forms the following packet:

        Route sequence at sender H: Q.D.H, *Q.E.I

   I receives this packet, reverses the (in this case simple) route
   sequence, and returns:

        Reversed route sequence at receiver I: Q.E.I, *Q.D.H


5.2.  Simple Addresses with Provider Selection

   The previous example is in fact a form of provider selection, but it
   is simple in that both ends have the same provider, so nothing expli-
   cit has to be done.  Assume in this case, however, that H wishes to
   send its packet through provider P.  Since I is not attached to pro-
   vider P, H must explicitly indicate that it wants its packet to go
   through provider P, and therefore forms the following packet:

        Route sequence at sender H: P.D.H, *P.0, Q.E.I

   The active element of the route sequence is the cluster address of
   provider P.  This causes routers in domain D to route the packet to



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 21]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


   provider P.  When the first router in provider P receives this
   packet, it recognizes the packet as being for "itself", and advances
   the Routing Header, producing:

        Advanced route sequence at provider P router: P.D.H, P.0, *Q.E.I

   which causes the packet to be routed to I.  Upon receiving this
   packet, I uses the reversing rules stated above, producing the fol-
   lowing packet:

        Reversed route sequence at receiver I: Q.E.I, *P.0, P.D.H

   This packet has a couple of noteworthy characteristics.  First, the
   packet may exit domain E via either provider Q or R, depending on
   what routing considers the best path to provider P.  Second, the P.0
   element is redundant, since the destination address P.D.H will also
   cause the packet to be routed to P.  However, without knowing the
   provider mask of P, I has know way of knowing that P.0 is redundant
   with P.D.H, and so includes both elements.  In the future, it may be
   possible for I to learn H's cluster address and optimize the header
   accordingly.

   To continue this example, assume that I does care which exit provider
   is used to reach H, and further that I chooses provider Q.  In this
   case, I would insert the following "policy route" (actually, one
   address) to force the packet to go through Q outgoing:

        Alternative reversed route sequence:  Q.E.I, *Q.0, P.0, P.D.H

   Note that this example describes a node that is more sophisticated
   than the simple one described previously.  In particular, the node in
   this example understands three components of the source route (the
   source and destination addresses and a provider) rather than just two
   (the source and destination addresses).  The node further understands
   that when it inserts the provider selector in the route sequence, it
   sets the active element to be that of the provider selector on
   transmitted packets.


5.3.  Extended Address (Address Sequence)

   Now assume that at some point 64 bits become inadequate and addresses
   are extended to an address sequence of two 64-bit addresses.  In this
   case, H's address sequences are P.D:S.H and Q.D:S.H, where the double
   colon '::' indicates a 64-bit boundary, and S represents a subnet
   inside domain D.  I's address sequences are Q.E::S.I and R.E::S.I.

   For H to send a packet to I, it could form:



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 22]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


        Route sequence at sender H: S.H, Q.D, *Q.E, S.I

   The active element Q.E would cause the packet to be routed to domain
   E, where the Routing Header would be advanced to:

        Advanced route sequence at router in Domain E: S.H, Q.D, Q.E,
        *S.I

   and delivered to I.

   The above reversing rules executed by I would produce:

        Reversed route sequence at receiver I: S.I, Q.E, *Q.D, S.H

   thus returning the packet to I.

6.  MULTICASTING IN SIPP

   This section describes how traditional multicast [2] works using SIPP
   route sequences.  As with unicast, SIPP multicast address sequences
   are described using a series of 64-bit address elements.  Thus, the
   node's notion of multicast addressing is extended such that a "multi-
   cast address" is seen as an address sequence rather than a single
   multicast address as is the case with IP.  The final element of the
   multicast address sequence is the group ID.

   When a node joins a multicast group, it considers the multicast
   address sequence to be one of its own address sequences for the sake
   of packet reception and reversal.  The multicast address sequence is
   not source-capable.

   In traditional multicast (also known as Deering multicast or source-
   based multicast), a packet from a sender to a multicast group is sent
   on the shortest-path delivery tree (rooted at the sender) to members
   of the group.  The traditional SIPP multicast address sequence con-
   tains only one address--the group ID.  This section describes the
   Routing Header that is formed by the sender, the reversed Routing
   Header formed by the receiver and the necessary extensions to the
   multicast forwarding algorithm.

6.0.1.  Example

   Assume the same scenario as described above (with nodes H and I),
   further assuming that H and I have extended addresses as described
   above.  (We do an extended address example here because the simple
   address example is the same as with current IP.) Assume further that
   H is transmitting a traditional multicast with multicast address M,
   and that I is a member of group M.  H forms the following header:



SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 23]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


        Route sequence at sender H: S.H, Q.D, *M

   The route sequence is received unchanged at each of the receivers.

   If I wishes to respond unicast to H, it executes the reversing rules
   described above in the following way.  First, it isolates its own
   address from the route sequence.  Since this is multicast, and since
   I is a member of the multicast group M, I considers M to be one of
   its "own" addresses, and strips it.  Reversing what remains produces
   <Q.D, P.H>.  Since a multicast address cannot be used as a source
   address, I knows to prepend its own unicast address sequence to the
   route sequence, producing:

        Reversed route sequence at receiver I: S.I, Q.E, *Q.D, S.H


7.  MOBILITY IN SIPP

   This section shows how SIPP source routing and SIPP route sequences
   might be used for mobile communication.  Note that the Mobile IP
   group of IETF is deliberating on various solutions for mobility, and
   may choose a different approach than the one outlined here.  At the
   same time, more approaches are possible with SIPP than with IP, so
   the Mobile IP group may choose a different solution for use with
   SIPP.  First, we introduce some terminology.

   Mobile Host (MH)
      A node that is able to maintain its network connections even after
      being physically moved.

   Correspondent Host (CH)
      A node that has a network connection open to an Mobile Host. A CH
      may itself be mobile.

   Foreign Agent
      The SIPP router to which the MH is attached after it moves.

   Home Agent
      A SIPP node that is aware of the MH's current location. Each MH
      has a preconfigured home station.


7.1.  Mobility Example

   Assume that H is a MH and that I is the CH, both with the (extended)
   address sequences from above.  Initially, a packet from the CH to the
   MH carries the following route sequence as in the above example:




SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 24]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


        Route sequence from CH to MH: S.I, Q.E, *Q.D, S.H

   Now suppose the MH moves to the vicinity of a Foreign Agent with an
   address D.d.  MH discovers D.d through SIPP "I-Am-Here" advertise-
   ments.  These are multicast by the Foreign Agent to the SIPP All
   Nodes address (similar to an IS hello advertisement in ES-IS).  MH
   also periodically multicast SIPP "I-Am-Here" advertisements to the
   SIPP All Routers multicast address (similar to the ES hello adver-
   tisement in ES-IS).  This latter advertisement contains the MH's
   identifying address.

   Through a mechanism beyond the scope of this document, the MH informs
   the Home Agent of its new base station.  Packets carrying the old
   route sequence from the CH are intercepted by the Home Agent.  The
   Home Agent tunnels them to the Foreign Agent, which forwards it to
   the MH.

   After the MH has discovered D.d, all subsequent packets to the CH
   carry the following route sequence:

        Route sequence from MH to CH after move: S.H, D.d, *Q.E, S.I

   It is sufficient to include only MH's identifying address in the
   route sequence; we assume that the Foreign Agent is within I's Iden-
   tifying Addresses (S.I) routing scope.  When the CH reverses the
   incoming route sequence from the MH, it created the following route
   sequence:

        Reversed route sequence from CH to MH after move: S.I, Q.E,
        *D.d, S.H

   This causes packet to the MH to be routed through the Foreign Agent
   at D.d, producing the desired behavior.


















SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 25]






draft-ietf-sip-routing-addr-01.txt                         February 1994


APPENDIX B: SIPP Service Interface and Address Sequences



   Because SIPP has larger addresses and a different packet format from
   IP, the service interface it provides to the transport layer is dif-
   ferent from that provided by IP [4].  Existing transport-layer proto-
   cols that use IP must be modified to operate over SIPP's service
   interface.  In this section, we discuss only the changes to the SIPP
   service interface that arise from the use of address sequences to
   represent the location of SIPP nodes.

   When sending a packet, the transport layer must specify the complete
   address sequences of the source and destination.  The lowest-order
   address in each address sequence must correspond to the identifying
   addresses used to form the transport-layer pseudo-header checksum.
   The destination address sequence can include "policy-route" addresses
   that an application may have prepended to the destination's address.

   As discussed before, a node's address sequences may change over time
   (e.g. because it is mobile).  The node's SIPP layer must track such
   changes; we do not require that the transport layer also track
   changes in the node's address sequences.  Thus, the source address
   sequence specified in a send operation may be incorrect or insuffi-
   cient.

   In such a case, the send operation fails, and the SIPP layer returns
   a correct source address sequence that may be used in the outgoing
   packet.  (Basically, the SIPP layer returns a source-capable address
   sequence with a matching identifying address.  If the transport layer
   passed the SIPP Unspecified Address, the SIPP layer returns some
   source-capable address).  The transport layer may then retry the send
   operation with this source address sequence.

   After processing a received packet, the SIPP layer passes up to the
   transport layer the source and destination address sequences in the
   incoming packet. To do this, the SIPP layer first applies the rever-
   sal rules.  The packet's destination address sequence is that address
   sequence that best matches the tail of the incoming route sequence.
   The unmatched part of the incoming route sequence, reversed, is the
   packet's source address sequence.










SIPP WG, Expires Sept. 1, 1994                                 [Page 26]


