





Internet Engineering Task Force
Internet Draft                                   Koskelainen/Schulzrinne
draft-koskelainen-mmusic-floor-req-00.txt                    Columbia U.
August 9, 2002
Expires: Dec 2002


                     Requirements for Floor Control

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document defines the requirements for floor control.


1 Introduction

   Conference applications often have shared resources such as the right
   to talk, input access to a limited-bandwidth video channel, or a
   pointer or input focus in a shared application.

   In many cases, it is desirable to be able to control who can provide
   input (send/write/control, depending on the application) to the
   shared resource.

   Floor control enables applications or users to gain safe and mutually
   exclusive or non-exclusive input access to the shared object or



Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 1]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   resource. Floor is an individual temporary access or manipulation
   permission for a specific shared resource (or group of resources)
   [2].

   Floor control is an optional feature for conferencing applications.
   SIP [7] conferencing applications may also decide not to support this
   feature at all. Two-party applications may use floor control outside
   conferencing, although the usefulness in this kind of scenario is
   limited.

   Floor control has been studied extensively over the years (e.g.  [5],
   [1], [6], [2]) therefore earlier work can be utilized here.

   This work supports on-going SIPPING conferencing work [4].

2 Conventions of This Document

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALLNOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].

3 Definitions

   Focus: The central point of signaling for conferences. It handles the
   subscriptions, invitations and other management functions for the SIP
   URI identifying the conference.

   Focus owner: A user role that sets policies for the whole focus (e.g.
   number of conferences that can be supported by that focus etc.)

   Floor: A permission to temporarily access or manipulate a specific
   shared resource or set of resources.

   Conference owner: A privileged user who controls the conference,
   creates floors and assigns and deassigns floor chairs.  Conference
   owner does not have to be a member in a conference.

   Floor chair: A user (or an entity) who manages one floor (grants,
   denies or revokes a floor). Floor chair does not have to be a member
   in a conference.

   Floor control: A mechanism that enables applications or users to gain
   safe and mutually exclusive or non-exclusive input access to the
   shared object or resource.

4 Model

   A floor control protocol is used to convey the floor control messages



Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 2]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   among the floor chairs (moderators) of the conference, the focus
   (such as conference server) and the participants of the conference.
   Centralized architecture is assumed in which all messages go via one
   focus point.

   The centralized conference server controls the floors at least in the
   signaling level. Controlling also the actual (physical) media
   resources (e.g. audio mixer) is highly recommended, but beyond the
   scope of this document.

   Note that the floor is a concept coupled with one or more media
   sessions.  The creation of the media session itself is defined
   elsewhere.  A participant with appropriate privileges may create a
   floor by defining that existing media session(s) is now floor-
   controlled, and apppoint a floor chair.

5 Integration with Conferencing

   Floor control itself does not support privileges such as handing over
   chair privileges to another users (or taking them away). Instead,
   some external mechanism, such as conference management, is used for
   that.

   Conference policy (and conference owner or creator) decides whether
   floor control is in use or not, and if it is, whether it is mandatory
   or optional. It is also conference policy about what media streams
   can be in a conference, and which ones are floor controlled.

   Typically, conference owner creates the floor(s) using floor control
   mechanism (protocol) and appoints the floor chair. Conference owner
   can remove the floor anytime (so that media is not floor controlled
   anymore), or change floor chair or floor parameters.

   Floor chair just controls the access to the floor(s), according to
   the conference policy.

6 Requirements

   REQ-1: It MUST be possible to announce that one or more conference's
   media sessions are floor-controlled. This means that, unless
   otherwise defined, all floor participants are in passive receive-
   only mode.

   REQ-2: It MUST also be possible to group more than one media sessions
   together so that one floor applies to the group of media sessions.

        Editor's note: This grouping can be done e.g. via SDP "fid"
             extensions.



Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 3]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   REQ-3: It MUST be possible to define who is allowed to create a (and
   change/terminate) floor in a conference.

        Editor's note: This may be a conference chair, or a participant
             authorized by conference chair.

   REQ-4: It MUST be possible for a participant with appropriate
   privileges to create a floor with specific parameters, such as how
   many simultaneous users are allowed. Similarly, floor modification
   and termination MUST be supported.

        Example: The conference owner creates a floor (for existing
             audio session), defines that max two users are allowed to
             hold the floor at the same time and assigns floor chair.

   REQ-5: It MUST be possible to use chair controlled floor policy in
   which the server notifies the floor chair and waits for the chair to
   make decisions. This enables the chair to fully control who has the
   floor. The server MAY forward all requests immediately to chair, or
   it may do filtering and send only occasional notifications to chair.

   REQ-6: Participants MUST be able to request (claim) a floor and give
   additional information about the request, such as the topic of the
   question in audio floor.

   REQ-7: It MUST be possible (for a floor holder) to release a floor.

   REQ-8: It MUST be possible (for a server or participant with
   appropriate privileges) to revoke a floor from its current holder.

   REQ-9: It MUST be possible to grant a floor to a participant.

   REQ-10: It MUST be possible to manipulate or set at least the
   following floor parameters:

   - who is floor control chair (this does not have to be the conference
   owner)
   - floor control policy (such as chair-controlled, FCFS, Random)
   - number of simultaneous floor holders

   Floor control related parameters are defined when the controlled
   floor is created, or modified.

   REQ-11: It MAY be possible to manipulate additional parameters, such
   as time limits.

   REQ-12: It MUST be possible for a user with appropriate conference
   privileges to give (and take away) chair privileges to (from) other



Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 4]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   users.

   REQ-13: It MAY be possible for a user to request that media is floor
   controlled.

        Editor's note: This may be useful especially if the chair is a
             robot.

   REQ-14: It MAY be possible to support multiple chairs.

   REQ-15: Bandwidth and terminal limitations MUST be taken into account
   in order to ensure that floor control can be efficiently used in
   mobile environments.

7 Open Issues

   - support for more than one floor chair?

8 Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Xiaotao Wu, Sanjoy Sen, Jonathan
   Rosenberg, Brian Rosen, Nermeen Ismail, Rohan Mahy, and Orit Levin
   for their comments.

9 Authors' Addresses

   Petri Koskelainen
   Dept. of Computer Science
   Columbia University
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue, MC 0401
   New York, NY 10027
   USA
   electronic mail: petkos@cs.columbia.edu

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Dept. of Computer Science
   Columbia University
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue, MC 0401
   New York, NY 10027
   USA
   electronic mail: hgs@cs.columbia.edu

10 Bibliography

   [1] Bormann, C., Kutscher, D., Ott, J., and Trossen, D., Simple
   conference control protocol service specification.  Internet Draft,
   Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 2001.  Work in progress.




Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 5]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   [2] Dommel, H.-P., and Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J., "Floor control for
   activity coordination in networked multimedia applications.," In
   Proc. of 2nd Asian-Pacific Conference on Communications (APCC (Osaka,
   Japan, June 1995).

   [3] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
   levels," RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1997.

   [4] O. Levin, A. Zmolek, R. Even, D. Petrie, and P. Koskelainen,
   "Conferencing requirements for sip based systems," Internet Draft,
   Internet Engineering Task Force, April 2002. Work in progress.

   [5] P. Koskelainen, H. Schulzrinne, and X. Wu, "A sip-based
   conference control framework," in The 12nd International Workshop on
   Network and Operating System Support for Digital Audio and Video
   (NOSSDAV) , (Miami Beach, Florida), May 2002.

   [6] Wu, X., Koskelainen P., Schulzrinne H., Chen C.  Use SIP and SOAP
   for conference floor control.  Internet Draft, Internet Engineering
   Task Force, Feb. 2002.  Work in progress.

   [7] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
   session initiation protocol," RFC 2543, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, Mar. 1999.


   Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an



Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 6]

Internet Draft            Floor control reqs.             August 9, 2002


   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




                           Table of Contents



   1          Introduction ........................................    1
   2          Conventions of This Document ........................    2
   3          Definitions .........................................    2
   4          Model ...............................................    2
   5          Integration with Conferencing .......................    3
   6          Requirements ........................................    3
   7          Open Issues .........................................    5
   8          Acknowledgements ....................................    5
   9          Authors' Addresses ..................................    5
   10         Bibliography ........................................    5




























Koskelainen/Schulzrinne                                       [Page 7]

