Networking Working Group                                 Th. Zahariadis
Internet Draft                                           H. C. Leligou
Intended status: Informational                            P. Karkazis
Expires: November 2009                                 TEI of Chalkida
                                                            P. Trakadas
                                                            S. Maniatis
                                                                   ADAE

                                                           May 21, 2009

           A Trust Framework for Low Power and Lossy Networks
                  draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be
   published except as an Internet-Draft.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 21, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.




Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document presents a trust framework, which may improve the
   security and reliability of routing over Low Power and Lossy Networks
   (LLN), against an increased set of attacks. The development of the
   framework builds upon previous work on trust and secure routing,
   adapting the trust assessments to the issues and constraints specific
   to LLNs.

   The proposed trust management scheme is based on direct and indirect
   interactions with neighboring nodes, to compute their trust value and
   thus select the most trusted path or forwarding node. To reduce the
   overhead of nodes' communication during the indirect trust value
   retrieval procedure, indirect trust information is requested from a
   limited number of neighbors, which respond only when they have highly
   reliable trust information


























Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


Table of Contents


   1. Terminology.................................................4
   2. Conventions used in this document............................4
   3. Introduction................................................5
   4. Trust Framework Principles...................................6
   5. Direct Trust Metrics.........................................9
      5.1. Direct Trust calculation...............................10
   6. Indirect Trust Metrics......................................10
      6.1. Indirect Trust calculation.............................12
   7. Total Trust Evaluation......................................12
   8. Trust-aware Routing Considerations..........................12
   9. IANA Considerations........................................14
   10. Conclusions...............................................14
   11. References................................................15
      11.1. Normative References..................................15
      11.2. Informative References................................16
   12. Acknowledgments...........................................16





























Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009



1. Terminology

   This document conforms to the terminology defined in [RFC2119],
   [RFC5548] and [1], with the following additions:

   Neighboring Node: A node B is neighboring node to node A, if it is
   within the radio range of node A and node A can reach directly node B
   (it is only one hop away).

   Malicious Node: A node that introduces any type of attack in a LLN,
   including exchange of false or incorrect messages at networking
   layer.

   Reliable Node: A node that realizes the applied routing protocol and
   does not introduce any attacks in a LLN.

   Trust: shows the level of certainty of node A that node B is a
   reliable node. We denote as T(A, B) the trust of entity A to node B.

   Trust metric: A value indicating the trust that node A maintains for
   node B with respect to a specific behaviour aspect or event.

   Reputation: of node B with respect to neighboring node C is the trust
   that nodes C publishes about node B. Also it is referred to as
   recommendation of node B according to node C.

   Direct Trust: a value indicating the trust that node A builds
   progressively for node B, utilizing its own routing experience
   (direct interactions). We denote as DT(A,B) the direct trust value
   that A has built for node B based on a set of events.

   Indirect Trust: a value indicating the trust that node A builds for
   node B based on the reputations provided by neighboring nodes. We
   denote as IT(A,B) the indirect trust value that A calculates for
   neighboring node B.

   Confidence Level: a value indicating the certainty of node A that its
   direct trust concerning node B is correct.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].




Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


3. Introduction

   Wireless Sensor and Low power and Lossy Networks (LLNs) offer
   efficient low-cost solutions for a great variety of application
   domains, including commercial buildings control home control and
   automation applications [4], as well as industrial and urban
   environments control [5].

   Due to their deployment requirements, the mass volume of nodes and
   the limited transmission range, LLNs are required to operate in an
   open, cooperative, ad-hoc manner, which implies that they should be
   capable of self-organizing and rely on the cooperation among nodes
   for the execution of networking tasks, such as hop-by-hop routing
   towards the destination. The necessary cooperativeness and openness
   of the LLNs' networking tasks combined with the very limited nodes'
   resources introduces important intricacies which dictate the design
   of new protocols.

   On one hand, security issues are inherently introduced due to the
   wireless operation. Eavesdropping can be easily performed in this
   environment, which makes the network vulnerable not only to privacy,
   but also to traffic analysis attacks, which threaten the whole
   network operation.

   On the other hand, the limited node resources in terms of memory
   space, processing power, and energy do not allow sophisticated
   security mechanisms (such as complex cryptography and authentication
   mechanisms) to be implemented. To this end, although vital for most
   application cases, security in LLNs is seriously threatened, while
   the routing procedure is at the focus of adversaries, due to its
   importance for the proper network operation and its vulnerability
   introduced by its cooperative nature in this environment.

   Attacks targeting the disruption of the routing procedure have been
   identified in the literature ([Karlof2003], [Kannhavog2007],
   [Giruka2008]). The routing attacks affect among others
   confidentiality, integrity and availability [7].

   To handle malicious behaviors, an approach borrowed from human
   societies has been proposed in the literature; a trust management
   system is implemented, where entities (nodes) monitor the behavior of
   their neighbors in order to establish trust relations amongst them
   and base their routing decisions not only on pure routing
   information, but also on their expectation (trust) that their
   neighbors will sincerely cooperate. In other words, the notion of
   trust, in the realm of network security, can be translated as a set
   of relations among entities (nodes) that cooperatively execute a


Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   protocol. These relations are based on the evidence generated by the
   previous interactions of the entities with respect to the employed
   protocol. Consequently, the evaluation of trust is based on several
   metrics that lead to trust establishment between the nodes.

   The detection of an unexpected behavior based only on direct evidence
   (i.e. measurements) and in a reliable way may take some time since an
   important number of interactions are required. Newly activated or
   just arrived nodes can benefit from their neighbors' experience: they
   become aware of the trustworthiness of each neighbor based on
   indirect trust information (also called recommendation) provided by
   other neighbors. However, specific attacks targeting the reputation
   protocol have also been described in the literature ([Sun2008]).

   The trust T(A, B) can be considered as a routing metric related to
   security allowing for trust-wise routing decisions to protect the LLN
   from a set of routing attacks. The implementation of any trust
   management system consumes node and network resources and should thus
   be carefully designed.

   This document describes a distributed trust framework, which may
   improve the security and robustness of routing over LLNs, against an
   increased set of attacks, including combined attacks. The trust
   framework is orthogonal to the routing protocol. However, the
   combination of a trust framework with a relative location routing
   algorithm (such as [Watteyne2008] may work in synergy to further
   enhance security, while efficiently supporting scalability and
   network dynamicity at the same time.

4. Trust Framework Principles

   The described trust framework aims to:

   1. Cope with security concerns described in [7],

   2. Fulfill the requirements mentioned in [3], [4] and [5] from an
      operational point of view,

   3. Stand as a valuable metric in the route discovery process, as
      described in [RFC5548] and [2].

   Additionally, the Trust Framework Model takes into consideration the
   following two properties that trust assessment holds, due to the
   dynamic, random, multi-hop nature of LLNs:





Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   o LLNs trust relations are uncertain and time-varying, since they
      are based on ephemeral relations; they lack a long-term trust
      process, as opposed to traditional wired networks, where trust
      evidence is generated via potentially lengthy assurance processes.
      Thus, trust relations in such networks will be short-termed and
      need to be updated more frequently.

   o LLNs trust relations are incomplete, in the sense that malicious
      nodes may take control of a part of the network, preventing the
      node to communicate with friendly nodes.

   Based on the aforementioned remarks, the Trust Framework Model for
   ROLL MUST hold the following properties:

   1. It SHOULD follow a fully decentralized trust management approach,
      i.e. the trust management functionality will be distributed over
      the LLN nodes. Centralized approaches SHOULD NOT be considered.
      Assuming homogeneous nodes, storing the necessary trust
      information for all the nodes of the LLN on a single node is not
      possible. Moreover, building such a trust framework is prone to
      attacks, as the trust information should be collected centrally to
      a node. Semi-distributed (cluster based) trust frameworks MAY also
      be considered. In this case, trust information of specific nodes
      MAY be stored only on selected nodes of the LLN. Yet, the nodes
      that handle the trust information would be prone to attacks,
      especially to Sybil attacks. A fully distributed trust framework
      is RECOMMENDED, as it better fits in the large, self-organized,
      homogeneous LLNs nature. Following the decentralized approach,
      each node is responsible for computing its own trust value per
      relation in the network, either by collecting evidence from direct
      interactions, or recommendations from other nodes in the network.

   2. The trust framework SHOULD be based on the Total Trust (TT) value.
      The TT value SHOULD be a combination of both Direct and Indirect
      Trust values. Each node in the LLN builds progressively the Direct
      Trust (DT) value that corresponds to each one of its neighboring
      nodes, utilizing its own routing experience and network
      overhearing. Moreover, it builds its Indirect Trust (IT) value for
      each one of its neighboring nodes, utilizing trust information
      that it receives from selected neighboring nodes. The DT value is
      important as it is based on the node's own experience, while the
      IT value is important mainly for newly initialized nodes or
      recently arrived nodes (in case of mobility).






Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   3. It SHALL use a confidence factor for the indirect trust value
      exchange process, which will reduce the possibility of bad-mouth
      attack. In this way, the indirect trust values can be checked by
      the requestor, leading to conclusions about the sincerity of
      neighbouring nodes.

   4. It WILL NOT use a trust value threshold level during route
      discovery process. That means that all neighbouring nodes are
      considered potential routing candidates, based upon their trust
      value. In other words, trust decision is not a binary decision on
      who to trust and who not to. The advantage of the selected
      technique is that bad-mouthing attack is not sufficient to isolate
      a node from the whole network.

   5. The reputation information MAY be requested in a reactive or
      proactive way, since both techniques have advantages. In reactive
      computing, the node computes the trust value of a hop or of the
      entire path, only when explicitly needed, preserving energy. On
      the other hand, in proactive computing, the node maintains a table
      containing already computed trust routes and thus the trust
      decision can be made without delay. The decision regarding the
      reputation information exchange process can be made in conjunction
      with the ROLL routing rules.

   6. Symmetric or asymmetric information spreading MAY be used, i.e.
      all nodes do (or do not) have access to the same amount of trust
      information in the network.

   Adopting the principles discussed above, the trust framework model
   allows for the calculation of the trust which can be used as a
   routing metric by the routing protocol (LLN Tree Discovery) in order
   to locate the nearest and most trusted exit and form trusted Directed
   Graphs towards that exit, composed of a best path tree and alternate
   forwarding options, following the rules stated in [I-D.ietf-roll-
   fundamentals].

   Moreover, dealing with security issues, the Trust Framework approach
   is hybrid, in the sense that well-known security measures are adopted
   ([7]) and combined with the trust framework, able to mitigate several
   attacks identified in LLN deployments. The trust model can take
   advantage of the traditional security measures in place, as their
   absence or misuse will be used as input for the establishment of
   trust relations and consequently feed the trust evaluation model. For
   example, the absence of encryption or the misinterpretation of an
   authentication mechanism may lead to the conclusion that a node
   behaves maliciously.



Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   It must be clearly stated that it is not required to use all the
   metrics specified in this document. A particular implementation MAY
   use a subset or all of the metrics defined in this document. Also,
   the value update process of each trust metric MAY be evaluated in
   different time periods, according to the accuracy needs of the
   specific application.

5. Direct Trust Metrics

   One of the most important issues in the trust model design is to
   define the set of behavior aspects/metrics against which each node is
   evaluated. On each sensor node, a trust repository MAY be used to
   store trust information per neighbor and trust metric. The monitored
   direct trust metrics MAY include:

   1. Packet forwarding: To detect nodes that deny or selectively
      forward packets, each time a source node transmits a packet that
      has to be forwarded it MAY enter the promiscuous mode and overhear
      the wireless medium to check whether the packet was actually
      forwarded by the selected neighbor. If positive, this is accounted
      as a successful interaction; otherwise, it is counted as a
      failure.

   2. Network-layer Acknowledgements (ACK): To detect nodes that collude
      with other adversaries (which possibly drop packets) disrupting
      the network operation, each source node MAY wait for a network-
      layer ACK to check whether its message has successfully reached an
      LLN Border Router.

   3. Message Integrity: Each time a source node transmits a message for
      forwarding and overhears the wireless medium to ensure that the
      message was forwarded, it additionally MAY process it to check the
      message's integrity i.e. that no unexpected modification has
      occurred. It thus detects modification attacks.

   4. Node Authentication: In case there is an option for a node to
      select between a neighbor supporting authentication and another
      which doesn't, this metric allows for this discrimination. (If the
      node supports authentication, the respective value is equal to 1;
      0, otherwise.)

   5. Node Message Encryption: Similar to node authentication, if a node
      supports message encryption, the respective value is equal to 1;
      0, otherwise.





Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


5.1. Direct Trust calculation

   Coming to the calculation of the direct trust value, each node i
   stores for each neighboring node j and for each trust metric m
   associated with successful/failed interactions, two counters: the
   S(i,j,m), which denotes the successful interactions of type m and the
   F(i,j,m), which denotes the failed interactions. Based on them, node
   i calculates the trust value T(i,j,m) of each trust event m regarding
   each neighboring node j by using the following equation:


                      S(i,j,m)
   T(i, j, m) = --------------------------                          (1)
                  S(i,j,m) + F (i,j,m)

   The trust values are then combined in a weighted sum to produce the
   total direct trust value:


   DT(i,j) = W(1)*T(i,j,1) + W(2)*T(i,j,2) + ... + W(5)*T(i,j,5)    (2)


   Where W(m) stands for the weighting factor of trust metric m. All
   weights sum up to 1 so that the total direct trust value ranges from
   0 to 1.

6. Indirect Trust Metrics

   Two indirect trust metrics are used in the Trust Framework:

   1. Reputation Response: To check the sincere execution of the
      reputation protocol, each time a node transmits a reputation
      request message to a neighbor, the reputation request number MAY
      be stored in the trust table for this neighbor while the
      reputation response number MAY increase only if the neighbor
      replies (i.e. the reputation response message is received). In
      this way, nodes that do not cooperate in the execution of the
      reputation protocol are assigned lower trust values.

   2. Reputation Validation: To protect against bad-mouthing attacks and
      wrong reputations being spread around, each time a node A receives
      a reputation response message from node C regarding node B, it
      compares the received value with its own direct trust on node B,
      under the condition that node A is in a certain degree confident
      about the direct trust value, it has calculated for node B. If the
      difference exceeds a predefined threshold, then the provided
      reputation is considered as "wrong reputation"; otherwise it is a


Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


      "correct reputation". Node A is confident for the trust value it
      has calculated for node B only if it has performed an adequate
      Number Of direct Interactions (noi). For this reason, the noi
      information is also kept in the trust table.

   The IT value is important mainly for the early stage of LLN
   deployment or recently arrived nodes (in case of mobility). We denote
   as IT(A,B) the indirect trust value that A calculates for neighboring
   node B. To trigger the indirect trust exchange process, each node
   SHOULD periodically issue a reputation request message, unless a
   reactive trust establishment system is decided. In such a case, it is
   the routing protocol that triggers the exchange of the indirect
   trust.

   Respecting the requirement for low overhead and for low resource
   consumption, following the proposed trust framework model a limited
   number (e.g. four) of neighbors MAY be queried. (If instead all N
   neighboring nodes were queried, they would generate N reputation
   response messages, resulting in significant network load burden
   (increasing collision probability) and exhaustion of node resources
   (memory space, processing power and consumed energy).) The source
   node MAY randomly select one node per quadrant, so that only four
   unicast reputation request and four unicast reputation response
   messages are generated (instead of N, in case all neighbors were
   requested). The selection of the four nodes MAY be performed based on
   direct trust information (i.e. the most trusted nodes are queried) or
   on remaining energy information. Yet, these selections would reveal
   to an adversary (performing traffic analysis) certain attributes of
   the selected (requested) nodes. Moreover, the source node needs to
   obtain indirect trust information for all its neighbors and this can
   be achieved only by asking uniformly geographically distributed
   nodes.

   Since the reputation exchange is mainly implemented to assist nodes
   with no or limited (direct) trust knowledge to reach a more reliable
   conclusion for the trustworthiness of nodes they are interested in, a
   requested node MAY provide its opinion for its neighbors only if it
   is confident about the direct trust value it has calculated. This is
   decided upon the so-called confidence factor C(i,j) which is
   calculated based on the following equation:


   C(i,j)  = noi/( noi + 1 )                                       (3)


   where noi stands for the Number Of direct Interactions (noi) between
   node i and j.


Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   The requested node scans its trust table and includes in its
   reputation response message the direct trust value it has calculated
   for all neighbors corresponding to confidence factor exceeding a
   predefined threshold (e.g. above 0.8). To avoid the disadvantages of
   reporting only positive/negative trust information, we have chosen to
   report only confident trust information, limiting this way the amount
   of communicated data (overhead) and economizing resources.

6.1. Indirect Trust calculation

   Once the node i that transmitted the reputation request message
   receives the reputation responses from k nodes (N1, N2,...,Nk),
   containing their trust info DT(Nx,j) for each neighboring node j,
   node i MAY calculate the indirect trust value for node j using the
   following equation:


             DT(i,N1)*DT(N1,j) + ... + DT(i,Nk)*DT(Nk,j)
   IT(i,j) = ----------------------------------------------        (4)
                    DT(i,N1) + ... + DT(i,Nk)


   The received values are summed up adopting the relevant direct trust
   as weight factors, so that a reputation provided by a highly trusted
   node counts more.


7. Total Trust Evaluation

   Finally, the total Trust (T) value for a neighbor j MAY be produced
   combining direct and indirect trust values in the following formula:

   T(i,j) = C(i,j)*DT(i,j) + [1- C(i,j)]*IT(i,j)                    (5)

   where C(i,j) is the confidence factor defined previously. It is
   obvious that as the number of interactions (and thus the confidence
   factor, C) increases, direct trust value becomes more significant
   than the reputation information.


8. Trust-aware Routing Considerations

   The described fully distributed trust framework MAY be combined with
   any routing scheme (including the distance vector approach described
   in [2]) to offer an enhanced secure Routing over Low Power and Lossy
   Networks (ROLL) framework.



Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   In more details, the trust metrics that have been proposed MAY
   increase security and provide countermeasures as follows:

   1. Forwarding: MAY protect against all types of packet dropping
      attacks (black hole, grey hole, selective forwarding, etc.)

   2. Network-ACK: MAY protect against all types of dropping for the
      whole path route and colluding nodes

   3. Packet Integrity: MAY protect against all types of modification
      attacks

   4. Authentication: MAY protect against authentication-related attacks

   5. Confidentiality: MAY prefer nodes that offer cryptography

   6. Reputation Responses: MAY add sincerity in reputation protocol
      execution

   7. Reputation Validation: May protect against bad - mouthing and
      rumor spreading attacks.

   The Routing Metric (RM) MAY be calculated using the following
   formula:


   RM(i,j) = W(l)*LC(i,j) + W(t)*T(i,j)                              (7)


   Where the W(l) and W(t) are the weighting factors of the routing link
   cost and the total trust, LC(i,j) is the link cost between nodes i
   and j decided on the routing metrics included in [I-D.ietf-roll-
   routing-metrics] and TT(i,j) the total trust value. Moreover, W(l) +
   W(t) = 1. By changing the W(l) and W(t) weight factors, emphasis MAY
   be given either on the routing attributes or on the trust value. For
   example, in case of location based routing, the LC(i,j) MAY be
   calculated by the following equation:


   LC(i,j) = D(i,j) = 1 - D(j)/d                                     (8)


   Where D(j) is the Euclidean distance of neighbouring node j to the
   LLN Border Router and d stands for the sum of the distance of all its
   N neighbors to the LLN Border Router, which can be calculated based
   on their coordinates and the coordinates of the base station.



Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   Following equation (8), the shortest distance to the destination
   maximizes the D(i,j) value.


9. IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request for IANA actions.

10. Security Considerations

   The framework presented in this document provides trust analysis and
   design guidelines with a scope limited to ROLL. The investigation is
   at a high-level and not specific to a particular protocol.

11. Conclusions

   This document presents a trust framework based on which a routing
   metric related to security can be derived to improve the security and
   reliability of routing over LLN, and defend against an increased set
   of attacks related to integrity and availability. The goal of this
   document is to describe a trust framework in conformance with the
   requirements set in the following ROLL documents: [3], [4] and [5].

   Also, this document can be considered as a complementary document to
   [6] and [7], focusing on security aspects faced on LLNs.

   In this context, a well-suited trust management scheme can help as a
   routing metric towards the best neighbor selection (amongst parents
   and siblings in LLN Tree Discovery) to the LLN Border Router.

   It is worth mentioning that the proposed framework keeps algorithmic
   complexity and memory allocation needs as low as possible (without
   jeopardizing the reliability of sensor communications), to achieve an
   efficient deployment of the trust model to sensor nodes available in
   the market.













Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009




12. References

12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5548] Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., Barthel, D.,
             Jacquenet, C., Madhusudan, G., and G. Chegaray, "Urban WSNs
             Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
             RFC5548, May 2009

   [1]  Vasseur, J., "Terminology in Low power And Lossy Networks",
         draft-ietf-roll-terminology-01 (work in progress), October
         2008.

   [2]  P. Thubert, T. Watteyne, Z. Shelby, D. Barthel, "LLN Routing
         Fundamentals", draft-thubert-roll-fundamentals-01 (work in
         progress), April 2009.

   [3]  J. Martocci, N. Riou, P. Mil, and W. Vermeylen, "Building
         Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
         Networks", draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs-05 (work in
         progress), February 2009.

   [4]  Porcu, G., "Home Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power
         and Lossy Networks", draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-06 (work
         in progress), November 2008.

   [5]  P. Thubert, S. Dwars, and T. Phinney, "Industrial Routing
         Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks", draft-ietf-roll-
         indus-routing-reqs-05 (work in progress), January 2009.

   [6]  M. Kim, JP. Vasseur, K. Pister, H. Chong, "Routing Metrics used
         for Path Calculation in Low Power and Lossy Networks", draft-
         ietf-roll-routing-metrics-00 (work in progress), March 2009.

   [7]  T. Tsao, R. Alexander, M. Dohler, V. Daza, and A. Lozano "A
         Security Framework for Routing over Low Power and Lossy
         Networks", draft-tsao-roll-security-framework-00 (work in
         progress), February 2009.






Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


12.2. Informative References

   [Giruka2008] V. C. Giruka, M. Singhal, J. Royalty, S. Varanasi,
             "Security in wireless sensor networks", Wireless
             Communications Mob. Comput. 2008; 8:1-24.

   [Kannhavog2007] Bounpadith Kannhavong, Hidehisa Nakayama, Yoshiaki
             Nemoto, And Nei Kato, Abbas Jamalipour, "A survey of
             routing attacks in mobile ad hoc networks", IEEE Wireless
             Communications, October 2007, pp. 85-91.

   [Karlof2003] Chris Karlof, David Wagner, "Secure Routing in Wireless
             Sensor Networks: Attacks and Countermeasures", Ad Hoc
             Networks Elsevier ed. Vol. 1 (2003) pp. 293-315.

   [Sun2008] Yan (Lindsay) Sun, Zhu Han, K. J. Ray Liu, "Defense of
             Trust Management Vulnerabilities in Distributed Networks",
             IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 25, No.2, February 2008,
             pp. 112-119

   [Watteyne2008] T. Watteyne, I. Auge-Blum, M. Dohler, S. Ubeda, D.
             Barthel, "Centroid Virtual Coordinates - A Novel Near-
             Shortest Path Routing Paradigm", Elsevier Computer Networks
             Journal, Special Issue on Autonomic and Self-Organising
             Systems, October 2008

   Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the Internet Community for valuable
   comments.

   Work presented in this paper was partially supported by the EU-funded
   FP7 211998 project "AWISSENET" (Ad-hoc PAN and Wireless Secure Sensor
   Networks".

Authors' Addresses

   Theodore Zahariadis
   TEI of Chalkida
   Psachna, Evia, 34400, Greece

   Phone: +30 22280 99550
   Email: zahariad@teihal.gr






Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft draft-zahariad-roll-trust-framework-00         May 2009


   Helen Leligou
   TEI of Chalkida
   Psachna, Evia, 34400, Greece

   Phone: +30 22280 99550
   Email: leligou@teihal.gr


   Panagiotis Karkazis
   TEI of Chalkida
   Psachna, Evia, 34400, Greece

   Phone: +30 22280 99550
   Email: karpa@teihal.gr


   Panagiotis Trakadas
   Hellenic Authority for the Information
   and Communication Security and Privacy (ADAE)
   Ierou Lohou 3, Marousi 151 24, Athens, Greece

   Phone: +30-2106387619
   Email: trakadasp@adae.gr


   Sotiris Maniatis
   Hellenic Authority for the Information
   and Communication Security and Privacy (ADAE)
   Ierou Lohou 3, Marousi 151 24, Athens, Greece

   Phone: +30-2106387619
   Email: smaniatis@adae.gr
















Zahariadis            Expires November 21, 2009              [Page 17]

