
Internet-Draft                                       H. Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt              Cisco Systems 
Target Category: Standards Track                           May 2001 
Updates: RFC 1766                           Expires: November 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Content Language Headers 
 

Status of this Memo 
     The file name of this memo is draft-alvestrand-content-language-
     02.txt 
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
     in progress." 
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
Comments on this draft should be sent to the mailing list <ietf-
languages@iana.org> 

Abstract 
This document defines a "Content-language:" header, for use in the case 
where one desires to indicate the language of something that has RFC-
822-like headers, like MIME body parts or Web documents, and an 
"Accept-Language:" header for use in the case where one wishes to 
indicate one's preferences with regard to languages. 

1. Introduction 
 
Content Language Headers                         Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt     Expires November 2001 
 
There are a number of languages presently or previously used by human 
beings in this world. 
A great number of these people would prefer to have information 
presented in a language which they understand. 
In some contexts, it is possible to have information available in more 
than one language, or it might be possible to provide tools  (such as 
dictionaries) to assist in the understanding of a language. 
In other cases, it may be desirable to use a computer program to 
convert information from one format (such as plaintext) into another 
(such as computer-synthesized speech, or Braille, or high-quality print 
renderings). 
 
A prerequisite for any such function is a means of labelling the 
information content with an identifier for the language that is used in 
this information content, such as is defined by [TAGS]. 
This document specifies a protocol element for use with protocols that 
use RFC-822 like headers for carrying language tags as defined in 
[TAGS]. 
The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119]. 

2. The Content-language header 
The "Content-Language" header is intended for use in the case where one 
desires to indicate the language(s) of something that has RFC-822-like 
headers, such as MIME body parts or Web documents. 
The RFC-822 EBNF of the Content-Language header is: 
 Content-Language = "Content-Language" ":" 1#Language-tag 
 
Or in RFC 2234 ABNF: 
 
Content-Language = "Content-Language" CFWS ":" Language-List 
Language-List = Language-Tag [ CFWS "," CFWS Language-List ]  
 
The Content-Language header may list several languages in a comma-
separated list. 
The CFWS construct is intended to function like the whitespace 
convention in RFC 822, which means also that one can place 
parenthesized comments anywhere in the language sequence, or use 
continuation lines. A formal definition is given in RFC 2822 [RFC2822]. 

2.1 Examples of Content-language values 
   
 

 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt                 [Page 2] 
Content Language Headers                         Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt     Expires November 2001 
 
Voice recording from Liverpool downtown 
   Content-type: audio/basic 
   Content-Language: en-scouse 
 
Document in Mingo, an American Indian language which does not have an 
ISO 639 code: 
   Content-type: text/plain 
   Content-Language: i-mingo 
 
An English-French dictionary 
 
   Content-type: application/dictionary 
   Content-Language: en, fr (This is a dictionary) 
 
An official European Commission document (in a few of its official 
languages) 
 
   Content-type: multipart/alternative 
   Content-Language: da, de, el, en, fr, it 
 
An excerpt from Star Trek 
   Content-type: video/mpeg 
   Content-Language: i-klingon 
 

3. The Accept-Language header 
The "Accept-Language" header is intended for use in the case where a 
user or a process desires to identify the preferred language(s) when 
RFC-822-like headers, such as MIME body parts or Web documents are 
used. 
The RFC-822 EBNF of the Accept-Language header is: 
Accept-Language = "Accept-Language" ":" 
                         1#( language-range [ ";" "q" "=" qvalue ] ) 
 
 
The syntax and semantics of language-range is defined in [TAGS]. 
(Note that RFC-822 EBNF rather than ABNF is used here, in order to 
ensure that the syntax is identical with that specified in [RFC 2616]). 
The Accept-Language header may list several language-ranges in a comma-
separated list, and each may include a quality value Q. 
If no Q values are given, the language-ranges are given in priority 
order, with the leftmost language-range being the most preferred 
language; this is an extension to the HTTP/1.1 rules, but matches 
current practice. 

 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt                 [Page 3] 
Content Language Headers                         Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt     Expires November 2001 
 
If Q values are given, refer to HTTP/1.1 [RFC 2616] for the details on 
how to evaluate it. 

4. Security Considerations 
The only security issue that has been raised with language tags since 
the publication of RFC 1766, which stated that "Security issues are 
believed to be irrelevant to this memo", is a concern with language 
ranges used in content negotiation - that they may be used to infer the 
nationality of the sender, and thus identify potential targets for 
surveilllance. 
This is a special case of the general problem that anything you send is 
visible to the receiving party; it is useful to be aware that such 
concerns can exist in some cases. 
The exact magnitude of the threat, and any possible countermeasures, is 
left to each application protocol. 

5. Character set considerations 
This document adds no new considerations beyond what is mentioned in 
[TAGS]. 

6. Acknowledgements 
This document has benefited from many rounds of review and comments in 
various fora of the IETF and the Internet working groups. 
Any list of contributors is bound to be incomplete; please regard the 
following as only a selection from the group of people who have 
contributed to make this document what it is today. 
In alphabetical order: 
Tim Berners-Lee, Nathaniel Borenstein, Sean M. Burke, John Clews, Jim 
Conklin, John Cowan, Dave Crocker, Martin Duerst, Michael Everson, Ned 
Freed, Tim Goodwin, Dirk-Willem van Gulik, Marion Gunn, Paul Hoffman, 
Olle Jarnefors, John Klensin, Keith Moore, Chris Newman, Masataka Ohta, 
Keld Jorn Simonsen, Rhys Weatherley, Misha Wolf, Francois Yergeau and 
many, many others. 
 
Special thanks must go to Michael Everson, who has served as language 
tag reviewer for almost the complete period since the publication of 
RFC 1766, and has provided a great deal of input to this revision. 

7. Author's Address 
Harald Tveit Alvestrand 
Cisco Systems 
Weidemanns vei 27 
7043 Trondheim 
NORWAY 
 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt                 [Page 4] 
Content Language Headers                         Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt     Expires November 2001 
 
EMail: Harald@Alvestrand.no 
Phone: +47 73 50 33 52 

8. References 
 
[TAGS]    Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the identification of languages", 
RFC 3066 
[ISO 639] 
     ISO 639:1988 (E/F) - Code for the representation of names of 
     languages - The International Organization for Standardization, 
     1st edition, 1988-04-01 Prepared by ISO/TC 37 - Terminology 
     (principles and coordination). 
     Note that a new version (ISO 639-1:2000) is in preparation at the 
     time of this writing. 
[ISO 639-2] 
     ISO 639-2:1998 - Codes for the representation of names of 
     languages -- Part 2: Alpha-3 code  - edition 1, 1998-11-01, 66 
     pages, prepared by ISO/TC 37/SC 2 
      
[ISO 3166] 
     ISO 3166:1988 (E/F) - Codes for the representation of names of 
     countries - The International Organization for Standardization, 
     3rd edition, 1988-08-15. 
[ISO 15924] 
     ISO/DIS 15924 - Codes for the representation of names of scripts 
     (under development by ISO TC46/SC2)  
[RFC 1521] 
     Borenstein, N., and N. Freed, "MIME Part One: Mechanisms for 
     Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message Bodies", 
     RFC 1521, Bellcore, Innosoft, September 1993. 
[RFC 2119] 
     Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels. S. 
     Bradner. March 1997. 
[RFC 2234] 
     Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF. D. Crocker, Ed., P. 
Overell, November 1997. 
[RFC 2616] 
     Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1. R. Fielding, J. Gettys,  
     J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, T. Berners-Lee. June 
     1999. 
[RFC 2822] 
 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt                 [Page 5] 
Content Language Headers                         Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt     Expires November 2001 
 
     Internet Message Format. P. Resnick, Editor. April 2001. 

Appendix A: Changes from RFC 1766 
The definition of the language tags has been split, and is now RFC 3066 
The differences parameter to multipart/alternative is no longer part of 
this standard. 













































 
draft-alvestrand-content-language-02.txt                 [Page 6] 