


INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  C. Apple
<draft-apple-schema-rqmts-list-03.txt>                 AT&T Laboratories
Expires: May 8, 1998                                     8 November 1997




                 Directory Schema Listing Requirements
                 <draft-apple-schema-rqmts-list-03.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   This memo documents requirements for listing directory services
   schema in a centrally operated, administered, and maintained
   repository. This repository will be available as a resource to
   directory protocol and service implementors to facilitate schema
   discovery.

1.0 Introduction

   The fastest route to interoperable directory services is through
   standard object classes and attribute types. There is a growing
   number of places where schema for Internet Directory Services and
   Internet Operations are being defined, with varying degrees of
   documentation.  This plethora of schema is unavoidable in the light
   of the needs of different service communities, but it makes it
   difficult for directory service builders to find and make use of an
   existing schema that will serve their needs and increase
   interoperability with other systems. A listing service providing a
   single point of discovery for directory service schema will promote



Apple                                                           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   schema reuse, reduce duplication of effort, and thus promote
   directory service interoperability.

   The intent is to offer a schema listing service with public read
   access and restricted, moderated write access. Many hard-coded
   choices and constraints have been reflected in this requirements
   document for the purpose of expediting deployment. Future releases of
   the service may require an update of this document.

   Initially, such a listing service will be centrally operated,
   administered, and maintained. The schema listing repository database
   may also be mirrored to ensure some level of redundancy for read
   access in the event of service interruption. Eventually, the
   operations, administration, and maintenance of such a listing service
   may evolve to use a more distributed deployment scenario.

   The schema listing service is also intended to be largely automated,
   with minimal human involvement. Human involvement is likely to be
   limited to the following types of activities:

      + handling repository access problems
      + trouble resolution for computing and communications facilities
      + dealing with reasonable requests that fall outside
        of the scope of normal schema listing repository operations
      + reviewing schema listing requests on a mailing list
        prior to publishing in the listing repository

   Future releases of the service may automate some of these tasks.

1.1 Scope

   Requirements for the initial release of a directory schema listing
   service are inside the scope of this document.

   Specifications for syntaxes and grammars to be used in the initial
   release of the directory schema listing service are outside the scope
   of this document.

   Documentation of schema listing procedures is outside the scope of
   this document.

1.2 Terms and Definitions

   Information Object - a descriptive abstraction of some real-world
   object

   Schema - a collection of definitions for related information objects




Apple                                                           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   Listing Meta Data - characteristics that differentiate one schema
   from another; used to catalog schema

   Listing Content - a formal specification of a schema using a profile
   of [MIMEDIR] created to provide a template for syntax and content
   transfer encoding of directory service protocol schema

   Schema Listing - the combination of listing meta data and all
   available listing content for a particular schema

   Repository - a database in which schema listings are stored

   Schema Listing Request - a schema listing formatted using [MIME]
   constructs that is submitted for consideration as a schema listing to
   be published in a repository

   Operator - an organization that administers and maintains a
   repository

   Primary Repository - the repository that masters the schema listings
   database

   Shadow Repository - a repository that mirrors the primary repository

   Contact Person - the name of the individual who holds the authority
   to update a schema listing and who should be contacted if questions
   or concerns arise related to a schema listing or schema listing
   request

   Listing Authority Contact - the name of the individual who holds
   authority to replace a contact person; can be either the contact
   person for a schema listing or an alternate contact within the
   organization to which the contact person belongs (this allows one
   person organizations to list schema)

   The terms for specifying requirement level described in [RFC2119] are
   used in this document.

1.3 Usage Scenarios

1.3.1 Location and Retrieval of the vCard Schema for LDAPv3

   A user of the schema listing service wants to locate a copy of the
   vCard schema for LDAPv3 so that they can use it in a prototyping
   project.  First, they point their web browser at a schema listing
   repository web site and download the list of available schema. Next,
   they use the search command on their browser to locate occurences of
   the string "vCard". The browser automatically scrolls down to the



Apple                                                           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   appropriate place in the list of available schema and the user clicks
   on a link to view the listing meta data to verify that this is indeed
   the vCard schema for use with version 3 of the LDAP protocol.
   Included in the web-based representation of the listing meta data are
   ftp URLs pointing to available profiles containing listing content
   for this schema. The user clicks on the link for the profile that
   they can use.

1.3.2 Submission of a New Schema Listing via SMTP

   A schema writer wishes to list a schema they have created and
   prepares the listing meta data and listing content according to one
   or more appropriate [MIMEDIR] profiles. The schema writer will assign
   a temporary, unique schema name for the request.

   The schema writer sends an SMTP message including the listing meta
   data and all available listing content in multipart-related [MIME]
   format to a listing request review mailing list. After a short review
   period, the listing repository operator validates the request, and if
   properly formed, assigns a permanent, unique name to the listing and
   publishes it according to the listing procedures. An announcement of
   the newly published schema listing is sent to a mailing list reserved
   for this purpose.

2.0 Listing Service Requirements

2.1 Functional Requirements

   Listed schema MAY be published as an RFC.

   A list of available schema listings MUST be maintained.

   Schema listings MUST be named according to the namespace requirements
   defined in section 3.

   The listing service SHALL also maintain information about the schema,
   beyond its definition. This information is referred to as meta data
   and will consist of information used for cataloging schema in the
   listing repositories.  The particular set of  meta data elements used
   during the initial deployment of the listing service will be defined
   in other documents.

   Listing meta data and listing content MUST be parsable.

2.2 Operational Requirements

   The process of listing schema MUST be centralized for the initial
   deployment.



Apple                                                           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   Updated schema listings SHALL be deprecated.

   A new schema listing name SHALL be allocated for each schema listing
   publication causing the deprectation of an existing schema listing.

   The listing repository MUST be centrally administered.

   The listing repository MAY be mirrored.

   The primary repository operator MUST obtain an OID subtree for which
   they hold sub-allocation authority for use in the schema listing
   service.

   Schema listing requests MAY be signed using PGP/MIME as described in
   [RFC2015]. The primary listing repository operator MUST be able to
   accept schema listing requests in PGP/MIME messages, although they
   are NOT REQUIRED to validate the signatures. The method for
   validating and determining trust of signatures is outside the scope
   of this document and is determined by the parties in the exchange.
   The method for determining and validating trust in an unsigned
   request is outside the scope of this document, as is the method for
   determining trust in schema listing repository or its content.

   A mailing list MUST be created for the purpose of submitting schema
   listing requests for review prior to publishing in the schema listing
   repository. The schema listing repository publication process MUST be
   moderated via this mailing list. Schema listing requests MUST be
   subjected to community review on this mailing list for a period of at
   least 2 weeks. If no comments are received, properly formed schema
   listing requests SHALL be published as schema listings; otherwise,
   the request MAY either denied or the schema listing MAY published
   subject to incorporation of comments.

   A mailing list MUST be created for announcing new and updated schema
   listings.

   A mailbox MUST be created for the purpose of receiving service
   trouble requests from users.

   Listing repository operators (of primary and shadow sites) MUST
   provide a free means of accessing the listing service consistent with
   the functions documented in paragraph 2.3.

2.3 Repository Access Functionality

   The following schema listing repository access protocols MUST be
   supported:  FTP [RFC959], HTTP 1.1[RFC2044], and SMTP [RFC821].




Apple                                                           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   The following access functions are REQUIRED:

      a) browse and retrieve schema listing content, listing
         meta data, and a list of available schema listings:

         + via HTTP using an HTTP client such as a web browser

         + via FTP using clients such as a GUI- or
           command-line-based FTP client or a web browser

         + via SMTP using an SMTP-to-FTP gateway

      b) search a list of available schema listings:

         + via HTTP using an HTTP client to download a copy of the
           list and utilizing search capabilities of that client

         + via HTTP by accessing repository-based searching
           facilities capable of accepting keywords from
           the user and returning schema listing summaries
           containing those keywords

      c) add and update schema listings by submitting a formatted
         request to a mailing list for community review:

         + via SMTP using appropriate MIME constructs
           as described in section 4.0

   Other access functions, including the following, MAY be supported,
   but will be defined in other documents in the future:

      a) search schema listing content

      b) search schema listing meta data

3.0 Listing Service Namespace Requirements

   The listing service namespace MUST be protocol-independent.

   The listing service namespace SHALL be based on OIDs.

   The listing service namespace SHALL consist of two different types of
   names:

      + schema listing names

      + schema listing request names




Apple                                                           [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   Specific requirements for each type of schema listing name follows.

   Schema listing names:

      + MUST be permanent

      + MUST be globally unique

      + MUST be publicly available

      + MUST NOT be recycled or re-used

      + MUST be created within the OID subtree reserved for use
        in the schema listing service and administered by the
        primary listing repository operator

   Schema listing request names:

      + MUST be globally unique

      + MUST be publicly available

      + MUST be considered temporary

      + SHALL be assigned by the schema writer

      + MUST be replaced with a permanent name prior
        to schema listing publication

      + MUST be based on one of the following:

         - an OID tree administered by the individual,
           organization, or organizational role acting
           as the schema writer

         - a GUID constructed according to [GUIDGEN] or [GUIDOTHER]

4.0 Listing Requirements

   Listing content SHALL be limited to the information actually required
   to specify and encode the schema for storage and transfer.

   Listing meta data SHALL be composed of information used to catalog
   schema listings.

   Meta data element syntax SHALL be defined based on the concept of
   tagged attribute type-value pairs.




Apple                                                           [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   Language tags as specified in [RFC1766] MUST be used in listing
   content and meta data.

   Meta data element values MUST be encoded using the UCS Transformation
   Format - 8 bit form [RFC2044].

   For the purposes of submitting a listing request, listing content and
   meta data SHOULD be structured according to appropriate profiles of
   [MIMEDIR] defined in other documents.

   Content associated with a schema listing, but not stored in the
   schema listing repository (such as large copyright notices and vendor
   logo images) MAY be included by reference in the meta data. If such
   external references are included in a particular schema listing, a
   fingerprint of the external content generated prior to schema listing
   request creation MUST be included along with these references in the
   request. Details associated with the creation of these external
   content references, including the algorithm to be used for generation
   of a content fingerprint and the syntax of the reference, will be
   defined in the [MIMEDIR] profile used to format and encode listing
   meta data for storage and transfer.

5.0 Listing Storage Requirements

   Listing repository file names MUST be permanent, globally unique, and
   publicly available.

   Listing repository file names SHOULD be constructed in a manner that
   allows human and machine users to determine the nature of file
   content by inspecting the file names.

   Listing content and listing meta data MUST be stored in separate
   files.

6.0 Security Considerations

6.1 Compromisable Assets

   One or more of the following assets could be compromised if the
   service is attacked:

      + Listing meta data
      + Listing content
      + Repository Hardware & Software
      + Networking Facilities Connecting Repository to the Internet
      + Repository Mirror Sites

6.2 Attack Scenarios



Apple                                                           [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


Allowable methods for submitting schema listing requests are:

      a) sending an e-mail message to a mail box

      b) submitting requests using web-based forms

Based on these request submission methods, there are a number of known
repository attack scenarios that must be considered during the
implementation of schema listing procedures and the software and
operational processes required to support them.

6.2.1 Denial-of-Service Attack Scenarios

Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of improperly formed
requests

Scenario B: someone could send in a large number of properly formed, but
frivolous, useless, or trivial requests

6.2.2 Confuse-the-User Attack Scenarios

Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of valid, but
frivolous, useless, or trivial requests and some or all of these
requests actually become listings in the repository

Scenario B: someone could maliciously submit one or more slightly
modified versions of existing schema listings which are popular or
widely used

6.3 Security Requirements on Schema Listing Procedures

The following contextual definitions apply to the requirements listed in
the remainder of this paragraph:

Verification - a process of determining authenticity of facts implied or
explicitly specified by a contact person during the process of
submitting a schema listing request; the methods used to implement such
a process MAY or MAY NOT be based on an IETF-sanctioned security
protocol; specification of the methods used to implement such a process
as well as the trust relationships relevant to the process are outside
the scope of this document.

High-Quality Directory Schema - a directory schema that serves some
useful purpose (e.g., a related set of attribute and object class
definitions for holding information about people in a LDAP directory); a
schema that is _not_ merely trivial or frivolous (e.g., a trivial schema
might consist of a related set of attribute and object class definitions
for holding information about the two possible binary bit values in a



Apple                                                           [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


directory).

The schema listing procedures SHOULD be designed to enable:

      a) verification that all properly formed schema
         listing requests are submitted by the contact
         person claiming to originate them

      b) methods of ensuring that only properly-formed,
         high-quality directory schema are published
         in the schema listing repository

      c) verifcation that requests to change the identity
         of the contact person for a schema listing originate
         from the listing authority contact or the contact
         person

      d) coping with the situation in which the contact
         person and/or listing authority contact for
         a schema is no longer available or is unable
         to submit updates to the schema listing
         for which they hold update authority

   For the initial release of the service, there is NO REQUIREMENT on
   any participant, user, or application to retain signature information
   as it applies to an entire schema listing request.

   Fingerprints included with external content reference meta data
   elements MUST be retained and included in published listing request.
   Users of the schema listing service SHOULD verify that fingerprints
   of referenced content match corresponding fingerprints included with
   external references as a part of the published schema listing.  If
   purported (included in the listing) and actual (computed by the user)
   fingerprints are different, users of the service SHOULD consider the
   possibility that the referenced content has changed since publication
   of the schema listing and that such a change could affect the way in
   which associated schema listing content can be used.

   Referenced content is outside of the control of the schema listing
   service.  A caveat explaining this concept MUST be included in the
   meta data of all published listings if external references are
   included in corresponding listing requests.

7.0 Acknowledgements

   Leslie Daigle of Bunyip Information Systems and Chris Weider of
   Microsoft provided valuable comments on multiple versions of this
   document.



Apple                                                          [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   The engineering team for listing service requirements:

      Chris Apple - AT&T Labs
      Sanjay Jain - Oracle
      Michael Mealling - NSI
      John Strassner - Cisco
      Sam Sun - CNRI
      Mark Wahl - Critical Angle
      Chris Weider - Microsoft

   The members of the ietf-schema-reg@imc.org mailing list.

8.0 References

   [CHARSET] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, "CHARACTER SETS",
   <URL:ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/character-sets>.

   [GUIDGEN] P. Leach, R. Salz, "UUIDs and GUIDs", INTERNET-DRAFT
   <draft-leach-uuids-guids-00.txt>, February 1997.

   [GUIDOTHER] Open Group CAE Specification C309 "DCE: Remote Procedure
   Call", August 1994.

   [LDAPV3] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access
   Protocol (Version 3)", INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-ietf-asid-ldapv3-
   protocol-08.txt>, October 1997.

   [MIME] [RFC2045], [RFC2046], and [RFC2047].

   [MIMEDIR] T. Howes, M. Smith, "A MIME Content-Type for Directory
   Information", INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-ietf-asid-mime-direct-04.txt>,
   July 1997.

   [RFC821] J. Postel, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 821, August
   1982.

   [RFC959] J. Postel, J.K. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol", RFC 959,
   October 1985.

   [RFC1766] H. Alvestrand, "Tags for the Identification of Languages",
   RFC 1766, March 1995.

   [RFC2015] M. Elkins, "MIME Security with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)",
   RFC 2015, October 1996.

   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Level", March 1997.




Apple                                                          [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Directory Schema Listing Requirements   8 November 1997


   [RFC2068] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, T. Berners-
   Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2068, January
   1997.

   [RFC2044] F. Yergeau, "UTF-8, a transformation format of Unicode and
   ISO 10646", RFC 2044, October 1996.

   [RFC2045] N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
   Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC
   2045, November 1996.

   [RFC2046] N. Freed & N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
   Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November 1996.

   [RFC2047] K. Moore, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions)
   Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047,
   November 1996.

9.0 Author's Address

   Chris Apple
   AT&T Laboratories
   600 - 700 Mountain Ave., Room 2F-165
   Murray Hill, NJ 07974-0636
   USA

   E-Mail: capple@att.com
   Phone: +1 908 582 2409
   FAX: +1 908 582 3296




                This INTERNET-DRAFT expires on May 8, 1998.

















Apple                                                          [Page 12]
