Network Working Group                                  D. Crocker
Internet-Draft:  draft-ietf-fax-itudc-              Internet Mail
     00.txt                                            Consortium
Expiration <4/98>                                October 24, 1997
                               
                               
                               
                               
           PROCEDURES FOR THE TRANSFER OF FACSIMILE
                    DATA VIA INTERNET MAIL
                               
                               
                               
STATUS OF THIS MEMO

This  document  is  an  Internet-Draft.   Internet-Drafts  are
working  documents  of  the Internet  Engineering  Task  Force
(IETF),  its areas, and its working groups.  Note  that  other
groups  may  also  distribute working documents  as  Internet-
Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months  and  may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted  by  other
documents  at any time.  It is inappropriate to use  Internet-
Drafts  as  reference material or to cite them other  than  as
``work in progress.''

To  learn  the  current  status of any Internet-Draft,  please
check  the  ``1id-abstracts.txt''  listing  contained  in  the
Internet-  Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
nic.nordu.net    (Europe),   munnari.oz.au   (Pacific    Rim),
ds.internic.net  (US  East Coast),  or  ftp.isi.edu  (US  West
Coast).

INTRODUCTION

     NOTE:   The distribution of this document to the  IETF
     Fax   WG  was  authorized  by  Study  Group  8.    The
     information herein is made available for  use  by  the
     Fax  WG.  The material is copyright ITU-T and  is  not
     for further publication.
     
This   document  is  based  on  a  draft  which  received   an
affirmative  "determination" at the October, 1997  meeting  of
ITU  Study  Group  8.  This version tunes  and  corrects  some
portions  of  that document, as well as creating an  alternate
organization  and  separating  some  control  and  value-added
functions  from  the  core  process  of  sending  a  facsimile
document.   One  of  the  goals of the  reorganization  is  to
facilitate  use  for  simple  facsimile  over  the   Internet,
possibly even compatible with the work being done by the  IETF
Fax  working  group, while still permitting use for  the  more
advanced  features desired by some constituencies of  the  ITU
Study Group.


ITU  - Telecommunication Standadization Sector       Temporary
Document



Study Group 8



Geneva, 7-
16 October
1997


 
 

Question: 4/8
 
 
                               
                               
                               
                               
SOURCE*: Internet Society

TITLE:   PROPOSED REVISION OF NEW DRAFT PROCEDURES FOR THE
         TRANSFER OF FACSIMILE DATA VIA INTERNET MAIL

                           ________


 
 Based  on discussons with the author of TD 2128, the enclosed
 document attempts a reorganization and revision of TD 2128 to
 improve  interworking with Internet mail  end  users  and  to
 simplify the specification and distinction between Simple and
 Basic Internet Fax services.
 
 
 
 The  enclosed  revised copy of TD2128 includes the  following
 changes:

1.   Revised  list  of  References to include  additional  RFC
     specifications

2.   Revision  of document structure to distinguish Basic  and
     Simple Internet fax within the main body of the document

3.   Revision of Basic Internet Fax to form a functional  core
     service.

4.   Revision  of  specification for Simple  Internet  Fax  to
     build upon the specification of Simple Internet Fax

5.   Addition   of  sections  for  Internet  mail  addressing,
     tailored for use with Internet Fax.

6.   Addition  of sections for Internet mail message  headers,
     to specify the headers required for use with Internet Fax.

7.   Addition of section specifying delivery confirmation
     through use of existing Internet mail standards.

8.   Revision of specification for exchange of capabilities,
     to use separate MIME type during a message exchange without
     other facsimile data.

9.   Inclusion of annotations for opportunities to incorporate
     IETF RFCs by reference.
 
 


           INTERNATIONAL  TELECOMMUNICATIONS          Draft
           UNION                              Recommendatio
                                                          n
           TELECOMMUNICATION                        T.Ifax1
           STANDARDISATIZATION SECTOR                      
           STUDY PERIOD 1997 - 2000            October 1997
                                                  Original:
                                               English only


  PROCEDURES FOR THE TRANSFER OF FACSIMILE DATA VIA STORE AND
                    FORWARD ON THE INTERNET
                               
CONTENTS:

1. SUMMARY AND SCOPE                                         7
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND                               7
3. REFERENCES                                                7
4. DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS                             8
5. SIMPLE INTERNET FAX                                       8
     5.1 REASON FOR SIMPLE STORE AND FORWARD FACSIMILE       8
     5.2 ADDRESSING                                          9
     5.3 MESSAGE STRUCTURE                                   9
     5.4 MESSAGE HEADERS                                    10
          5.4.1 DATE:                                       10
          5.4.2 FROM:                                       10
          5.4.3 TO: AND CC:                                 10
          5.4.4 MESSAGE-ID:                                 10
6. BASIC INTERNET FAX                                       10
     6.1 ADDRESSING                                         10
     6.2 MESSAGE STRUCTURE                                  10
     6.3 MESSAGE HEADERS                                    11
7. CONFIRMATION OF RECEIPT                                  11
8. EXCHANGE OF CAPABILITIES                                 12
          8.1.1 G3: SENDER'S CAPABILITIES                   13
          8.1.2 X"0A" G3: SENDER'S FACSIMILE TELEPHONE NUMBER1
          3
          8.1.3 X"0B" G3: NSF SIGNAL                        13
          8.1.4 X"0C" G3: NSS SIGNAL                        13
          8.1.5 X"0D" G3: NSC SIGNAL                        13
          8.1.6 G4 CAPABILITIES                             13
9. FACSIMILE POLLING                                        13
     9.1 MIME LABEL FOR DOCUMENT-RETRIEVAL BODY-PART        14
     9.2 FORMAT OF THE DOCUMENT-RETRIEVAL BODY-PART         14
          9.2.1 X"0F" G3: SELECTIVE POLL                    14
          9.2.2 G3: PASSWORD                                14
          9.2.3 G3: DTC                                     14
ANNEX A: TIFF-F FORMAT                                      16
     A.1 REFERENCES, DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS          16
     A.2 TIFF                                               16
          A.2.1 REFERENCES, DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS   16
     A.3 MIME LABELLING                                     16
     A.4 TIFF-F                                             16
          A.4.1 IFD AND IMAGE DATA                          16
          A.4.2 FACSIMILE CAPABILITIES                      20
(XRESOLUTION,YRESOLUTION) = (200,200) IS CONSIDERED AS
EQUIVALENT TO (204,196)                                     20
ANNEX B:  TIFF-FX FORMAT                                    21
     B.1 MIME LABELLING                                     21
     B.2 TIFF-FX                                            21
     B.3 COPY OF THE CONTENTS OF GENEVA OCTOBER 7-16 TEMPORARY
     DOCUMENT TD 2100 TO GO HERE.                           21
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE TRANSACTIONS                             22
APPENDIX B - A MULTIPART EXAMPLE                            30


_1.  Summary and scope

This Recommendation:

a)   defines  procedures  that enable  facsimile  data  to  be
     transferred via Internet Email.
b)   supports the requirements of F.IFax.
c)   defines a method for identifying the capabilities of the
     remote equipment.
d)   defines a method for providing positive or negative
     acknowledgement of receipt.
e)   does not require changes to current ITU facsimile
     Recommendations.
f)   does not require changes to current IETF internet
     standards.
g)   does not require terminals to have multi-page memory.
     
h)   permits extensive interworking between facsimile and
     Internet mail users and facilities, sharing common services
     where possible and isolated facsimile-specific functions

2.   Introduction and Background

F.IFax, defines the service requirement for both real-time and
store and forward facsimile over the Internet.  For store  and
forward facsimile this Recommendation defines addressing, MIME
encapsulation  of  document components and  data  formats  for
those components..

Store  and  forward  facsimile  uses  Internet  mail  standard
protocols  for  posting, relaying and delivery  of  store  and
forward facsimile document. It requires no changes to Internet
standards  or  to  ITU  Facsimile  Recommendations.   Such  an
approach  leads  to  a  system that can  be  used  universally
without  changes  to  Internet servers or  other  intermediate
systems between the sender and the recipient and which permits
interworking  between facsimile store and  forward  users  and
users of general Internet mail.


3.   References

The  following  ITU-T  Recommendations, and  other  references
contain  provisions  which, through reference  in  this  text,
constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the  time  of
publication,   the   editions  indicated   were   valid.   All
Recommendations and other references are subject to  revision;
all  users of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged  to
investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent
edition  of  the  Recommendations and other references  listed
below. A list of the currently valid ITU-T Recommendations  is
regularly published.

Internet  RFC  (Request For Comments) documents are  available
via http://ds.internic.net/ds/dspg/intdoc.html.

1.   ITU-T    T.30:   Procedures   for   document    facsimile
     transmission in the general switched telephone network
2.   ITU-T T.4: Standardization of Group 3 facsimile apparatus
     for document transmission
3.   ITU-T T.6: Facsimile coding schemes and coding control
     functions for Group 4 facsimile apparatus
4.   ITU-T T.50: International Reference Alphabet (IRA)
5.   ITU-T E.164:  Numbering plan for the ISDN era
6.   ITU-T F.IFax: Internet facsimile: operations and
     definition of service
7.   ISO 8601:1988:  Data elements and interchange formats
     –representation of dates and times
8.   ISO  2111:  Data  Communications  -  basic  mode  control
     procedures - code independent information transfer
9.   RFC  822:  Standard for the format of ARPA Internet  text
     messages
10.  RFC 821:  Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
11.  RFC-2045:   Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions  (MIME)
     Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies
12.  RFC-2046:  Multipurpose Internet Mail  Extensions  (MIME)
     Part Two: Media Types
13.  RFC-2047:  MIME  (Multipurpose Internet Mail  Extensions)
     Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text
14.  RFC-2048:  Multipurpose Internet Mail  Extensions  (MIME)
     Part Four: Registration Procedures
15.  RFC-2049:  Multipurpose Internet Mail  Extensions  (MIME)
     Part Five: Conformance Criteria and Examples
16.  RFC-1725: Post Office Protocol – Version 3
17.  ITU-T   T.563:  Terminal  characteristics  for  Group   4
     facsimile apparatus
     
18.  RFC  1123: Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Application
     and Support
19.  RFC-1891 SMTP Service Extension for Delivery Status
     Notifications
20.  RFC-1894 An Extensible Message Format for Delivery Status
     Notifications

4.   Definitions and abbreviations

All  abbreviations are as per documents ITU-T  T.30  and  ITU-
F.IFax unless specifically stated otherwise.

G3        Group 3 facsimile
G4        Group 4 facsimile
Relay
terminal  A  receiving system capable of relaying the received
          facsimile  to  one  or  more  Group  3  or  Group  4
          facsimile terminals
Email     Electronic Mail
IETF      Internet Engineering Task Force
IMAP      Internet Mail Access Protocol version 4
MIME      Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
POP3      Post Office Protocol version 3
RFC       Request For Comment (Draft IETF standard)
SMTP      Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
TIFF      Tagged Image File Format
UTC       Coordinated Universal Time: Time scale, based on the
          second (SI)
IP        Internet Protocol
TCP       Transmission Control Protocol
          
In  the  descriptions below the following formats are used  to
represent octet values:

X"nn"          hexadecimal
B"nnnnnnnn"    binary: X"A3" = B"10100011"
nnnn nnnn      ITU  format  as  bits are  received:  X"A3"  =
               B"10100011" = 1100 0101
          

5.   Simple Internet Fax

5.1  Reason for simple store and forward facsimile

This  mode is designed so that a facsimile terminal sends  and
receives  the  facsimile document as an image attached  to  an
Email.

5.2  Addressing

(This  sub-section  may be replaced by RFC  citation,  if  the
current   IETF  specification  for  facsimile  addressing   is
published in a sufficiently timely fashion.)



Specification  of  store  and forward  facsimile  senders  and
recipients  is accomplished by the use existing Internet  mail
addressing  mechanisms and standards.   Those  mechanisms  are
tailored  for store and forward facsimile through a compatible
profile, which encodes the information required to refer to  a
facsimile  terminal  and  the store and  forward  relay  which
connects that terminal to the Internet mail service.

     simple-fax-mbox          =  "FAX=" ( global-phone / local-
     phone )
     
     global-phone        =  "+" digit-string
     
     local-phone         =  digit-string
     
     digit-string        =  1*(DIGIT / "-" / ".")
     
5.3  Message structure

The  structure  of  an  Internet  mail  message  containing  a
facsimile is:

  Table 1/T.IFax - Simple store and forward facsimile Format
                               
        DESCRIPTI   NOTE
            ON        
             
                      
                      
          Email      1
         envelope     
             
                      
                      
          Email      2
          header      
             
                      
                      
          Image      3
           Data       
             
Notes:

1.   Envelope  information specifies the list of  destinations
     to which the message is currently being sent, as well as the
     address of the agent which posted the message, and any other
     transfer-specific information which applies to the current
     transfer of the message.  Normally this information is carried
     via SMTP (Reference 10, 18) commands.
     
2.   This contains all normal end-to-end Internet mail message
     header fields such as "To:", "From:", "CC:", "BCC:", "Reply
     to:" etc., as documented in (References 9, 18) and extensions.
     
3.   The body of the email is a MIME part which contains one
     or more pages of image data in the format defined in Annex A.

4.   Some  terminals may transmit character coded  information
     with or without image data using Multipart/mixed.  It  is
     recommended that a terminal supporting the format defined here
     be designed to process such mixed content email; however it is
     outside the specification of this annex.
     
5.4  Message headers

The  following standard Internet mail headers are required for
facsimile store and forward:

5.4.1     Date:

This contains the date and time of message posting

5.4.2     From:

This specifies the originator (author) of the message

5.4.3     To: and CC:

These list the primary and secondary recipients, respectively,
for  the  message.   The  lists can be a  mixture  of  general
Internet  mail addresses and Internet mail addresses  tailored
for  use by facsimile store and forward, as defined in Section
5.1.

5.4.4     Message-ID:

This is a unique string which identifyies the message


6.   Basic Internet Fax

6.1  Addressing

(This  sub-section  may be replaced by RFC  citation,  if  the
current   IETF  specification  for  facsimile  addressing   is
published in a sufficiently timely fashion.)



     basic-fax-mbox      =  simple-fax-mbox

                              [  sub-sep sub-addr ]  
                              [ post-sep post-dial]

     sub-sep        =
     
     sub-addr       =
     
                     ;  This contains the contents of the T.30
                        SUB FIF.
          
     post-sep       =
     
     post-dial      =
     
6.2  Message structure

The structure of an Email message containing a Basic facsimile
store  and forward message is the same as for Simple  Internet
Fax,  with the addition of support for binary file data  using
standard MIME structuring and labelling:

   Table 2/T.IFax - Basic Store and forward facsimile Format
                               
        DESCRIPTI   NOTE
            ON        
             
                      
                      
          Email      1
         envelope     
             
                      
                      
          Email      2
          header      
             
                      
                      
          Image      3
           Data       
             
                      
                      
          Binary     4
        File Data     
             
Notes:

1.   This is the same as for Simple Internet Fax.
     
2.   This is the same as for Simple Internet Fax.
     
3.   The  body of the email is a MIME part which contains  one
     or more pages of image data in the format defined in Annex B.
     
4.   This MIME part contains other binary file data using  any
     of the formats acceptable for facsimile.
     
5.   Where  possible the content types for binary files should
     be the same as those already existing.  Where no suitable
     content type exists it will be necessary to apply for a new
     content type after consultation with the IETF.  This paragraph
     needs detailed specification of the alignment between BFT and
     MIME types.)
     
6.   Binary file parts and image data parts may be interleaved
     in any order.
     
6.3  Message headers

Message headers are the same as for Basic Internet fax.


7.   Confirmation of receipt

Senders  of  facsimile store and forward may request  delivery
confirmation.    Existing  Internet  mail   Delivery   Service
Notification  (DSN)  (Reference  19, 20) mechanisms  shall  be
used.

Facsimile  store and forward recipients which  receive  a  DSN
request must return a delivery service notice, upon successful
delivery of the facsimile.

For the purposes of facsimile store and forward relay devices,
the  DSN  shall  be  issued upon receipt of  the  confirmation
message  from the target facsimile station.  For the  purposes
of Internet mail recipients, the DSN shall be issued according
the standard rules specified for DSNs.


8.   Exchange of capabilities

Facsimile   store  and  forward  participants  may   wish   to
communicate  their capabilities prior to sending a  facsimile.
A  special  MIME Content-Type is defined for this purpose,  in
place  of the Image Data MIME body-part present in a facsimile
message.  In all other respects the capabilities message shall
conform   to   requirements  for  Simple  or  Basic   Internet
Facsimile.

The sending system must make use of the "Capabilities Request"
message  type  to  obtain the capabilities of  the  recipient.
This can be done as part of a first facsimile transmission  or
as  a special transmission using the ITU header alone with  no
image  or  binary data.  The sending system should  store  the
recipient's capabilities for use during future transmissions.

The sender of any message using the procedures defined in this
Recommendation  shall  be  free to  use  any  valid  facsimile
capabilities during its first call to other equipment.  If the
receiving equipment can process the data transmitted  it  will
send back an acknowledgement of successful reception otherwise
it  will send back an acknowledgement indicating "Capabilities
mismatch".

8.1  MIME label for exchange of capabilities body part

The MIME label is:

     Content-Type: application/fax-poll
     
  (NB:  this  section may also be expressed in ASN.1  notation
following  an  editorial  update  from  those  desiring   such
notation):



The MIME label is:

     Content-Type:application/fax-capabilities
     
8.2  Format of exchange of capabilities body-part

The   Application/Fax-Capabilities  MIME  part  contains   the
following  data  (NB: this section may also  be  expressed  in
ASN.1  notation  following  an  editorial  update  from  those
desiring such notation):

         3/T.IFax: Exchange of Capabilities Body-Part
                               
Description          Mandato  Repeata  Field
                        ry      ble    Type
DIS:   G3   sender's   Yes1     No     X"09"
capabilities
TSI:   G3   sender's    No      No     X"0A"
facsimile number
NSF: G3 NSF signal      No      No     X"0B"
NSS: G3 NSS signal      No      No     X"0C"
NSC: G3 NSS signal      No      No     X"0D"
G4 capabilities        Yes2     No     X"12"
Notes:
  1 For Group 3 only
  2 For Group 4 only
  
All  fields  within  the ITU header part  have  the  following
format:

Field type   Data length   Data
   Field type          (1 octet)
   Data length    (2 octets: low octet/high octet order)
   Data      (Of defined length)
   
The desirability of an extension method for this format is  to
be  studied and, if it is felt necessary, a method  is  to  be
added to this draft Recommendation.

The following field types are allocated:

8.2.1     G3: Sender's capabilities

This contains the contents of the T.30 DIS FIF.  It is present
in all messages and identifies the capabilities of the sender.

8.2.2     X"0A" G3: Sender's facsimile telephone number

This contains the contents of the T.30 TSI FIF.

8.2.3     X"0B" G3: NSF signal

This contains the contents of the T.30 NSF FIF.

8.2.4     X"0C" G3: NSS signal

This contains the contents of the T.30 NSS FIF.

8.2.5     X"0D" G3: NSC signal

This contains the contents of the T.30 NSC FIF.

8.2.6     G4 capabilities

This  contains Group 4 applications capability data as defined
in T.563 Appendix II.



The sender of any message using the procedures defined in this
Recommendation  shall  be  free to  use  any  valid  facsimile
capabilities during its first call to other equipment.  If the
receiving equipment can process the data transmitted  it  will
send back an acknowledgement of successful reception otherwise
it  will send back an acknowledgement indicating "Capabilities
mismatch".


9.   Facsimile polling

Facsimile  store and forward participants may wish to  poll  a
destination  facsimile station, to request return transmission
of  one or more fax documents.  A special MIME Content-Type is
defined for this purpose, in place of the Image Data MIME body-
part  present  in a facsimile message.  In all other  respects
the  capabilities  message shall conform to  requirements  for
Simple or Basic Internet Facsimile.

The sender of any message using the procedures defined in this
Recommendation  shall  be  free  to  request   any   facsimile
document.   If  the receiving equipment can process  the  data
transmitted  it  will  send  back the  requested  document(s);
otherwise  it  will  send  back an acknowledgement  indicating
"Document(s) unavailable".

9.1  MIME label for Document-Retrieval body-part

The MIME label is:

     Content-Type: application/fax-poll
     
  (NB:  this  section may also be expressed in ASN.1  notation
following  an  editorial  update  from  those  desiring   such
notation):



9.2  Format of the Document-Retrieval body-part

The ITU header MIME part contains the following data (NB: this
section  may also be expressed in ASN.1 notation following  an
editorial update from those desiring such notation):

               Table 2/T.IFax: ITU Header Format
                               
Description          Mandato  Repeata  Field
                        ry      ble    Type
SEP:   G3  selective    No      Yes    X"0F"
poll
PWD: G3 password        No      Yes    X"10"
DTC:    G3   polling    No      No     X"11"
request
Notes:
  1 Where known
  2 For Group 3 only
  3 For Group 4 only
  
All  fields  within  the ITU header part  have  the  following
format:

Field type   Data length   Data
   Field type          (1 octet)
   Data length    (2 octets: low octet/high octet order)
   Data      (Of defined length)
   
The desirability of an extension method for this format is  to
be  studied and, if it is felt necessary, a method  is  to  be
added to this draft Recommendation.

The following field types are allocated:

9.2.1     X"0F" G3: Selective poll

This contains the contents of the T.30 SEP FIF.

9.2.2     G3: Password

This contains the contents of the T.30 PWD FIF.

9.2.3     G3: DTC

This  contains the contents of the T.30 DTC FIF.  This is used
for a non-selective poll or turnaround poll.


Annex A: TIFF-F format

(This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation)

Editorial consideration will be given to reconciling  Annex  A
and Annex B.

A.1  References, definitions and abbreviations

IFD : Image File directory

(See  main  body of this Recommendation for other  references,
definitions and abbreviations)

A.2  TIFF

(This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation)

Editorial consideration will be given to reconciling  Annex  A
and Annex B.

A.2.1     References, definitions and abbreviations

TIFF:   "The  TIFF  6.0  specification  dated  June  3,   1992
specification  ©  1986-1988, 1992 Adobe Systems  Incorporated.
All Rights Reserved"

This  Annex  is  not a complete definition  of  TIFF  but  is,
instead,  a use of a particular TIFF specification referenced.
This  annex includes a definition of an extension to  TIFF  to
meet  the requirements of facsimile.  Under the terms  of  the
letter   dated   September  19th  1997  from   Adobe   Systems
Incorporated  to  the  Director if the ITU-T  Adobe  grants  a
license to use the TIFF specification as the basis for an  ITU
Recommendation.   Detailed  terms  are  contained  within  the
letter which is available from the ITU.

(See  main  body of this Recommendation for other  references,
definitions and abbreviations)

A.3  MIME labelling

The  email body part which contains the TIFF-F file  shall  be
preceded by the following indicator.

     Content-type: Image/TIFF
     (specific  type/subtype & parameter details  need  to  be
     reconciled with IETF documents currently in Working Group
     Last Call.)
TIFF  creates  binary data which shall may need MIME  Content-
Transfer-Encoding,  such  as  Base64,  for  carriage   through
Internet  mail  relay systems.  Hence is may be  necessary  to
convert  the binary data to MIME base64 format and  to  follow
the Content-Type MIME header with:

  Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
  
A.4  TIFF-F

(This  sub-section  may be replaced by RFC  citation,  if  the
current  IETF  specification for  TIFF-F  is  published  in  a
sufficiently timely fashion.)

In this section a minimum set of TIFF features is described.

A.4.1     IFD and image data

Flexibility of positioning IFD and image data in a  TIFF  data
stream  is  constrained in the format defined in  this  annex.
The three elements of a TIFF file: Header, IFD and Image data;
shall  appear  as  shown  in  Fig, Annex  A.1/T.IFax.   Header
information shall be at the beginning of the file and IFD  and
Image  data shall follow in pairs according to page order.   A
pair of IFD and Image data shall correspond to one page of the
facsimile document.

                               
                               
  Fig.  Annex A.1/T.IFax - Sequence of Header, IFD and image
                             data
                               
The  fixed  values used in the Header field are  described  in
Table Annex A-1/T.IFax.

                Table Annex A.1/T.IFax - Header
                               
            Off               Value
            set   Descripti  
                  on
                  
             0          Byte  0x4949
                  Order      
                  
             2     42         0x2A
                             
             4        Offset 
                  of     1st 0x00000
                  IFD        008
                             
The structure of an IFD is described in Table Annex A.2/T.IFax
along with coding samples.

