

draft-ietf-ssh-users-04.txt              Erik Guttman / Sun Microsystems
                                                G. Malkin / Bay Networks
                                                           November 1997

                        Users' Security Handbook


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).


Abstract

   The Users' Security Handbook is the companion to the Site Security
   Handbook (SSH).  It is intended to provide users with the information
   they need to keep their networks and systems secure.


Acknowledgements

   This document is the work of the Site Security Handbook Working Group
   of the User Services Area of the Internet Engineering Task Force.
   The group was chaired by Barbara Y. Fraser of the Software
   Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University, who also edited
   the Site Security Handbook.  Contributing authors to this document
   are:  Erik Guttman/Sun Microsystems, Lorna Leong/SingNet, Singapore 
   Telecom.












Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   Table of Contents


   1.  Who Cares?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1  Why Was This Written?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2  Who Should Read it?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3  Stuff You Should Know  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The Commandments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  READ.ME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  The Wires have Ears . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Just Do It  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.1   The Dangers of Downloading  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.2   Don't get caught in the Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.3   Email Pitfalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.4   Passwords . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.5   Viruses and Other Illnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.6   Modems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.7   Abandoned Terminals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.8   File Protections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.9   Encrypt Everything  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.10  Shred Everything Else . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.11  What program is this, anyway? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Paranoia is Good  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Bad Things Happen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.1  What to do if you suspect trouble  . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.2  How to prepare for the worst in advance  . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.  Home Alone  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.1  Beware of Daemons  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

   References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Editor's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21






















Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


1.  Who Cares?

   This document provides guidance to the end-users of computer systems
   and networks on what they can do to keep their data and 
   communications private, and their systems and networks secure.  It
   is a companion document to the Site Security Handbook [SSH].

1.1 Why Was This Written?

   This handbook is a guide which end-users can follow to help keep
   their computer systems and networks more secure.  It contains hints
   and guidelines, dos and don'ts.

1.2 Who Should Read it?

   This document is targeted towards end-users of computer systems and
   networks.  This includes users working in small, medium and large
   corporate and campus sites, as well as users working from home PCs
   with modems.  Some of the handbook applies only to users who
   administer their own computers.

   System and network administrators may wish to use this document as
   the foundation of a site-specific users' security guide; however,
   they should consult the Site Security Handbook first.

1.3 Stuff You Should Know

   For the purposes of this document, a "site" is any individual or
   organization that owns and uses computer or network resources.  These
   resources may include computers, routers, servers, or other devices
   that may be accessed from outside the site (e.g., from the Internet).

   The "Internet" is the global data network which connects users via
   the TCP/IP suite of protocols.

   An "administrator" is an individual or group which is responsible for
   the day-to-day maintenance and operation of the site's hardware and
   software.  An "end-user" is everyone else.

   A "security point-of-contact" is the person or help-desk that you
   need to get ahold of if you suspect that there has been a computer
   security incident.  If you are in a centrally-administered site, your
   security point-of-contact will be somewhere within the central
   administration.  If you are a home user, your first point-of-contact 
   will probably be the help-desk provided by your Internet Service 
   Provider, which might direct you to the security contacts within the
   team.  You need to know how to make contact in advance.  There
   may be a phone number, Email address or the pager number of a system
   administrator that you should have on hand.




Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


2.  The Commandments

    - Know who your security point-of-contact is.
    - Keep passwords secret.
    - Read manuals and turn on security features.
    - Use a password-locked screensaver or log out when you leave your
      desk.
    - Don't let just anyone have physical access to your computer or
      your network.
    - Be aware of the software you run and very wary of software of
      unknown origin.  THINK HARD before you execute downloaded
      software.
    - Consider how private your data and Email need to be.  Have you
      invested in privacy software (cryptographic programs) and learned 
      how to use it yet?
    - Prepare for the worst in advance.
    - Do not panic.  Consult your security point-of-contact if possible
      before spreading alarm.
    - Report security problems as soon as possible to your security
      point-of-contact.
    - Keep yourself informed on the newest threats.


3.  READ.ME

   Before getting connected to the Internet, where available, you 
   should get hold of the security policy of the site you intend to 
   get connected to and read it.  A security policy is a formal 
   statement of the rules by which users who are given access to a
   site's technology and information assets must abide.  As a user, you 
   are obliged to follow the policy created by the decision makers and
   administrators of your site.  When using an outside network, you 
   are obligated to follow its Acceptable Use Policy (if it has one).

   A security policy exists to protect a site's hardware, software and
   data.  It explains what the security goals of the site are, what
   users can and cannot do, what to do when problems arise and who to
   contact, and generally, informs users what the "rules of the game"
   are.

   Some of the guidelines in this document should be followed in all
   cases.  Other guidelines, specifically those surrounding downloading
   software, may not be appropriate in all cases.

   If you administer your own computer, you may decide that you are
   willing to take certain risks for the sake of convenience. This may
   be appropriate if your computer is used recreationally.  If you use
   your computer for your business, you may not want to risk the data
   being stolen or damaged.  It is really up to you.  This document will
   simply provide you with guidance and some idea of what you are
   getting yourself in for if you ignore caution.


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


4.  The Wires have Ears

   You would probably have heard of telephone conversations being 
   eavesdropped on through "wire-tapping".  With communications over 
   data networks, eavesdropping may be done even more easily than
   tapping telephone lines.  Links between computers may potentially be 
   insecure, as can any of the computers through which data flows. All
   information passing over networks may be worth eavesdropping on, to
   someone, even though you may think "no one will care about this...". 

   Information passing over a network may be read not only by the
   intended audience but can be read by others as well.  This can happen
   to personal Email and sensitive information that is accessed via file
   transfer or the Web.  Please refer to the "Caught in the Web" and
   "Email Pitfalls" sections for specific information on protecting your
   privacy.  The point is that you need to take this very seriously.

   As a user, your utmost concerns should, firstly, be to protect
   yourself against misuse of your computer account(s) and secondly, to
   protect your privacy.

   Unless precautions are taken, every time you log in over a network,
   to any service, your password or confidential information may be
   stolen.  It may then be used to gain illicit access to systems you
   have access to.  In some cases the consequences are obvious:  If
   someone learns your credit card number or can gain access to your
   bank account, you might find yourself losing some cash, quickly.
   What is not so obvious is that services which are not financial in
   nature may also be abused in rather costly ways.  You may be held
   responsible if your account is misused by someone else!

   Many Internet services involve remote logins.  A user is prompted for
   his or her account name and password.  If this information is sent
   through the network without encryption, the message can be
   intercepted and read by others.  This is not really an issue when you
   are logging in to a "dial-in" service where you make a connection via
   telephone and log in, say, to an online service provider, as telephone
   lines are harder to eavesdrop on than Internet communications. But note
   that this usually applies only to the (initial) dial-in authentication.

   Once you have gotten through the dial-in authetication stage, the 
   risks come when you use programs to log in across the network.  
   Examples of such logins are through applications like telnet and ftp, 
   where you have to send your user name and pasword, and then files 
   (and/or other data) to a remote site over the network.  Many programs
   used for such (remote) applications simply send data without using
   encryption.

   The precaution commonly taken by larger institutions, such as 
   corporations, against password eavesdropping is to use one-time
   password systems.  Until recently, this has been far too complicated 


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   and expensive for home systems and small businesses.  An increasing
   number of products allow precaution to be taken without fancy
   hardware, by using cryptographic techniques.  An example of such a
   technique is "SSH" (Secure Shell), which is both freely and
   commercially available for a variety of platforms.  Many products
   (including SSH-based ones) also allow user-data to be encrypted
   before it is passed over the network.

   All these may sound very complex but it need not be, in practice. Ask
   your service provider how to log in securely and what to avoid. If
   you have a professional service provider they will give you detailed
   information.  If secure login is not available, that itself is
   possibly good reason not to log in at all and to seek another service
   provider.


5. Just Do It

5.1 The Dangers of Downloading

   An ever-expanding wealth of free software has become available on the
   Internet.  While this exciting development is one of the most
   attractive aspects of using public networks, you should also exercise
   caution.  Some files may be dangerous.  Downloading poses the single
   greatest risk.

   You should decide ahead of time what risks are acceptable and then
   stick to this decision.  It may be wise to simply avoid downloading
   any software from the network which comes from an unknown source, to
   a computer storing business records, other valuable data and data 
   which is potentially damaging (if the information was lost or stolen).

   If the machine has a mixed purpose, say recreation, correspondence
   and some home accounting, perhaps you will hazard some downloading of
   shareware applications.  You take some risk of acquiring software
   which is not exactly what it purports to be.

   Be careful when storing all downloaded files so that you remember
   their (possibly dubious) origin.  Do not, for example, mistake a
   downloaded program for a common program, say for doing directory
   listings.

   Checking vital system files for corruption, tampering or malicious
   replacement is very tedious work to do by hand.  Fortunately there
   are many virus detection programs available for PCs and Macintosh
   computers.  There are security auditing programs available for UNIX-
   based computers.  If software is downloaded from the network, it is
   wise to run virus detection or auditing tools regularly.





Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 6]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997



5.2 Don't get caught in the Web

   The greatest risk when web browsing is downloading files.  Web
   browsers allow any file to be retrieved from the Internet. See "The
   Dangers of Downloading."

   Many web browsers are downloading files even when it is not entirely
   obvious.  Thus, the risk posed by actively downloading files may be
   present even if you do not actively go out and retrieve files
   overtly.  Any file which you have loaded over the network should be
   considered possibly dangerous (even files in the web browser's
   cache.)  Do not execute them by accident, as they may be malicious
   programs.

   Web browsers may download and execute programs on your behalf.  You
   may disable these features.  If you leave them enabled, be sure that
   you understand the consequences.  You should read the security guide
   which accompanies your web browser as well as the security policy of
   your company (if you are accessing the Web from work.)  You should be
   aware that downloaded programs may be quite risky to execute on your
   machine.  (See "What program is this, anyway?").

   Web pages often include forms.  Be aware that, as with Email, data
   sent from a web browser to a web server is not secure.  Several
   mechanisms have been created to prevent this, most notably SSL
   (Secure Sockets Layer).  This facility has been built into many web
   browsers.  It encrypts messages which are sent between the user's web
   browser to the web server so no one along the way can read it.

   More and more software is downloaded, as part of 'normal' access to
   the World Wide Web.  It is of course very dangerous to simply run
   software obtained from uncertain sources, for all the reasons
   discussed in the section "What Program is this, anyway?"

   It is prudent to disable features which allow scripts, programs and
   the like to be downloaded and run on your computer.  You should check
   with your (work) site's administrative policy before you turn on such
   features.

   If you administer your own machine, you may decide to allow Activex,
   Javascript, Java, etc. to run in your browser.  There are a variety
   of techniques used to make downloaded programs safer.  You should
   read about them and decide for yourself whether you trust these
   security mechanisms.

5.3 Email pitfalls

   All the normal caveats apply to messages received via Email that you
   could receive any other way.  For example, the sender may not be who
   he or she claims to be.  If Email security software is not used, it


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 7]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   is very difficult to determine for sure who sent a message.  This
   means that Email is not a suitable way to conduct business.  It is
   very easy to forge an Email message, so that it appears to come from
   anyone.

   Another security issue you should consider when using Email is
   privacy.  Email passes through the Internet from computer to computer
   As the message moves between computers, and indeed as it sits in the 
   user's mailbox waiting to be read, it is potentially visible to 
   others. For this reason, it is wise to think twice before sending
   confidential or extremely personal information via Email.  You should
   never send credit card numbers and the like via unprotected Email.
   Please refer to "The Wires Have Ears" section.

   To cope with this problem there are privacy programs which are
   available.  Some mail programs make use of Privacy Enhanced Mail
   (PEM).  There is also a popular program which is widely available
   called PGP (Pretty Good Privacy).  To use them, you need mail 
   programs which employ these privacy protection software.

   One service many Email users like to use is Email forwarding.  This
   should be used very cautiously.  Imagine the following scenario:

      A user has an account with a private Internet Service Provider and
      wishes to receive all her mail there.  She sets it up so that her
      Email at work is forwarded to her private address.  All the mail
      she would receive at work then moves across the Internet until it
      reaches her private account. All along the way, the Email is
      vulnerable to being read.  A sensitive Email message sent to her
      at work could be read by a network snoop at any of the many stops
      along the journey which the Email takes.

   Remember to be careful with saved mail.  Copies of sent or received
   mail (or indeed any file at all) placed in storage provided by an
   Internet service provider or BBS may be vulnerable.  The risk is that
   someone might break into the account and read the old mail.  If you
   are a home user, keep your mail files, indeed any sensitive files, on
   your home machine.  You may also consider using an encryption program
   on your sensitive files.

   Note that Email sent or received at work may not be private.  Check
   with your employer, as employers may (in some instances) legally both
   read your mail and make use of it.  The legal status of Email depends
   on the privacy of information laws in force in each country.

   Many mail programs allow files to be included in mail messages.  The
   files which come by mail are files like any other.  Any way in which
   a file can find its way onto a computer is possibly dangerous, like a
   disease vector.  If the attached file is merely a text message, fine.
   But it may be more than a text message.  If the attached file is
   itself a program or an executable script, extreme caution should be


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 8]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   applied before running it.  See the section entitled "The Dangers of
   Downloading."

5.4 Passwords

   Passwords may be easily guessed by an intruder unless precautions are
   taken.  Your password should contain a mix of numbers, punctuation,
   and upper and lower case letters.  Avoid all real words or 
   combinations of words, license plate numbers, names and so on.  The
   best password is a made up sequence (e.g., an acronym from a phrase
   you won't forget).

   Resist the temptation to write your password down.  If you do, keep
   it with you until you remember it, then shred it!  NEVER leave a
   password taped onto a terminal or written on a whiteboard.  You
   wouldn't write your PIN code on your automated teller machine (ATM)
   card, would you?  You should have different passwords for different
   accounts, but no so many passwords that you can't remember them.  You
   should change your passwords periodically.

   You should also NEVER save passwords in scripts or login procedures
   as these could be used by anyone who has access to your machine.

   Be certain that you are really logging into your system.  Just
   because a login panel or prompt appears and asks you for your
   password does not mean you should enter it.  Avoid unusual login
   screens and immediately report them to your security point-of-
   contact.  If you notice anything strange upon logging in, change your
   password immediately.

   You should use "one-time passwords" if you are logging in over a
   network, unless precautions have been taken to encrypt your password
   when it is sent over the network. (Some applications take care of
   that for you.)  See "The Wires Have Ears" for more information on the
   risks associated with logging in over a network.

5.5 Viruses and Other Illnesses

   The following definitions are quoted from the Internet User's
   Glossary [GLOSSARY].

   Virus

      A program which replicates itself on computer systems by
      incorporating itself into other programs which are shared among
      computer systems.

   Trojan Horse

      A program which carries within itself a means to allow the creator
      of the program access to the system using it.


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                  [Page 9]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   Worm

      A computer program which replicates itself and is self-
      propogating.  Worms, as opposed to viruses, are meant to spawn in
      network environments.

   Trojan Horse programs are dealt with in the "What program is this,
   anyway?" section.  Worms should be considered a type of virus for the
   purposes of the discussion below.

   Viruses are essentially unwanted pieces of software that find their
   way into a computer.  What the virus may do once it has entered its
   host depends on several factors:  What the virus has been programmed
   to do?  What part of the computer system has the virus attacked?
   Some viruses are 'time bombs' which activate only when given a
   particular condition, such as reaching a certain date.  Others remain
   latent in the system unless a particular afflicted program is
   activated.  Still, there are others which are continually active,
   exploiting every opportunity to do mischief.  A subtle virus may
   simply modify a system's configuration, then hide.

   There are 3 ways to avoid viruses:

   1. Don't be promiscuous

      If at all possible, be cautious about what software you install in
      your system.  Do not run programs which origin you are unaware or
      unsure of.  Do not execute programs or reboot using old diskettes
      unless you have reformatted them, especially if the old diskettes
      have been used to bring software home from a trade show, and so
      on.

      Viruses have to get onto a computer somehow.  Nearly all risk of
      viruses can be eliminated if you are extremely cautious about what
      files are stored on your computer.  See "The Dangers of
      Downloading" for more details.

   2. Scan regularly.

      Give your computer a regular check-up.  There are excellent
      virus-checking and security audit tools for most computer
      platforms available today.  Use them, and if possible, set them to
      run automatically.

   3. Notice the unusual.

      It's not true that a difference you cannot detect is no difference
      at all, but it is a good rule of thumb.  You should get used to
      the way your system works.  If there is an unexplainable change
      (for instance, files you believe should exist are gone, or strange
      new files are appearing, disk space is 'vanishing') you should



Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 10]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


      check to see if you have a virus.

   If you are responsible for maintaining your own computer, you should
   take some time to be familiar with computer virus detection tools
   available for your type of computer.  You should use an up-to-date
   tool (i.e., not older than three months).  It is very important to
   test your computer if there has been a reported virus 'outbreak' in
   your organization or if you have been using freeware, other peoples'
   used floppy disks to transfer files, and so on.

   If your computer system or account is centrally administered, you
   should use the tools recommended by the systems administration.   You
   should report any virus you suspect has been passed onto your system.
   You should notify your site's systems administrators as well as the
   person you believe passed the virus to you.  It is important to
   remain calm.  Virus scares may cause more delay and confusion than an
   actual virus outbreak.  Before announcing the virus widely, make sure
   you verify its presense using a virus detection tool, and if possible,
   with the assistance of technically-competent personnel.

   The best way to avoid problems with viruses is to keep important
   files backed up.  That way, if worse comes to worse, you can always
   restore your system to its state before it was afflicted.

5.6 Modems

   You should be wary about attaching anything to your computer, and
   especially something which allows data to flow.  If your computer is
   centrally administered, you should get permission before you connect
   anything to your computer.

   Modems present a special security risk.  Many networks are protected
   by a set of precautions designed to prevent a frontal assault from
   public networks.  If your computer is attached to such a network, you
   must exercise care when using a modem.  It is quite possible to use
   the modem to connect to a remote network while *still* being
   connected to the 'secure' net.  Your computer can now act as a hole
   in your network's defenses.  Unauthorized users may be able to get
   onto your your organization's network through your computer!

   Be sure you know what you are doing if you leave a modem on and set
   up your computer to allow remote computers to dial in.  Be sure you
   use all available security features correctly.  Many modems answer
   calls by default.  You should turn auto-answer off unless you are
   prepared to have your computer respond to callers.  Some 'remote
   access' software requires this.  Be sure to turn on all the security
   features of your 'remote access' software before allowing your
   computer to be accessed by phone.

   Note that having an unlisted number will not protect you from someone
   breaking into your computer via a phone line.  It is very easy to


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 11]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   probe many phone lines to detect modems and then launch attacks.

   If you are a dial-in user, you should become familiar with what is
   normal behavior for your modem.  If you detect a lot of sustained
   modem activity that cannot be explained by your work, it is possible
   that your system is being probed or accessed by a remote system.

5.7 Don't leave me...

   Do not leave a terminal or computer logged in and walk away. Use
   password-locked screensavers whenever possible.  These can be set up
   so that they activate after the computer has been idle for a while.

   Sinister as it may be, someone coming around to erase your work is
   not uncommon.  If you remained logged in, anyone can come by and
   perform mischief for which you may be held accountable.  For example,
   imagine the trouble you could be in for if nasty Email were sent to
   the president of your company in your name, or your account were used
   to transfer illegal pornography.

   Anyone who can gain physical access to your computer can almost
   certainly break into it.  This means that you should be careful with
   who you allow access to your machine.  If this is impossible, it is
   wise to encrypt your data files kept on your local hard disk.   It is
   wise to lock the door to one's office where the computer is stored,
   if possible.

5.8 File Protections

   Data files and directories on shared systems or networked file
   systems require care and occasional oversight.  There are two
   categories:

    - Files to share

      Shared files may be visible to everyone or to a restricted group
      of other users.  Each system has a different way of specifying
      this.  Learn how to control sharing permissions of files and
      implement such control without fail.

    - Protected files

      These include files which only you should have access to, but
      which are available to anyone with system administrator
      privileges.  An example of this are files associated with the
      delivery of Email.  You don't want other users to read your Email,
      so make sure such files have all the necessary file permissions
      set accordingly.





Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 12]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


5.9 Encrypt Everything

   Additionally, there are files that are private. You may have files
   which you do not wish anyone else to have access to.  In this case,
   it is prudent to encrypt the file.  This way, even if your network is
   broken into or the systems administrator turns into Mr. Hyde, your
   confidential information will not be available.  Encryption is also
   very important if you share a computer.  A home computer may be used
   for preparing taxes and playing computer games by children.  By
   backing up the data and using encryption, this kind of shared use may
   be done safely.

   Before you encrypt files on a shared file server, you should check
   with your site's security policy.  Some employers and countries
   expressly forbid the storing and/or transferring of encrypted files.

   Be careful with the passwords or keys you use to encrypt files.
   Safely lock them away to keep them from others but also for your own
   security.  If you lose them, you will lose your ability to decrypt
   your data as well!  It may be wise to save more than one copy.  This
   may even be required, if your company has a key escrow policy, for
   example.  This protects against the possibility that the only person
   knowing a pass phrase may leave the company or be struck by
   lightning.

   It should be noted that encryption programs, whilst readily
   available, are of widely varying quality.  PGP (which stands for
   "Pretty Good Privacy") for example, offers a strong encryption
   capability.  Many common software applications include the capability
   to encrypt data.  The encryption facilities in these are typically
   very weak.

   You should not be intimidated by encryption software.  Easy-to-use
   software is being made available.

5.10 Shred Everything Else

   You would be surprised what gets thrown away into the waste paper
   basket:  notes from meetings, old schedules, internal phone lists,
   computer program listings, correspondence with customers, even market
   analyses.  All of these would be very valuable to competitors,
   recruiters and even an overzealous (hungry?) journalist looking for a
   scoop.  The threat of dumpster diving is real - take it seriously!
   Shred all potentially useful documents before discarding them.

   You should also be aware that deleting a file does not erase it in
   many cases.  The only way to be sure that an old hard disk does not
   contain valuable data may be to reformat it.





Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 13]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


5.11 What Program is this, anyway?

   Programs have become much more complex in recent years.  They are
   often extensible in ways which may be dangerous.  These extensions
   make applications more flexible, powerful and customizable.  They
   also open the end-user up to all sorts of risks.

    - A program may have "plug-in" modules.  You should not trust the
      plug-ins modules simply because you are used to trusting the 
      applications they plug into.  For example: Some web pages suggest 
      that a user download a plug-in to view or use some portion of the 
      web page's content.  Consider: What is this plug-in?  Who wrote 
      it?  Is it safe to include it in your web browser?

      Newer web browsers will allow "plug-in" modules to have "digital
      signatures."  This will assist you in determining the source of
      the software, but you must still answer the questions posed above.


    - Some files are "compound documents".  This means that instead of
      using one single program, it will be necessary to run several
      programs in order to view or edit a document.  Again, be careful
      of downloading application components.  Just because they
      integrate with products which are well-known does not mean that
      they can be trusted.  Say you receive a mail message which can
      only be read if you download a special component.  This component
      could be a nasty program which reformats your hard drive!

    - Programs can use the network without making you aware of it.  One
      thing to keep in mind is that if a computer is connected, any
      program has the capability of using the network, with or without
      informing you.  Say for example:

         You download a game program from an anonymous file server. This
         appears to be a shoot-em-up game, but unbeknownst to you, it
         transfers all your files, one by one, over the Internet to a
         cracker's machine!   Or it might disconnect from your online
         service, and dial into a server reached via a foreign telephone
         number, doing untold mischief and sending your phone bill
         through the roof in the process...


6.  Paranoia is Good

   Many people do not realise it but social engineering is a tool which
   many intruders use to gain access to computer systems.  The general
   impression that people have of computer break-ins is that they are
   the result of technical flaws in computer systems which the intruders
   have exploited.  People also tend to think that break-ins are purely
   technical.  However, the truth is that social engineering plays a big
   part in helping an attacker slip through security barriers.  This


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 14]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   often proves to be an easy stepping stone onto the protected system
   if the attacker has no authorized access to the system at all.

   Social engineering may be defined, in this context, as the act of
   gaining the trust of legitimate computer users to the point where
   they reveal system secrets or help someone, unintentionally, to gain
   unauthorized access to their system.  Using social engineering, an
   attacker may gain valuable information and/or assistance that could
   help break through security barriers with ease. Skillful social
   engineers can appear to be genuine but are really full of deceit.

   Most of the time, attackers using social enginering work via
   telephone.  This not only provides a shield for the attacker by
   protecting his or her identity, it also makes the job easier because
   the attacker can claim to be a particular someone with more chances
   of getting away with it.

   There are several types of social engineering.  Here are a few
   examples of the more commonly used ones:

    - An attacker may pretend to be a legitimate end-user who is new to
      the system or is simply not very good with computers.  This
      attacker may approach systems administrators and other end-users
      for help.  This "user" may have lost his password, or simply can't
      get logged into the system and needs to access the system
      urgently.  Attackers have also been known to identify themselves
      as some VIP in the company, screaming at administrators to get
      what they want.  In such cases, the administrator (or it could be
      an end-user) may feel threatened by the caller's authority and
      give in to the demands.

    - Attackers who operate via telephone calls may never even have seen
      the screen display on your system before.  In such cases, the
      trick attackers use is to make details vague, and get the user to
      reveal more information on the system.  The attacker may sound
      really lost so as to make the user feel that he is helping a
      damsel in distress.  Often, this makes people go way out their way
      to help.  The user may then reveal secrets when he is off- guard.

    - An attacker may also take advantage of system problems that have
      come to his attention.  Offering help to a user is an effective
      way to gain the user's trust.  A user who is frustrated with
      problems he is facing will be more than happy when someone comes
      to offer some help.  The attacker may come disguised as the
      systems administrator or maintenance technician.  This attacker
      will often gain valuable information because the user thinks that
      it is alright to reveal secrets to technicians.  Site visits may
      pose a greater risk to the attacker as he may not be able to make
      an easy and quick get-away, but the risk may bring fruitful
      returns if the attacker is allowed direct access to the system by
      the naive user.


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 15]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


    - Sometimes attackers can gain access into a system without prior
      knowledge of any system secret nor terminal access.  Just like how
      one should not carry someone else's bags through Customs, no user
      should key in commands on someone's behalf.  Beware of attackers
      who use users as their own remotely-controlled fingers to type
      away on the user's keyboard, commands the user does not understand
      which may harm the system.  These attackers will exploit system
      software bugs and loopholes even without direct access to the
      system.  The commands keyed in by the end-user may bring harm to
      the system, open his own account up for access to the attacker or
      create a hole to allow the attacker entry (at some later time)
      into the system.  If you are not sure of the commands you have
      been asked to key in, do not simply follow instructions.  You
      never know what and where these could lead to...

   To guard against becoming a victim of social engineering, one
   important thing to remember is that passwords are secret.  A password
   for your personal account should be known ONLY to you.  The systems
   administrators who need to do something to your account will not
   require your password.  As administrators, the privileges they have
   will allow them to carry out work on your account without having you
   to reveal your password. An administrator should not have to ask you
   for your password.

   Most maintenance work will require special privileges which end-users
   are not given.  Users should guard the use of their accounts, and
   keep it for their own use.  Accounts should not be shared, not even
   temporarily with a maintenance staff or administrator.  Systems
   administrators will have their own accounts to work with and will not
   need to access a system via an end-user's account.

   Systems maintenance technicians who come on site should be
   accompanied by the local site administrator (who should be known to
   you).  If the site administrator is not familiar to you, or if the
   technician comes alone, it is wise to give a call to your known site
   administrator to check if the technician should be there.  Yet many
   people will not do this because it makes them look paranoid and it is
   embarrassing to show that they have no, or little trust in these
   visitors.

   Unless you are very sure that the person you are speaking to is who
   he or she claims to be, no secret information should ever be revealed
   to such people.  Sometimes, attackers may even be good enough to make
   themselves sound like someone whose voice you know over the phone.
   It is always good to double check the identity of the person.  If you
   are unable to do so, the wisest thing to do is not to reveal any
   secrets.  If you are a systems administrator, there should be
   security procedures for assignment and reassignment of passwords to
   users, and you should follow such procedures.  If you are an end-
   user, there should not be any need for you to have to reveal system
   secrets to anyone else.  Some companies assign a common account to


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 16]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   multiple users.  If you happen to be in such a group, make sure you
   know everyone in that group so you can tell if someone who claims to
   be in the group is genuine.


7.  Bad Things Happen

   This section concerns those who maintain their own computer systems.
   For those who have an account on a shared system or a centrally-
   administered computer, very little in this section will apply to you.
   If you notice that your files have been modified or ascertain somehow
   that your account has been used without your consent, you should
   inform your security point of contact immediately.

   The rest of this section concerns those whose systems are not
   centrally-administered, such as home users or employees of small
   businesses.

7.1 What to do if you suspect trouble

   The incident should be reported to your security point-of-contact.
   For home users, report the incident to your Internet Service
   Provider.  They will tell you what the next step should be.

   If you suspect that your home computer has a virus, that a malicious
   program has been run, or that a system has been broken into, the
   wisest course of action is to first disconnect the system from all
   networks.  If available, virus detection or system auditing software
   should be used.

   If it becomes clear that a home system has been attacked, it is time
   to clean up.  Ideally, a system should be built back up from scratch.
   This means erasing everything on the hard disk.  Then you install the
   operating system and then all additional software the system needs.
   It is best to install the operating system and additional software
   from the original distribution diskettes or CD-roms, rather than from
   backup storage.  The reason for this is that a system may have been
   broken into some time ago, so the backed-up system or program files
   may already include some altered files or viruses.  Restoring a
   system from scratch is tedious but worth while.  Do not forget to
   re-install all security related fixes you had installed before the
   security incident.  Obtain these from a verified, unsuspicious
   source.

7.2 How to prepare for the worst in advance

    - Read all user documentation carefully.  Make sure that it is clear
      when services are being run on your computer.  If network services
      are activated, make sure they are properly configured (set all
      permissions so as to prevent anonymous or guest logins, and so
      on).  Increasingly, many programs have networking capabilities


Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 17]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


      built in to them.  Learn how to properly configure and safely use
      these features.

    - Back up user data.  This is always important.  Backups are
      normally thought of as a way of ensuring you will not lose your
      work if a hard disk fails or if you accidentally delete a file.
      Backing up is also critical to ensure that data cannot be lost
      due to a computer security incident.  One of the most vicious
      and unfortunately common threats posed by computer viruses and
      Trojan Horse programs is erasing a computer's hard disk.

    - Obtain virus-checking software or security auditing tools. Learn
      how to use them and install them before connecting to a public
      network.  Many security tools require that they be run on a
      "clean" system, so they can compare the present state to the
      pristine one.  Thus, it is necessary to do some work ahead of
      time.

    - Upgrade networking software regularly.  As new versions of
      programs come out, it is prudent to upgrade.  Security
      vulnerabilities will likely have been fixed.  The longer you wait
      to do this, the greater the risk that security vulnerabilities of
      the products will be well known and some network assailant will
      exploit them.  Keep up to date!


8. Home Alone

   A home system can be broken into over the Internet if a home user is
   unwary.  The files on the home system can be stolen, altered or
   destroyed.  The system itself could be accessed again some time in
   future, if it has been compromised.  This section describes issues
   and makes recommendations relevant to a home user of the Internet.

8.1 Beware of Daemons

   A home system which uses PPP to directly connect to the Internet is
   increasingly common.  These systems are at the greatest risk if they
   run certain kinds of programs called "services."  If you run a
   service you are in effect making your computer available to others
   across the network.  Some services include:

   - File servers (an NFS server, a PC with 'file sharing' turned on)
   - An FTP server
   - A Web server

   There are in general two types of programs which operate on the
   Internet:  Clients (like web browsers, Email programs and FTP clients)
   and Servers (like web servers and mail servers).




Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 18]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   Most software which runs on home systems is of the client variety;
   but, increasingly, server software is available on traditionally-
   client platforms (e.g., PCs).  Server software which runs in the
   background is referred to as a "daemon" (pronounced dee-mon).  Many
   of the server software program names of internet daemons end in `d',
   like "inetd" (Internet Daemon) and "talkd" (Talk Daemon).  These
   programs wait for clients to request some particular service from
   across the network.

   There are four very important things to keep in mind as far as the
   security implications of running services on a home computer.  First
   and most important,

    - If a server is not properly configured it is very vulnerable to
      attack over a network.  It is vital, if you run services, to
      become familiar with properly configuring them.  This is not
      easy, and may require training or technical expertise.

    - All software has flaws, and flaws exploited deviously can be used
      to breach computer security.  If you run a server on your home
      machine you have to stay aware.  This requires work:  You have to
      stay in touch with the supplier of the software to get security
      updates.  It is highly recommended that you keep up with security
      through on-line security forums.  See [SSH] for a list of
      references.

      If security flaws in your server software are discovered you will
      need to either stop using the software or apply "patches" or
      "fixes" which eliminate the vulnerability.  The supplier of the
      software, if it is a decent company or freeware author, will
      supply information and updates to correct security flaws.  These
      "patches" or "fixes" must be installed.

    - As a rule of thumb, the older the software, the greater the chance
      it has known vulnerabilities.  This is not to say you should
      simply trust brand new software either!  Frequently, it takes time
      to discover even obvious security flaws in servers.

    - Some servers start up without any warning.  There have been web
      browsers and telnet clients in common use which automatically
      start FTP servers if not explicitly configured to not do so.  If
      these servers are not themselves properly configured, the entire
      file system of the home computer can become available to anyone on
      the Internet.

   In general, any software MAY start up a network daemon.  The way to
   be safe here is to know the products you are using.  Read the manual,
   and if any questions arise, call the company or mail the author of
   free software to find out if you are actually running a service by
   using the product.



Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 19]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


   A very serious risk for a home user is if he or she runs a remote
   login service on their home machine.  This allows the home user to
   log in to their home machine from other computers on the Internet.
   This can be quite convenient.  The danger is that someone will
   secretly observe the logging in and be able to masquerade as the user
   whenever they choose in the future.  See "The Wires Have Ears" which
   suggests precautions to take for remote login.

   If possible, activate all "logging" options in your server software
   which relate to security.  You need to review these logs regularly
   in order to gain any benefit from this logging.  You should also be
   aware that logs often grow very quickly in size, so you need to be
   careful they don't fill up your hard disk!








































Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 20]

Internet Draft          Users' Security Handbook           November 1997


References

   [GLOSSARY] Malkin, G, ed, "Internet User's Glossary", RFC 1983 (FYI
           18), August, 1996.

   [SSH]   Frasier, Barbara, ed, "Site Security Handbook," RFC 2196 (FYI
           8), June, 1996.


Security Considerations

   This document discusses what computer users can do to improve
   security on their systems.


Editor's Address

   Erik Guttman
   Sun Microsystems
   Bahnstr. 2
   74915 Waibstadt Germany

   Phone: +49 7263 911701
   Email: eguttman@eng.sun.com


   Gary Scott Malkin
   Bay Networks
   8 Federal Street
   Billerica, MA 01821

   Phone:  (508) 916-4237
   Email:  gmalkin@baynetworks.com




















Guttman, Malkin           Expires: 26 April 98                 [Page 21]



