Internet Engineering Task Force
INTERNET-DRAFT                                               H.Garudadri
draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00                               QUALCOMM


                                                             July 11 2004
                                                    Expires:  Jan 11 2004

            MIME Type Registrations for 3GPP2 Multimedia files

Status of This Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
    groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
    time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Distribution of this document is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

    This document serves to register and document the standard MIME types
    associated with the 3GPP2 multimedia file format, which is part of the
    family based on the ISO Media File Format.


1 Introduction

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].



H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 1]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


    The third-generation partnership project 2 (3GPP2) for 3rd generation
    cellular telephony has defined a standard file format to contain
    audio/visual sequences which may be downloaded to cellular phones
    [3GPP2].  At the time of writing, the 3GPP2 file format (3G2) can
    contain H.263, H.264 or MPEG-4 video;  and 13K Vocoder, EVRC or AMR 
    Narrow-band speech, or AAC audio;  and 3GPP timed text.

    Within the file, as with all files in the 'ISO' family, there is an
    intrinsic file-type box, which identifies those specifications to
    which the file complies, and which players (possibly compliant with
    only one specification) are permitted by the content author to play
    the file.  This identification is through four-letter 'brands'.
    Files identified by the MIME type defined here MUST contain a brand
    defined in a standard issued by 3GPP2 that can apply to 3GPP2 files, in
    their compatible brands list.

    The MIME types defined here are needed correctly to identify such
    files when they are served over HTTP, included in multi-part
    documents, or used in other places where MIME types are used.

2 Security Considerations

    The 3GPP2 file format may contain audio, video, and displayable text
    data.  There is currently no provision for 'active' elements (such as
    scripts) of any kind.

    Clearly it is possible to author malicious files which attempt to
    call for an excessively large picture size, high sampling-rate audio
    etc.  However, clients can and usually do protect themselves against
    this kind of attack.

    It should be noted that selected metadata fields may encompass
    information partly intended to protect the media against unauthorized
    use or distribution. In this case the intention is that alteration or
    removal of the data in the field would be treated as an offence under
    national agreements based World Intellection Property Organization
    (WIPO) treaties.

    3GPP2 files have an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically
    possible that metadata fields or media formats could be defined in
    the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the
    part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks, but
    this type of capability is currently not supported in the referenced
    specification.

    There is no current provision in the standards for encryption,
    signing, or authentication of these file formats.




H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 2]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


3 MIME Types


    This registration applies to all files defined as using the '3G2'
    file format and identified with a suitable brand in a 3GPP2
    specification.  The usual file suffix for all these files is ".3g2".

3.1 Files with audio but no video

    The type "audio/3gpp2" may be used for files containing audio but no
    visual presentation (neither video nor timed text, for example).

    To: ietf-types@iana.org
    Subject: Registration of Standard MIME media type audio/3gpp2

MIME media type name:              audio
MIME subtype name:                 3gpp2
Required parameters:               none
Optional parameters:               Codecs. See draft-gellens-mime-bucket-00 
Optional parameter values:         [C.S0050] 
Encoding considerations:           files are binary and should be
                                    transmitted in a suitable encoding
                                    without CR/LF conversion, 7-bit
                                    stripping etc.; base64 is a suitable
                                    encoding. Note that this MIME type is
                                    used only for files;  separate types
                                    are used for real-time transfer, such
                                    as for the RTP payload format for 13K
                                    vocoder speech [RFC2658].
Security considerations:           see the security considerations
                                    section in RFC XXXX
Interoperability considerations:   The 3GPP2 organization has defined the
                                    specification, interoperability and
                                    conformance, and conducts regular
                                    interoperability testing.
Published specification:           3GPP2 C.S0045, 3GPP2 C.S0050.
                                    3GPP2 specifications are publicly
                                    accessible at the 3GPP2 web site,
                                    www.3gpp2.org.
Applications which use this media type: Multi-media
Additional information:            The type "audio/3gpp2" MAY be used for
                                    files containing audio but no visual
                                    presentation.  Files served under
                                    this type MUST NOT contain any visual
                                    material.  (Note that 3GPP timed text
                                    is visually presented and is
                                    considered to be visual material).
Magic number(s):                   None.  However, the file-type box



H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 3]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


                                    must occur first in the file, and
                                    MUST contain a 3GPP2 brand in its
                                    compatible brands list.
File extension(s):                 3g2 and 3gpp2 are both declared at
                                    http://www.nist.gov/nics/; 3g2 is
                                    preferred 
Macintosh File Type Code(s):       '3gpp2'
Person & email address to contact for further information:
                                 H. Garudadri, hgarudadri@qualcomm.com
Intended usage:                    COMMON
Change controller:                 3GPP2

3.2 Any files

    The type "video/3gpp2" is valid for all files.  It is valid to serve
    an audio-only file as "video/3gpp2".

    To: ietf-types@iana.org
    Subject: Registration of Standard MIME media type video/3gpp2

MIME media type name:              video
MIME subtype name:                 3gpp2
Required parameters:               none
Optional parameters:               Codecs. See draft-gellens-mime-bucket-00   
Optional parameter values:         [C.S0050]
Encoding considerations:           files are binary and should be
                                    transmitted in a suitable encoding
                                    without CR/LF conversion, 7-bit
                                    stripping etc.; base64 is a suitable
                                    encoding.  Note that this MIME type
                                    is used only for files;  separate
                                    types are used for real-time
                                    transfer, such as for the RTP payload
                                    formats for H.263 [RFC2429] and 13K
                                    vocoder speech [RFC2658].
Security considerations:           see the security considerations
                                    section in RFC XXXX
Interoperability considerations:   The 3GPP2 organization has defined the
                                    specification, interoperability and
                                    conformance, and conducts regular
                                    interoperability testing.
Published specification:           3GPP2 C.S0045, 3GPP2 C.S0050.
                                    3GPP2 specifications are publicly
                                    accessible at the 3GPP2 web site,
                                    www.3gpp2.org.
Applications which use this media type: Multi-media
Additional information:
Magic number(s):                   None.  However, the file-type box



H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 4]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


                                    must occur first in the file, and
                                    MUST contain a 3GPP2 brand in its
                                    compatible brands list.
File extension(s):                 3g2 and 3gpp2 are both declared at
                                    http://www.nist.gov/nics/; 3g2 is
                                    preferred
Macintosh File Type Code(s):       '3gpp2'
Person & email address to contact for further information:
                                 H.Garudadri, hgarudadri@qualcomm.com
Intended usage:                    COMMON
Change controller:                 3GPP2


4 IANA Considerations

    This document registers the MIME types audio/3gpp2 and video/3gpp2,
    defined above.

5 RFC Editor Considerations

    The references to RFC XXXX in the MIME registrations need to be
    replaced with the actual RFC number when it is issued.

6 Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
    included on all such copies and derivative works.

    However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as
    by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
    Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
    purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures
    for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING



H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 5]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

7 Intellectual Property Notice

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
    has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
    IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
    licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
    obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
    proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can
    be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
    Director.


8 Acknowledgments

    This document used draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-01 as the template. The 
    authors of draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-01, R. Castagno and D. Singer 
    are gratefully acknowledged. 

















H.Garudadri 		                                       [Page 6]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004


9 Authors' Contact Information
    Harinath Garudadri
    Qualcomm Inc
    5775 Morehouse Dr.
    San Diego, CA 92121
    Email: hgarudadri@qualcomm.com
    Tel:   +1 858 651 6383


9 References
  Normative
    [3gpp2] Published specifications:
    C.P0050-0 v1.0: 3GPP2 File Formats for Multimedia Services.
    C.S0045-0 v1.0: Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) Media Format and 
    Codecs for cdma2000 Spread Spectrum Systems
    
    [MIME1] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
    Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC
    2045, November 1996.

    [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels",
    RFC 2119, March 1997

  Informative
    [RFC2429] C. Borman et al., "RTP Payload format for the 1998 version
    of ITU-T Rec. H.263 Video (H.263+)",
    RFC 2429, October 1998

    [RFC2658] K. McKay, "RTP Payload format for PureVoice(tm) Audio",
    RFC 2658, August 1999









H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 7]





Internet Draft    draft-garudadri-avt-3gpp2-mime-00         July 11 2004





















































H.Garudadri                                                     [Page 8]


