

    
   AVT                                                
   Internet Draft                                 S. Narayanan (Editor) 
   draft-narayanan-mrtp-motivation-00.txt                  D. Bushmitch 
   Expires: April 14, 2005                                    Panasonic 
                                                                 S. Mao 
                                                          Virginia Tech 
                                                              S. Panwar 
                                                       Polytechnic Univ 
                                                       October 14, 2004 
    
    
         Motivation for a Multi-Flow Real-time Transport Protocol 
                                      
                                      
Status of this Memo 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   RFC 3668. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2005 
 
Copyright Notice 

 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
 
 
Narayanan et. al.      Expires - April 17, 2005               [Page 1] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   We proposed a new multi-flow real time protocol (MRTP) in our earlier 
   internet-draft [1] for carrying real-time data through multiple paths 
   between the source and the destination. There are a various 
   advantages in multipath data transport as demonstrated by [2][3] 
   [5][8]. MRTP would provide an end-to-end transport services over 
   multiple flows and paths to real time data. In this draft we discuss 
   the motivation for needing such a standardized protocol to encourage 
   further discussion on the requirement for a multi-path transport 
   protocol. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 
 
 



























 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 2] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................4 
   2. Terminology....................................................4 
   3. Motivation.....................................................4 
   4. Advantages of using multi-path transport.......................5 
   5. Reasons for a new protocol.....................................6 
   6. Usage scenarios................................................6 
      6.1 Unicast Video Streaming....................................6 
      6.2 P2P Video Downloading......................................7 
      6.3 Realtime Multicasting......................................8 
   7. Security Considerations........................................8 
   Acknowledgments...................................................9 
   Author's Addresses................................................9 
    





























 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 3] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
 
    
1. Introduction  
   In [1] we proposed a new protocol, the Multi-flow Real-time Transport 
   Protocol (MRTP), for real-time transport over networks using multiple 
   paths (e.g., P2P, wireless networks, ad hoc networks). MRTP is a 
   transport protocol that could be implemented in the user space of the 
   hosts operating system. Given multiple paths maintained by an 
   underlying multipath routing protocol, MRTP and its companion control 
   protocol, the Multi-flow Real-time Transport Control Protocol 
   (MRTCP), provide essential support for multiple path real-time 
   transport. This includes session and flow management, data 
   partitioning, traffic dispersion, timestamping, sequence numbering, 
   and Quality of Service (QoS) reporting. In this draft we provide the 
   background and motivation that lead us to the conclusion that we need 
   new standardized protocol to support the above listed features.  
    
2. Terminology 
   This document does not introduce any new terminology. 
    
3. Motivation 
   Various research activities have repeatedly demonstrated multiple 
   benefits in partitioning real time data and transmitting each 
   partition through a different path between the source and the 
   destination (see section 4). With the advent of P2P networks, 
   wireless ad hoc networks and multipath routing protocols (e.g., 
   MDSR), using multiple paths to deliver a single real-time stream is 
   becoming more possible.  
      
   None of the existing transport protocols provide the required multi-
   path service in a transparent manner (see section 6). Applications  
   used in such research projects are forced to develop their own 
   proprietary protocols (e.g., Meta-RTP [5])to implement and study 
   multi-path real-time transport. As progress is made in this area, 
   different groups will develop independent and redundant protocol 
   specifications that will not interoperate. In order to avoid such a 
   scenario, we propose that a standard multi-path protocol should be 
   developed by IETF, published as an experimental RFC to be used in the 
   research and development efforts in this area. We believe 
   availability of such a standard protocol will play a crucial role in 
   accelerating research in multi-path transport applications. Section 6 
   presents some such example applications. 
    


 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 4] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
4. Advantages of using multi-path transport 
   This section presents a subset of the advantages in using multi-path 
   transport: 
     . Improves reliability of the end-to-end channel. Transmission 
        errors in one path can be independent from other paths, allowing 
        the use of forward error-correction schemes. 
      
     . Some Redundancy in traffic dispersion  / coding can allow 
        message reconstruction only from a subset of paths. 
    
     . Increases fault-tolerance of the real-time networks. When 
        multiple connections share the same path, the level of 
        redundancy needs to be increased. 
    
     . Improves throughput or the overall bandwidth availability to 
        transmitting / receiving nodes. Provides for load balancing 
        without additional delays typically introduced by traffic 
        shaping. Can lead to energy conservation for wireless devices. 
    
     . Improves queuing delays and delay variation experienced by 
        transmitted traffic as shown by a number of experimental studies 
        and theoretical models. 
    
     . Improves resilience to attacks in security applications 
      
     . Shown to reduce the information leakage probability when traffic 
        is dispersed over N path and K routers are attacked. 
    
     . Greatly enhances multiple description coded (MDC) content 
        transport. Multiple paths carry multiple descriptions, 
        presentation is possible only with a subset of successfully 
        received descriptions. Provides for graceful presentation 
        quality adaptation upon path degradation/failure. 
    
     . Also shown to improve the quality in rendering when applied to 
        layered coding (e.g., MPEG) transport. Packet-based dispersion, 
        Frame-based dispersion, GOP-based dispersion, priority-based 
        dispersion. 
    
     . Improved traffic characteristics (correlations within critical 
        time scale (CTS) of a system). Traffic partitioning is shown to 
        decrease SRD within CTS of the queue. As a result, shown to 
        significantly improve Queueing performance (BOP) of the 
        underlying queues.  
    



 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 5] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
5. Reasons for a new protocol 
   One natural question arises is that can any of the existing protocols 
   provides the same support, i.e., do we really need such a new 
   protocol? There are two existing protocols that are closely related 
   to our proposal. One is the Realtime Transport Protocol (RTP) [10]. 
   RTP is a multicast-oriented protocol for Internet realtime 
   applications. RTP is not suitable for the purpose of enabling 
   interoperable applications for the following reasons: 
     . RTP itself does not support the use of multiple flows. 
     . An application could implement multipath real-time transport 
        using RTP, but it would have to perform all the overhead 
        processing of managing multiple individual flows, partitioning 
        traffic, determining the quality of the overall session based on 
        individual flow statistics, etc. An signaling mechanism used by 
        such an application to exchange the Session-Flow-Substreams 
        mapping will make it non-interoperable with applications 
        developed by other groups. 
      
   The other closely related protocol is the Stream Control Transport 
   Protocol (SCTP) [6]. SCTP is a message-based transport layer protocol 
   initially designed for reliable signaling in the Internet ( e.g., 
   out-of-band control messages for Voice over IP (VoIP) call setup or 
   teardown). One attractive feature of SCTP is that it supports multi-
   homing and multi-streaming, where multiple network interfaces or 
   multiple streams can be used for a single SCTP session. SCTP can not 
   be directly used for multi-path real-time transport for the following 
   reasons: 
     . With SCTP, generally one primary path is used and other paths 
        are used as backups or retransmission channels.  
     . Even though there are several recent papers proposing to adapt 
        SCTP to use multiple paths simultaneously for data transport 
        [7]. SCTP cannot be applied directly for multimedia data because 
        there is no real-time features like timestamping and QoS 
        feedback services. With MRTP, the design is focused on 
        supporting real-time applications, with timestamping and QoS 
        feedback as its essential modes of operation.  
     . Moreover, since SCTP is a transport layer protocol and is 
        implemented in the system kernel, it is hard, if not impossible, 
        to make changes to it. A new multimedia application, with a new 
        coding format, a new transport requirement, etc., could only 
        with difficulty be supported by SCTP.  
      
6. Usage scenarios 
6.1 Unicast Video Streaming 
   This is a point-to-point scenario, where a wireless sensor network is 
   deployed to monitor,  e.g., wild life, in a remote region. Some 

 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 6] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
   sensors carry a video camera, and others are simple relays that relay 
   the captured video to the base. Source routing, or some other simple 
   routing protocols can be used.  
    
   A camera sensor initiates an MRTP session to the base. The captured 
   video is transmitted using multiple flows going through different 
   relays. In this way, a relative high rate video can be scattered to 
   multiple paths each is bandwidth-limited. Redundancy can also be 
   added by transmitting a more important sub-stream using multiple 
   flows. 
    
   Some sensors may be damaged or may run out of power. In this case, 
   the underlying multipath routing protocol informs MRTP about the path 
   changes. Either the sender or the receiver can delete a failed flow, 
   or add a new flow to the session. The server at the base maintains a 
   resequencing buffer for each flow, as well as enforcing a deadline 
   for each packet expected to arrive.  
    
6.2 P2P Video Downloading 
   This is a many-to-one scenario. In a P2P network where each node 
   maintains a cache for recently downloaded files. When a node A wants 
   to download a movie, it would be more efficient to search the caches 
   of other nearby nodes first than going directly to the Internet. If 
   the movie is found in the caches of nodes B, C, and D, A can initiate 
   an MRTP session to these nodes, downloading a piece of the movie 
   simultaneously (or sequentially, depending on the coding scheme used)  
   from each of them. A pair of pointers is used for each flow 
   indicating the segment of the video assigned to that flow. There are 
   three flows, each with a unique flow ID, in this MRTP session. 
   However, the flows have the same session ID since they belong to the 
   same MRTP session. Resequencing buffers are used in A to reorder the 
   packets, using the sequence numbers and the timestamps in their 
   headers. A similar application of video streaming in Content Delivery 
   Networks (CDN) using multiple servers is presented in [8]. 
    
   During the transmission, Node D moves out of the network. Node A 
   would delete the flow from D and adjust the file pointers in the 
   other two flows. Now the part of the video initially chosen from D 
   will be downloaded from B and C instead, by sending Add Flow packets 
   to B and C with updated pointers. On the other hand, node A may 
   broadcast probes periodically to find new neighbors with the movie 
   and replace the stale flows in the session. Note that MRTP provides 
   the flexibility for applications to implement these schemes.  
    



 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 7] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
6.3 Realtime Multicasting 
   This is a multicast application similar to a video teleconferencing 
   using RTP. Unlike RTP, MRTP uses multiple multicast trees. In [9], 
   algorithms are given for computing two maximally disjoint multicast 
   trees, where one is used for multicasting and the other is maintained 
   as backup. This algorithm can be adapted to support multiple 
   multicast trees in an MRTP session.  
    
   For the example, if there are two multicast trees used, where each 
   multicast tree is a flow and both flows belong to the same MRTP 
   session. Since there may be a large number of participants in the 
   session, QoS feedback should be suppressed, as in RTP, to avoid 
   feedback explosion. The RTCP transmission interval computing 
   algorithm [10] can be used to dynamical compute the interval between 
   two back-to-back QoS reports according to the current number of 
   participants and the available bandwidth. Since a flow may have more 
   than one receiver, the sender ID field in a RR packet is used to 
   identify its sender. The QoS metrics for a flow are computed over all 
   the receivers of this flow. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
   This draft just presents the motivation for an earlier internet-
   draft. As such, there are no security issues that needs to addressed 
   by this draft.  
    
References 
                     
     1. S. Narayanan, D. Bushmitch, S. Mao, S. Panwar, ôMRTP: A Multi-
        flow Real Time Transport Protocolö, draft-narayanan-mrtp-00.txt, 
        July 2004.  
     2. Shiwen Mao, Shunan Lin, Shivendra S. Panwar, Yao Wang, and Emre  
        Celebi, "Video transport over ad hoc networks: Multistream 
        coding with multipath transport," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas 
        in Communications, Special Issue on Recent Advances in Wireless 
        Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 10,  
        pp.1721-1737, December 2003. 
     3. D. Bushmitch, R. Izmailov, S. Panwar, A. Pal, ``Thinning, 
        Striping and Shuffling: Traffic Shaping and Transport Techniques 
        for Variable Bit Rate Video,'' in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM'02, 
        Taipei, 2002. 
     4. S. Bradner, ``Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement 
        levelö, RFC 2119. 
     5. N. Gogate, D. Chung, S.~S. Panwar, Y. Wang,``Supporting 
        image/video applications in a multihop radio environment using 
        route diversity and multiple description coding,''  IEEE Trans. 

 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 8] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
                                                                         
        Circuit Syst. Video Technol., vol.12, no.9, pp.777-792, Sept. 
        2002. 
     6. R.~R. Stewart and Q. Xie,  Stream Control Transmission Protocol: 
        A Reference Guide. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2001. 
     7. D.~S. Phatak and T. Goff, ``A novel mechanism for data streaming 
        across multiple IP links for improving throughput and reliabilit 
        in mobile environments,'' in  Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, pp.773-782, 
        June 2002. 
     8. J.~G. Apostolopoulos, T. Wong, W. Tan, and S. Wee, ``On Multiple 
        Description Streaming in Content Delivery Networks,'' in  Proc. 
        IEEE INFOCOM, pp.1736-1745, June 2002. 
     9. S. Sajama and Z. J. Haas, ``Independent-tree ad hoc multicast 
        routing (ITAMAR),'' in  Proc. IEEE Fall VTC'01, October 2001. 
     10. H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V. Jacobson, 
        ``RTP: A transport protocol for realtime applications,'' IETF 
        Request For Comments 3550. [Online]. Available at: 
        http://www.ietf.org. 
    
Acknowledgments 
   < TBD> 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Sathya Narayanan  
   Panasonic Digital Networking Lab, 
   2 Research Way, Princeton, NJ 08540 
   Phone: (609) 734 7599 
   Email: sathya@Research.Panasonic.COM 
    
   Dennis Bushmitch 
   Panasonic Digital Networking Lab, 
   2 Research Way, Princeton, NJ 08540 
   Phone: (609) 734  
   Email: db@Research.Panasonic.COM 
    
   Shiwen Mao 
   Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
   340 Whittemore Hall (0111), Blacksburg, VA 24061 
   Email: smao@vt.edu 
    
   Shivendra Panwar 
   Polytechnic University 
   Brooklyn, NY 
   Phone: (618) 260 3740  
   Email: panwar@catt.poly.edu 
 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                   [Page 9] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
 
Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
 
Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    

 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                  [Page 10] 
Internet-draft         Motivation for MRTP                October 2004 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgment 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
    








































 
 
Narayanan, et al.          Expires - April                  [Page 11] 
