 



DNSOP                                                              Di Ma
Internet Draft                                                  Feng Han
Intended status: Informational                                      ZDNS
Expires: May 30, 2015                                       Linjian Song
                                                                     BII
                                                       November 26, 2014


       Considerations on the evolution of DNS root zone operation
                           and management
                     draft-madi-dnsop-drzom-00

Abstract

   Given responsibilities and importance it bears, DNS root system
   architecture remains largely unchanged. Over the years, the topics
   together with some proposals of scaling the root have been discussed
   in various communities, trying to offer solutions or insights to a
   specific issue of DNS root operation. This document gathers and
   describes issues relating to the root zone operation and management
   and comb corresponding technical requirements for evolution
   directions of root zone operation and management in new groundwork.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   DNS service links naming space and addressing system, a connecting
   thread through the Internet infrastructure. DNS was designed as a
   hierarchical system with a few TLDs and slow update frequency. Rarely
   has the domain name system faced so many significant changes in its
   root zone operation and management, with DNSSEC-signed zone file,
   IPv6 adoption and new gTLD. Besides, DNS is expected to deliver more
   responsibilities by supporting DANE (DNS-based Authentication of
   Named Entities) that allow Internet applications to establish
   cryptographically secured communications by using information made
   available in DNS, which by the way, has been launching discussions in
   IETF DANE WG. Given responsibilities and importance it bears, DNS
   root system architecture remains largely unchanged. Issues of root
   security and stability have been stated in many technical reports
   [RFC2870] [SAC042] [SAC046]. Over the years, the topics together with
   some proposals of scaling the root have been discussed in various
   communities, trying to offer solutions or insights to a specific
   issue of DNS root operation. 

   "Scaling the root" was one of remarkable issues when it comes to
   evolve the current root system. It could be to extend the number of
   root name servers, or it could be to make the root operation
   mechanism scale to bigger zone file and higher update frequency, or
   it could still be to establish a more open root zone publication
   system. DNS root operation is critical service to the Internet and
   any changes to it ought to be in a prudent way, assuring security and
   stability. Among others, zone file management, the focal thing in
   root operation, is a systematic task, involving kinds of multi-
   stakeholders in Internet community. We cannot get the pleasing
   outcome for root scaling without reviewing the DNS root operation and
   management on the whole. 

   This document, inspired by [icann-ITI] and [RSST], is intended to
   gather and describe issues relating to the root zone operation and
   management and comb corresponding technical requirements for root
   zone evolution directions, before the IETF community gives solutions
   to the very issues.



 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


2.  Modeling DNS root system operation

2.1.  DNS root system components

   As described in many technical reports and also a common view, there
   are three sub-systems involving DNS root zone operation and
   management:

   The Resolving System publically interfaces with DNS resolvers, by
   responding to root zone query requests via DNS protocol data units.

   The Publication System distributes the root zone file to the root
   servers (including anycast clones) and arranges for the information
   in the root zone file to be available for the construction of
   responses to queries. 

   The Provisioning System processes change requests, maintains the
   authoritative database of root zone information, and periodically
   creates a root zone file that contains the authoritative root zone
   information.

2.2.  Roles in DNS root system operation

   In accordance with this model, DNS root system roles could be
   therefore identified:

   Root Zone Coordinator (RZC): RZC works as an administration body of
   root zone operation. RZC, as a workflow interface with TLD
   registries, receives and processes root zone change requests and
   executes administration to TLD registries. With DNSSEC deployment,
   RZC additionally delivers the responsibility of root zone Key Signing
   Key (KSK) management. Accordingly, RZC is recognized as a root zone
   operation representative to the public. The role of RZC is part of
   IANA functions, acted by ICANN currently.

   Root Zone Host (RZH): The role of RZH is to maintain reliable,
   secure, and accurate operation of the DNS name servers that publish
   root zone data they fetch from RZC (IANA). As a distribution channel
   for root zone data, RZH is responds to root zone information queries
   via DNS messages. As well known, there are 13 sets of root name
   server IPv4/IPv6 addresses reflecting hundreds of individual machines
   representing RZH, denoted by 13 letters from A to M, operated by 12
   independent organizations worldwide.

   Root Zone Maintainer (RZM): RZM is the backend operator of root zone.
   Viewed as a technical role, RZM takes the responsibility of
   generating (updating) root zone file together its digital signature,
   and distributes DNSSEC-signed zone file to Root Zone Host (RZH). RZM.
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   At present, VeriSign serves as RZM.

   Root Zone Administrator (RZA): RZA is privileged to perform the
   review and approval function that authorizes each individual change
   to the root zone. The RZA imparts nothing to the root zone but merely
   explicitly authorizes these changes by verifying that RZC has
   followed established policies and procedures in processing the
   requests. At present, the role of RZA is played by National
   Telecommunications and Information Agency (NTIA), a governing body of
   the United States.

3.  Evolution directions

   This section is to list the evolution directions with the purpose to
   make DNS root system remain an unshakable corner stone of DNS
   operation with security, stability as well as high efficiency, while
   provide a better and up-to-date service. Responding to root queries
   with security and stability is the fundamental among others for root
   system. In this document, the evolution of DNS root system is
   identified hereby as a set of key issues with respect to resolving
   system, publication system and provisioning system.

3.1.  DNS protocol data unit and Resolving System

   One of the fundamental problems of DNS protocol is the UDP size
   limitation, which is caused by the IPv4 MTU setting in the early days
   of Internet. Efforts made by EDNS introduce a negotiation mechanism
   to support bigger DNS protocol data unit. However, owing to either
   capability or filtering policy of intermediate networking devices,
   EDNS fails to get the pleasing expectation that it is designed for.
   Granted, EDNS is improving over time with updated versions. IPv6 is
   yet another thing that DNS protocol data unit can benefit from. IPv6-
   capable mandates an MTU of 1280 bytes, which means, even without
   EDNS, the size of DNS protocol data unit could be still improved by
   the virtue of IPv6 fundamentally. Where and when acceptable, TCP is
   still another option for carrying DNS messages [RFC5966]. 

   With a bigger DNS protocol data unit, more information can be
   included in DNS message, especially offering a chance to enhance the
   Resolving System. By far, there are significant issues regarding the
   Resolving System owing to the limitation of the size of DNS protocol
   data unit.

   When a recursive name resolver is bootstrapped, it uses a hints file
   or other statically pre-configured initial glue to find a root
   server, and then it asks that root server for the current list of
   root servers, with the expected answer the full list of RZH and their
   addresses, the process of which is called "priming exchange". For one
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   thing, with the inclusion of IPv6 addresses for RZHs, the response is
   even longer. In the case of 13 RZHs, there is no placing all the IP
   addresses of all dual-stake RZHs in a priming response with UDP
   limitation of 512 bytes. For another thing, it has been decades since
   there were 13 RZHs, which was a calculated one regarding to specific
   constraints. The number of RZH is by no means a constant for DNS
   system but a variable parameter when and where possible. And still
   for another thing, when DNSSEC signatures are added to the root zone,
   the response message to the priming query or DNSKEY query will exceed
   512 bytes accordingly. 

   Together with the tendency that DNS is delivering more
   responsibilities, bigger protocol data units will therefore
   facilitate advancements designed to scale the root system in the days
   to come. 

3.2.  Root zone synchronization and Distribution System

   DNS root sub-systems are not organized closely to one another but
   root zone keeps changing. Data synchronization is therefore
   fundamental to root zone distribution from RZM to RZH via
   Distribution System. Considering DNS tends to be more dynamic,
   synchronization should be taken into account when a new Distribution
   System is introduced.

   In alignment with current DNS operation, DNS root name servers ({A-
   M}.root-servers.net), serving as RZH, receive queries from clients
   using the DNS protocol and provide appropriate responses. As one
   important channel to publish root zone information, the root name
   servers have been subjected to attacks over the decades, mostly of
   the Distributed Denial Of Service (DDOS) variety. Besides,
   reachability of the root name server system is required even for
   purely local communication, since otherwise local clients have no way
   to discover local services. As a point of view from [icann-ITI], in a
   world sized distributed system like the Internet, critical services
   ought to be extremely well distributed. 

   Historically and from the perspective of protocol, the channel for
   distributing root zone information guarantee the authenticity. This
   situation has been changed by DNSSEC that was designed to provide a
   security extension to DNS. One of the ways that we can benefit from
   DNSSEC is DNSSEC-signed root zone file itself guarantee authenticity
   no matter where it is fetched as long as contents of this zone file
   could go through the validation based on DNSSEC information with a
   globally-trusted single key maintained by IANA. Therefore, the
   deployment of DNSSEC and the advantage it brings about could evolve
   the root zone Distribution System scaling to a more open fashion.
   Accordingly, an open publication system of DNS root zone is
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   desirable. The role of RZH is expected to be played in a different
   way. By the virtue of DNSSEC-signed root zone, theoretically, any
   entity with good credit and network could be authorized to host root
   zone as long as the hosted zone file is approved and signed by IANA.
   Note that the selection process of the RZH candidate is out of the
   scope of this document.

   Some efforts have been made. For instance, [I-D.dnsop-dist-root]
   proposes an enhancement that recursive DNS resolvers, serving as RZH,
   get copies of the root zone, validate it using DNSSEC, populate their
   caches with the information, and also give negative responses from
   the validated zone. While [I-D.dnsop-scalingroot] positions that IANA
   produce several additional forms of the DNS root zone by creating yet
   another "golden address" pair. It asks the IANA to authorize an un-
   owned pair of addresses that anyone can hang root service on.   

   Although promising, there are problems gripping the designs for open
   publication system of DNS root zone. If DNS root zone publication
   system operates in an open mode, far more RZHs are expected to take
   part in.  Given an increasing number of RZH, either recursive
   resolvers or "universal anycast" endpoints or anything else, it
   should be taken into account how to scale the zone file
   synchronization mechanism to the much bigger groups of RZHs, ensuring
   consistence and negligible delay. Optimized root zone file
   distribution mechanism would be desirable. For example, TLD KSK
   rollover should be accomplished within a specific time, requiring the
   DS records update should synchronized beforehand timely.

   Besides, open publication brings about a more diverse group of RZHs,
   including ones that are deployed in a poorly-connected Internet
   locations. And an increasing size of root zone file can easily be
   served from sites with high-bandwidth connections and ready access to
   servers and other computing infrastructure. It cannot easily be
   served from sites with poor connectivity or infrastructure. A
   synchronization mechanism of this open publication that can scale to
   networking diversity is also indispensable. 

3.3.  Root zone update and Provisioning System

3.3.1.  Update frequency

   The size of root zone file is attached with significance. "Size" here
   is not merely referred to as how many bytes the zone file has, but
   also with the number of delegations considered. A conspicuous
   observation is root zone has been growing up. As analyzed in [icann-
   impact-newgTLD], the number and size of records in the root zone has
   successfully grown over time, in part to accommodate new developments
   like the introduction of IDN ccTLDs, the first two rounds of new
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   gTLDs, the introduction of IPv6 glue records, and the deployment of
   DNSSEC in the Root Zone. There is also a natural tendency for the
   number of name servers per delegation to increase as TLD name server
   infrastructure matures over time. 

   As indicated in [RSST], due to introduction of DNSSEC and TLD update,
   the transferring frequency of root zone will, as estimated and
   desirable, remarkably increased, bring about the undesirable latency,
   which will place a significant impact on root operation. The very
   observation and analysis is yet another significance that should be
   included into the context of root zone management evolution. 

   DNS root zone is getting bigger in an unprecedented rate and to an
   unpredictable size. Ever since the new gTLD program was launched by
   ICANN, more than 400 new gTLDs have been delegated so far. As a
   natural tendency and estimated, more and more TLD operators will get
   involved in root system, thus the rate of change or update would
   increase proportionately. These changes includes:

   1.  Delegation and re-delegation
       These are additions of new top-level domains or the transfer of
       operation of a top-level domain from an existing operator to a
       new operator. There might also be the removal of a top-level
       domain.

   2.  Changes in contact information
       There are usually three official points of contact for a top-
       level domain, the formal head of the operator, the administrative
       contact and the technical contact. Each of these can change from
       time to time. The Root Zone Registration Data ("WHOIS") system is
       therefore affected.

   3.  Changes in the set of name servers
       Each top-level domain is served by two or more name servers. Top-
       level domain operators occasionally add to, change, or remove
       name servers from their set.

   4.  Changes in the addresses of name servers
       Name servers are occasionally renumbered. Also, when a new name
       server is added to the set serving a TLD, its address must also
       be added.

   5.  TLD KSK rolling
       TLD operators request to update their DS records in root zone.

       For each change, current root server system has several parties
       involved which including RZA, RZS, RZM and RZHs. And the whole
       process consists of several manual steps, which dramatically
 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


       decrease the efficiency and predictability of the update process.
       To make the whole process automated and use other zone update
       policy (for example, dynamic update), measures should be taken to
       fulfill the impending improvement to the Provisioning System.

3.3.2.  Shared zone control

   Over the years, concerns have been raised towards current root
   operation is based in the Untied States and subject to the
   jurisdiction of the United States. Due to the multi-stakeholder mode
   advocated and coordinated by ICANN, shared control on root zone is
   desirable by many and technical specification is needed therefore.
   One straightforward thought is that root zone data should have
   multiple signatures. Some theories have been advanced together with
   multiple signing protocols. 

   Technically, efforts have been made on coordinating DNSSEC signing
   information and multiple signing protocols. But how to make these
   technologies fit into the context of shared control on DNS root is
   still an open question, which should follow current root operation
   practices with new risks evaluated. As indicated in [icann-ITI], the
   right model is one in which all of the parties sharing control have a
   set of capabilities:

   1.  A system for initiating a shared zone consisting of the zone
       itself, rules, and individual journals for each of the
       participants to post their requests and actions.

   2.  Each type of request is visible to all of the other participants
       who can approve, disapprove, or timeout.

   3.  Rules define what happens to a request
         *  One type of a rule is a vote, which defines the conditions
            for a request to succeed. This might include a delay for all
            parties to have time to consider the request. For ccTLDs the
            WSIS rules would dictate 1 of N, so each Country Code Top
            Level Domain (ccTLD) could unilaterally change its own data.
            Other domains might use a simple majority

         *  Specified delays could be important so that others might be
            able to point out operational issues and let the requesters
            reconsider

         *  Different conditions might apply for different operations,
            such as creating a new vs. editing, etc.

4.  Security Considerations

 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   TBD

5.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Bill Manning and David Conrad for
   reviewing this document.

7.  Informative References


   [RFC2870]  R. Bush, D. Karrenberg, M. Kosters, R. Plzak.,           
              "Root Name Server Operational Requirements", RFC 2870,
              June 2000.

   [SAC042]   SSAC Comment on the Root Scaling Study Team Report and the
              TNO Report,          
              https://www.icann.org/en/system/files/files/sac-042-en.pdf

   [SAC046]   Report of the Security and Stability Advisory Committee on
              Root Scaling.,          
              https://www.icann.org/en/system/files/files/sac-046-en.pdf

   [RFC5966]  R. Bellis., "DNS Transport over TCP - Implementation
              Requirements", RFC 5966, August 2010.

   [icann-ITI]
              Identifier Technology Innovation Panel,
              https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/identifier-
              technology-2013-10-11-en

   [I-D.dnsop-scalingroot]
              Xiaodong Lee, Paul Vixie and Zhiwei Yan., "How to scale
              the DNS root system", draft-lee-dnsop-scalingroot-00(work-
              in-progress), July 2014.

   [I-D.dnsop-dist-root]
              W. Kumari, P. Hoffman., "Securely Distributing the DNS
              Root", draft-wkumari-dnsop-dist-root-01(work-in-progress),
              July 2014.

   [icann-impact-newgTLD]
              Joe Abley and Kim Davies., "Impact on Root Server
              Operations and Provisioning Due to New gTLDS", June 2012.

 


Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Evolution of DNS root             November 2014


   [RSST]     Jaap Akkerhuis, Lyman Chapin, Patrik Faltstrom, Glenn
              Kowack, Lars-Johan Liman and Bill Manning., "Report on the
              Impact on the DNS Root System of Increasing the Size and
              Volatility of the Root Zone", September 2009

Authors' Addresses

   Di Ma
   ZDNS Ltd.
   4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
   Haidian, Beijing 100190
   China

   Email: madi@zdns.cn


   Feng Han
   ZDNS Ltd.
   4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
   Haidian, Beijing 100190
   China

   Email: hanfeng@zdns.cn


   Linjian Song
   Beijing Internet Institute
   2508 Room, 25th Floor, Tower A, Time Fortune
   Beijing 100028
   China

   Email: songlinjian@gmail.com



















Di Ma, et al.             Expires May 30, 2015                 [Page 10]
