



Network Working Group                                           Shepherd
Internet-Draft                                                 Farinacci
Expires: December 11, 2006                                 Cisco Systems
                                                                      Wu
                                                                      Li
                                                                  Cernet
                                                            June 9, 2006


             IPv4 unicast/multicast VPNs over an IPv6 core
                   draft-ietf-softwire-4over6vpns-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a method by which a Service Provider with an
   IPv6 backbone may provide VPNs (Virtual Private Networks) and MVPNs
   (Multicast Virtual Private Networks) for its IPv4 customers.  The
   IPv6 core network need only deploy native multicast services using
   Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) .  All additional functionality



Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


   described is Customer Edge (CE) based and there are no additional
   Provider (P) or Provider Edge (PE) protocols.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1.  Introduction

   Current PE based VPN solutions continue to overload functional and
   scaling requirements onto the PE nodes.  The next logical direction
   for VPN expansion is to move the functionality onto the CE nodes.  By
   doing so, we can remove the need for per-customer routetables inside
   any provider node.  The provider network need only implement a means
   to control traffic distribution to only those CE nodes participating
   in a particular VPN instance.

   This document describes a means by which an IPv6 provider network can
   use multicast to control traffic distribution between participating
   VPN CE nodes and how those CE nodes can auto discover all other VPN
   participating CE nodes without additional protocols nor overloaded
   extensions to existing protocols.


2.  Requirements

   o This is a CE-managed service.  That is the service provider PE and
   P routers only move native IPv6 packets and do not otherwise
   participate in the customer routing protocols.

   o The service provider infrastructure runs native multicast services
   as defined in [1] [RFC2362] so precise multicast replication can be
   performed among the VPN sites.

   o A unique IPv6 scoped multicast address is assigned to each VPN
   customer as defined in [2] [RFC4291].  The multicast group prefix of
   the VPN could be one of several possibilities: ff05, ff08, or could
   possibly have a new scope ID assignment.  The T flag may also be 1.

   o Each participating CE of a VPN joins the VPN assigned group
   creating a multipoint tunnel between the VPN sites so dynamic
   discovery of the CE devices can occur.  Broadcasting over the tunnel
   is realized by using the IPv6 multicast in the underlying provider
   network. o ARP protocol as in [3] [RFC0826] is used to discover the
   underlying tunnel endpoints.  The CE nodes ARP over the tunnel for a



Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


   VPN-based next-hop - on the tunnel's subnet - and the hardware
   address returned is an IPv6 address internal to the provider network.

   o Participating CEs within a VPN share a common routing protocol and
   neighbor adjacencies through the multipoint tunnel.


3.  Multicast VPNs

   o PIM runs with the Intergateway Protocol (IGP) at each customer site
   as well as over the multipoint tunnel through the provider network.

   o Sending PIM Hello messages are "broadcasted over the multipoint
   tunnel which ensures only the VPN member CE routers will get the
   packets.


4.  Unicast VPNs

   Each VPN CE member router is configured with the core IPv6 VPN
   multicast group address, which is effectively a VPN ID.  Each CE
   member router joins this core IPv6 multicast group, creating a
   multipoint tunnel between each of the CE member routers.  The VPN
   customer IGP runs across this multipoint tunnel, establishing
   neighbor adjacencies and building a complete customer routing table.

   By using ARP across the multipoint tunnel to discover the next-hop of
   each of the CE member neighbors, the learned hardware address
   returned will be the core-facing IPv6 interface address of the
   multipoint neighbor.  Unicast packets coming from one CE destined to
   a remote CE VPN neighbor will be unicast encapsulated with the ARP-
   learned IPv6 next hop of the CE VPN neighbor.


5.  Packet Fowarding

5.1.  Unicast

   Unicast packets are forwarded at the customer site as IPv4 packets to
   the edge of the network following the IPv4 routed topology.  The CE
   router will encapsulate the IPv4 packets in IPv6 and send to the
   hardware address learned through the multipoint tunnel across the
   provider network.  The destination CE router will decapsulate and
   forward the internal IPv4 packet to the unicast destination.

5.2.  Multicast

   Multicast can run in any of Any Source Multicast (ASM), Source



Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


   Specific Multicast (SSM) or BiDirectional (BiDir) within each VPN.
   For ASM and Bidir the Rendezvous Point (RP) can be located at any of
   the VPN sites.  For joining SSM channels, the member in the receiver
   site will join a (S,G) which are IPv4 addresses.  The IGP routing
   within the VPN allows the PIM join to travel to the edge and over the
   multipoint tunnel.  The VPN internal multicast state is setup via
   IPv4 PIM.

   Multicast forwarding to receivers sites may be a subset of all
   participating VPN sites and precise replication/forwarding without
   unwanted traffic to non-receiver CEs may be desired.  To facilitate
   this, the CE router(s) in the receiver sites will take the IPv4 PIM
   (S,G) join, after sending it over the multipoint tunnel, and the IPv6
   VPN group address to build an IPv6 PIM (S,G) join where:

   S is the underlying IPv6 address of the CE router at the source site.

   G is a group address derived from the VPN IPv6 group address and the
   IPv4 (S,G) address.

   The complete group address G will be:
   ff18:vvvv:ssss:ssss:gggg:gggg::x where s and g are the nibbles of the
   IPv4 (S,G) address and vvvv is the unique 16-bit VPN ID value.  The
   IPv6 unique VPN multicast address SHOULD comprise only the higher
   order bits with trailing zeros to allow for at least 64 lower bits to
   be used for encoding the IPv4 (S,G) address.


6.  IANA Considerations

   A new ARP hardward type should be specified to identify the IP
   address of the interface joined to the multipoint tunnel.


7.  Security

   The VPN member CE routers could maintain secure communications
   through the use of Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol as
   described in [4] [RFC4301].

8.  Normative References

   [RFC0826]  Plummer, D., "Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or
              converting network protocol addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
              address for transmission on Ethernet hardware", STD 37,
              RFC 826, November 1982.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate



Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2362]  Estrin, D., Farinacci, D., Helmy, A., Thaler, D., Deering,
              S., Handley, M., and V. Jacobson, "Protocol Independent
              Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification",
              RFC 2362, June 1998.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.







































Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Greg Shepherd
   Cisco Systems

   Email: shep@cisco.com


   Dino Farinacci
   Cisco Systems

   Email: dino@cisco.com


   Jianping Wu
   Cernet

   Email: jianping@cernet.edu.cn


   Xing Li
   Cernet

   Email: xing@cernet.edu.cn



























Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  4over6vpn                      June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Shepherd, et al.        Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 7]


