




Internet-Draft                                                        Pars Mutaf
Expires: July, 2007                     Institut National des Telecommunications
                                                                    Evry, France
                                                                   January, 2007



                           Private Information Queries

                               (Problem statement)


                         <draft-mutaf-piqproblem-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.




Abstract

   This document makes a problem statement for the "Private Information Queries"
   protocol. 


Mutaf                        Expires July, 2007                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             PIQ problem statement                    January 2007



1. Introduction

   By current practice, for privacy reasons, cellular phone numbers are not 
   made publicly available nor predictable (this is also suggested in [SIPPRI]). 
   Today, cellular users are obligated to manually share their phone numbers 
   with their colleagues, friends, family members, etc., through face-to-face 
   communication (i.e. oral communication). This is unfortunate. Some wireless 
   technologies e.g. Bluetooth or IrDA can allow for sharing a phone number and 
   other information in a more convenient way. Nevertheless, these technologies
   operate over very short distances, hence also require user contact. It is 
   very desirable to have a protocol that allows for sharing phone numbers, or
   other private information over much longer distances.

   There is also anecdotal evidence that users often loose the list 
   of their correspondents accidentally upon loss of state, or when their 
   cellular device is lost/stolen/changed. Recovering the list of correspondents
   is very difficult for the same reasons described above.

2. Private information queries

   Private information queries is an application-layer IP protocol. It can be
   used to request private information *directly* from the target user's 
   device. It is an Internet protocol, consequently it is possible to request 
   the phone number of a user, via a cellular network i.e. over a very large 
   distance. Figure 1 illustrates the basic protocol operation: 


                  Cellular host                   Cellular host
                 (John Hoffman)                  (Alice Collins)

             1.         ------ Request(phone number)------>

             2.                                      user approval

             3.         <----- Response(phone number)------

                        Figure 1. Private information 
                                  request/response


   The request is sent directly to Alice Collins's host's IP address. Upon 
   receipt of the private information request, the responder application 
   displays a message:

                     John Hoffman requested your phone number.
                     Do you wish to return it? [YES/NO]

   If approved by the user, the responder application returns the requested 
   information. The target user may know John Hoffman and may accept the 
   request. Or, the target user may not know John Hoffman but may have an idea 
   who he is and/or why he is trying to contact, and hence may accept the 
   request (or not). The decision belongs to the target user. It is taken in 
   real-time.

Mutaf                        Expires July, 2007                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              PIQ problem statement                   January 2007


3. Example solution: multicast name resolution

   How one can get the IP address a phone, if that phone's SIP URI is unknown?

   A solution can be built on top of multicast name resolution [MNR] or an 
   improved version of it. Although this protocol is currently limited to 
   link-local scope, within a wireless access subnet that covers a large number 
   of cells, one can reach a user over very large distances. This is already
   an important progress compared to using a short-range wireless technology 
   e.g. Bluetooth (current practice).

   In this approach, the responder configures a name from the user's human name,
   for example "alicecollins". The requester user will enter the name Alice
   Collins, and the application will trigger a multicast name resolution request
   to the name "alicecollins". The request will be multicast over the subnet,
   and the target host will return an IP address.

   At this point, the requester application can send a private information 
   query to the destination user's host. The target user's phone number can be
   obtained (if accepted by the target user). Next time, the target user can be
   contacted using his/her phone number i.e. regardless of location.


4. Security considerations

   The requester's identity (found in the request message) must be 
   authenticated. Public key cryptography and certificates may be used to 
   address this problem. 

   The responder's identity (found in the response message) must be also
   authenticated in order to avoid phone number spoofing.


5. Conclusion, future work

   This document presented the need for requesting private information directly
   from another user's IP device. An initial solution based on multicast name
   resolution was discussed. 

   Although this document was focused on phone numbers and SIP URIs, other 
   private information e.g. e-mail address, DNS names, IP addresses may also 
   be requested.













Mutaf                        Expires July, 2007                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             PIQ problem statement                    January 2007

References

  [SIPPRI] J. Peterson, "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session Initiation 
           Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.
  [MNR] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeroconf

Author's Address

   Pars Mutaf
   Institut National des Telecommunications
   Email: pars.mutaf@int-evry.fr

   This document and the information contained herein
   are provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE
   INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM
   ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
   ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
   INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




































Mutaf                        Expires July, 2007                         [Page 4]
