



Network Working Group                                        B. Wissingh
Internet-Draft                                                       TNO
Intended status: Informational                               A. Petrescu
Expires: December 21, 2014                                     CEA, LIST
                                                          G. Karagiannis
                                                              G. Heijenk
                                                    University of Twente
                                                           June 19, 2014


            The Use-Case of Disseminating to Road-Side Units
                draft-wissingh-disseminate-to-rsu-00.txt

Abstract

   This document describes use cases related to disseminating
   Intelligent Transport System (ITS) information to Road-Side Units.
   The described use cases relate to the concept of disseminating ITS
   information from a back-office to vehicles as well as to the concept
   of disseminating ITS information from vehicles to the back-office
   and/or vehicles.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Back-office to RSU dissemination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Dissemination of ITS information to fixed RSUs  . . . . .   3
       3.1.1.  Sending to RSUs and to Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.1.2.  Sending POIs of CSs to EVs  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.1.3.  Sending POIs related to a EV planned route -
               eCo-FEV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.4.  Different means of sending POIs . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Dissemination of ITS information to mobile RSUs . . . . .   6
       3.2.1.  usage for Incident Warning  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Vehicle to RSU dissemination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Vehicular Networking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       4.1.1.  Traffic safety use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1.2.  Traffic efficiency and management use cases . . . . .  11
       4.1.3.  Infotainment applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Appendix A.  ChangeLog  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

1.  Introduction

   GeoNetworking mechanisms provide the capability to communicate data
   packets in a manner qualified by geographical coordinates.  For
   example, one such mechanism may allow a server in the fixed
   infrastructure to direct an IP packet flow to receivers situated in a
   distinct geographical area.  Variations of such a mechanism may use
   several distinct or overlapping areas.  Other variations may involve
   mobile (instead of fixed) servers as sources and receivers.

   One of the applications for which GeoNetworking mechanisms can used,
   is the dissemination of ITS to Road-Side Units.  This document
   describes multiple use cases related to this dissemination of
   information.  These use cases are categorised into two categories,



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   namely "Sending ITS information from the back-office to the vehicles
   via Road-Side Units" and "Sending ITS information from vehicles to
   the back-office/vehicles via Road-Side Units and/or via direct
   communication".

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   RSU stands for Road Side Unit.

   ITS stands for Intelligent Transport Systems Information

3.  Back-office to RSU dissemination

3.1.  Dissemination of ITS information to fixed RSUs

   Vehicular communications are characterized by a strong mobility
   component.  Most if not all computing entities are mobile - embedded
   in vehicles, carried by passengers.  However, despite the
   difficulties brought in by the inherent mobility characteristics and
   wireless communications, the vehicular communications are far from
   following chaotic patterns, because they are subject to rather
   constant mobility patterns: the laws of road use impose rules such as
   vehicles following each other in one particular direction which leads
   to platooning, mandatory presence of road signs which offers many
   wireless communication opportunities, etc.

   The mobility characteristics of vehicular communications impose a
   strong need for qualifying the position of entities (by e.g.
   coordinate distance to an agreed reference) and communicate
   accordingly.  In Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) many use-
   cases have been described that make use of communicating applications
   which rely on the positions of entities.  Among these use-cases, the
   dissemination of ITS-specific data from a server in the
   infrastructure to one particular geographical area is a use-case
   exhibited in many applications.  An example put very simple is that
   of a well-informed Command Center sending warning messages to
   vehicles approaching a particularly hazardous area (and to them
   only).

   Currently mass instant communications are dominated by voice encoding
   on FM frequencies (analog frequency modulation); in this, the
   vehicular hazard warning application mentioned above has a very
   coarse geographical dimension: the FM stations are broadcasting over
   very large areas (all vehicles on the road are informed and the human



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   listener performs filtering).  On another hand, mass instant
   communications may be realized on a finer manner by employing
   advanced packet-based digital communications.  It may offer a more
   performant service in terms of reliability and response time.

   If TCP/IP packet data communications were used, then a relatively
   straightforward manner to achieve this geonetworking (send data
   packets to a particular area) is to employ a trivial 'mapping' system
   between an IP address and its geographical coordinates, and vice-
   versa.  In this manner, application software may be written that
   sends IP packets to IP address destinations qualified by geographical
   coordinates.  This straightforward manner has certain drawbacks.
   Certain 'mapping' mechanisms exist already in the family of Internet
   protocols - witness DNS - and their advantages and drawbacks are well
   understood with respect to scalability.  Rather than a trivial
   mapping, a more dynamic mechanism is needed which scales to the size
   of current and future Internet.

   In this document we do not propose designing new GeoNetworking
   mechanisms, but express the thought that if it existed then a set of
   particular ITS vehicular communications use-cases may benefit from
   them.

3.1.1.  Sending to RSUs and to Vehicles

   The end-to-end need is to send data packets from a server to
   vehicles.  On another hand, given the strong wired-wireless
   dichotomy, sending packets to a particular set of vehicles in a
   particular area may involve a two-step operation: (1) send the data
   packets to the RSUs (Road-Side Units) which are closest, or whose
   wireless capabilities cover best the set of vehicles, and followed by
   a second step (2) the respective RSUs send the data received in the
   first step, to the vehicles.

   The wired-wireless dichotomy mentioned above is considering that the
   Road-Side Unit (or other entities deployed in vehicles) are equipped
   with at least one wireless interface that is able to deal with
   contraints of communication at high speeds (channel fading, Doppler
   effects).  Such interfaces include the IEEE 802.11p
   [ieee802.11p-2010] links and also cellular links.

3.1.2.  Sending POIs of CSs to EVs

   In vehicular communications, there are many kinds of information that
   need to be sent to designated entities in designated geographical
   areas.  In [etsi-ts-102-637-1] such information is divided in four
   classes of V2X messages depending on the services made possible by
   their contents (messages for active road safety, for co-operative



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   traffic efficiency, for co-operative local services and for global
   Internet services).  In particular, the co-operative local services
   (or "location-based" services) are the notification of POI,
   automatice access control and parking management, ITS local
   electronic commerce and Media downloading.

   The notification of POI to vehicle is sent, in principle a fixed
   unit, a server, in the fixed infrastructure.

   In general, a Point of Interest (POI) is a conceptual mark of a place
   with a particular signification.  In most uses, the signification
   means a potential service to customer (e.g. a restaurant POI, or a
   museum POI).  The POIs are frequently used as a list of private
   collection of information that may be queried by a user when situated
   in a new geographical area.  The POI list is downloaded in advance on
   a portable device and, when arriving in the new area, its POI list
   helps to situate precisely the restaurants, museums, etc.  A single
   POI identifies a single place (e.g. a set of POIs are not used to
   build larger structures such as shapes, neither is a sequence of POIs
   used to describe a route - other concepts are used for describing
   shapes, areas and routes).

   A POI data structure typically stores parameters such as latitude,
   longitude and altitude, together with additional labels such as name
   or civic address and various description of the service.

   In the case of Electrical Vehicle scenarios, the user of the EV is
   well interested to learn in advance the situation of various Charging
   Stations (CS).  The user may download the CS placements as a POI
   list.  In addition, while driving, the user may receive dynamically
   the most recent information about the CS placement.

   ETSI topology for POI distribution

3.1.3.  Sending POIs related to a EV planned route - eCo-FEV

   In project eCo-FEV, it is considered as useful to distribute the POIs
   relevant to a Fully Electrical Vehicle (FEV) which are situated along
   a pre-planned route [ecofev-d200.1].

3.1.4.  Different means of sending POIs

   Described in [etsi-ts-101-556-1-2-12].

   o  broadcast of all POIs => the vehicle filters based on its
      position.





Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   o  vehicle requests using its position as key => the response may be
      broadcast.

   o  dissemination of POIs from server to a particular RSU which is in
      the vicinity of the POI in question (not the vehicle question).

3.2.  Dissemination of ITS information to mobile RSUs

   As the text in Section 3.1 described fixed RSUs, there is also the
   type of mobile RSUs which are also being used for sending data
   packets from a server to vehicles.  These mobile RSUs have different
   characterisicts in comparison with the fixed versions.  One of these
   characteristics of a mobile RSU is that such a RSU is not 'bound' to
   a fixed geographical position but instead the geographical position
   may change more dynamically.

   With a dynamically changing geographical position, the requirements
   for a 'mapping' system between an IP address and the corresponding
   dynamic geographical coordinates may differ from the requirements for
   a 'mapping' system between an IP address and fixed geographical
   coordinates.  For example the requirements with regards to the
   frequency with which a 'mapping' is updated may be higher for dynamic
   geographical coordinates then for fixed geographical coordinates.  So
   indeed rather than a trivial 'mapping', a more dynamic mechanism is
   needed which scales to the size of current and future Internet.

   As a RSU being mobile, where mobile means 'not fixed to a
   geographical position', it provides advantages over fixed RSUs in
   different use-cases.  A use-case for which a mobile RSU provides
   additional advantages over a fixed RSU is for example so called
   'Incident Warning'.

3.2.1.  usage for Incident Warning

   An example of 'Incident Warning' is the application of Road Works
   Warning.  With Road Works Warning, vehicles and road users can be
   informed of ongoing road works along a road.  Vehicles and road users
   could be informed about the geographical position of the road works,
   the distance over which the road works is ongoing, speed limits, etc.
   While this road works related information can be send from a server
   to vehicles and road users via fixed RSUs, using a mobile RSU can
   provide advantages.  One of the advantages of using a mobile RSU for
   sending road works related information to vehicles and road users is
   that there is more flexibilty in reaching certain geographical
   positions.

   When for example at a certain geographical position road works is
   planned for which vehicles and road users should be informed but no



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   fixed RSU is present at that location, a mobile RSU could be
   positioned at that location in order to be able to send road works
   relation information to approaching vehicles.  In order for a road
   operator to be able to send the information to the geographical area
   of the road works, the road operator should somehow keep track of the
   relation between RSUs IP addresses and their geographical position.
   So this use case would also benefit from a more dynamic mechanism in
   which these relations between IP addresses and geographical positions
   can be maintained.

   Such an implementation of a mobile RSU with a Road Works Warning
   application has been developed within an European EIT ICT Labs
   project during 2013.

4.  Vehicle to RSU dissemination

4.1.  Vehicular Networking

   The use cases considered in this section are vehicular networking use
   cases.  However, Internet-wide geo-networking can be applied to any
   use case that is similar to these vehicular use cases where source
   nodes anywhere in the Internet are able to geo(broad/any)cast packets
   to all/any node(s) with geo-location awareness within an arbitrary,
   source-specified destination area.

   Vehicular networking can be considered as one of the most important
   enabling technologies needed to support various types of traffic
   applications, such as infotainment type of applications, traffic
   efficiency & management and traffic safety applications.

   Traffic safety applications are those that are primarily applied to
   decrease the probability of traffic accidents and the loss of life of
   the occupants of vehicles.  Note that VSC and VSC-A projects focus on
   vehicle-to-vehicle safety.  Another project called CICAS-V
   (Cooperative Intersection Collision Avoidance Systems - Violation)
   discuss the traffic safety application over vehicle-to-infrastructure
   communication.

   Traffic efficiency & management applications are focusing on
   improving the vehicle traffic flow, traffic coordination and traffic
   assistance.  Moreover, traffic efficiency & management applications
   are focusing on providing updated local information, maps and in
   general messages of relevance limited in space and/or time.

   Infotainment types of applications are the applications that are
   neither traffic safety applications nor traffic efficiency &
   management applications.  Such applications are supported by e.g.,




Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   media downloading use cases.  Such vehicular applications are defined
   by several initiatives:

   o  the USA VSC (Vehicular Safety Communications) and VSC-A (VSC-
      Applications) projects.

   o  the European Car-to-Car Communication Consortium (C2C-CC) [C2C-CC]
      and the ETSI TC ITS [ETSI TC ITS], [ETSI-TR-102-638] with the
      additional support of some EU funded research projects, such as
      SEVECOM [SEVECOM], SAFESPOT [SAFESPOT], CVIS [CVIS].  PREDRIVE-C2x
      [PREDRIVE-C2x], GEONET [GEONET].

   The USA Vehicle Safety Communications (VSC) consortium, see [VSC], is
   supported among others by CAMP (Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership).
   CAMP is a partnership that has been formed in 1995 by Ford Motor
   Company and General Motors Corporation.  The objective of CAMP is to
   accelerate the implementation of crash avoidance countermeasures to
   improve traffic safety by investigating and developing new
   technologies.  VSC has been realized in two phases.

   The first phase, denoted as VSC started in 2002 and ended in 2004.
   The second phase started in 2006 and ends in 2009.  VSC focused and
   is focusing on traffic safety related applications.  In 2006, The VSC
   2 consortium in cooperation with USDOT initiated a three-year
   collaborative effort in the area of wireless-based safety
   applications under the Vehicle Safety Communications - Applications
   (VSC-A) project, see [VSC-A].  The VSC2 consortium consists of the
   following members; Mercedes-Benz, Ford, General Motors, Honda &
   Toyota.  The main goal of this project is to develop and test
   communications-based vehicle safety systems to determine whether
   vehicle positioning in combination with the DSRC at 5.9 GHz can
   improve the autonomous vehicle-based safety systems and/or enable new
   communication-based safety applications.

   The WAVE Short Message Protocol [IEEE 1609.3] was designed
   specifically to offer a more efficient (smaller size) alternative to
   TCP or UDP over IP, for 1-hop messages that require no routing.

   The European Car-to-Car Communication Consortium (C2C-CC) is an
   industry consortium of car manufacturers and electronics suppliers
   that focuses on the definition of an European standard for vehicular
   communication protocols.

   The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) Technical
   Committee (TC) Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) was established in
   October 2007 with the goal of developing and maintaining standards,
   specifications and other deliverables to support the development and
   the implementation of ITS service provision.  It is foreseen that



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   ETSI ITS will be the reference standardization body of the future
   European ITS standards, and actually the C2C-CC provides
   recommendations to the ETSI TC ITS.

   The following subsections describe use cases that can be implemented
   using either V2I or V2V.  When V2V is applied, the use of Internet-
   wide Geo-networking solution is not required.

4.1.1.  Traffic safety use cases

   In VSC, see [VSC] 34 vehicle application scenarios have been
   identified, evaluated and ranked.  From this evaluation, a subset of
   eight significant near- and mid-term traffic safety applications have
   been selected: (1) cooperative forward collision warning, (2) curve
   speed warning, (3) pre-crash sensing, (4) traffic signal violation
   warning, (5) lane-change warning, (6) emergency electronic brake
   light, (7) left turn assistant, (8) stop sign movement assistant.  A
   brief description of these applications is given below (for more
   details, see [VSC]):

   o  Traffic signal violation warning: it informs and warns the driver
      to stop at a legally prescribed location in the situation that the
      traffic signal indicates a stop and it is estimated that the
      driver will be in violation.

   o  Curve speed warning - Rollover Warning: aids the driver in
      negotiating speeds at appropriate curves.

   o  Emergency Electronic Brake Lights: it is used to inform vehicles
      that a vehicle brakes hard.  In particular in this situation a
      warning message is sent to the vehicles moving behind the vehicle
      that brakes hard.

   o  Pre-crash sensing: it prepares the driver for an unavoidable and
      imminent collision.

   o  Cooperative Forward Collision Warning: aids the driver in
      mitigating or avoiding collisions with the rear-end vehicles in
      the forward path of travel through driver notification or warnings
      of an unavoidable collision.  This application does not attempt to
      control the vehicle to avoid an unavoidable collision.

   o  Left Turn Assistant: it informs the driver about oncoming traffic
      in order to assist him in making a left turn at a signalized
      intersection without a phasing left turn arrow.

   o  Lane Change Warning: it warns the driver if an intended lane
      change may cause a crash with a nearby moving vehicle.



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   o  Stop Sign Movement Assistance: it warns the driver that the
      vehicle is nearby an intersection, which will be passed after
      having stopped at a stop sign.

   In the VSC-A project an additional investigation has been performed,
   on traffic safety applications that can be used in crash immitment
   scenarios, see [VSC-A].  The following 7 traffic safety applications
   have been selected for implementation in the VSC-A test bed.

   o  Emergency Electronic Brake Light: is a traffic safety application
      that is the same as the Emergency Electronic Brake Light
      application defined in the VSC project, see above.

   o  Forward Collision warning: is a traffic safety application that is
      the same as the Cooperative Forward Collision Warning application
      defined in the VSC project, see above.

   o  Intersection Movement Assist: is a traffic is intended to warn the
      driver of a vehicle when it is not safe to enter an intersection
      due to high collision probability with other vehicles.  It is
      similar to the Stop Sign Movement Assistance application defined
      in the VSC project, see above.

   o  Blind Spot Warning & Lane Change Warning: it is similar to the
      Lane Change Warning application defined in the VSC project, see
      above.  In the Blind Spot Warning application the driver of a host
      vehicle is informed that another vehicle is moving in an adjacent
      lane and that this vehicle is positioned in a blind spot zone of
      the host vehicle.

   o  Do Not Pass Warning: this is an application that was not
      investigated in the VSC project.  It is intended to warn the
      driver of a host vehicle during a passing maneuver attempt when a
      slower vehicle, ahead and in the same lane, cannot be safely
      passed using a passing zone which is occupied by vehicles with the
      opposite direction of travel.  In addition, the application
      provides advisory information that is intended to inform the
      driver of the host vehicle that the passing zone is occupied when
      a passing maneuver is not being attempted.

   o  Control Loss Warning: this is an application that was not
      investigated in the VSC project.  It is intended to enable the
      driver of a host vehicle to generate and broadcast a control- loss
      event to surrounding vehicles.  Upon receiving this information
      the surrounding vehicle determines the relevance of the event and
      provides a warning to the driver, if appropriate.





Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   The Car to Car Communication Consortium specified a number of traffic
   safety use cases.  The following three are considered as being the
   main traffic safety use cases, see [C2C-CC_Manifesto]:

   o  Cooperative Forward Collision Warning: this use case tries to
      provide assistance to the driver.  Vehicles share (anonymously)
      information such as position, speed and direction.  This enables
      the prediction of an imminent rear-end collision, by each vehicle
      monitoring the behavior of its own driver and the information of
      neighboring vehicles.  If a potential risk is detected, the
      vehicle warns the driver.  This use case requires: the ability for
      all vehicles to share Information with each other over a distance
      of about 20 to 200 meters, accurate relative positioning of the
      vehicles, trust relationships among the vehicles and a reasonable
      market penetration (at least 10%).

   o  Pre-Crash Sensing/Warning: this use case is similar to the
      previous one, but in this case the collision is identified as
      unavoidable, and then the involved vehicles exchange more precise
      information to optimize the usage of actuators such as airbags,
      seat belt pre-tensors, etc... This use case requires basically the
      same abilities that the previous one, restricting the needed
      communication range to 20 to 100 meters, and adding the
      requirement of a fast and reliable connection between the involved
      cars.

   o  Hazardous Location V2V Notification: this use case is based on the
      share of information that relates to dangerous locations on the
      road, among vehicles, and also among vehicles and the road
      infrastructure.  On one hand, vehicles may detect the dangerous
      locations from sensors in the vehicle or from events such as the
      actuation of the ESP (Electronic Stability Program).  On the other
      hand, recipients of this information may use it to properly
      configure active safety systems and/or warn the driver.  This use
      case requires: vehicles to trust other vehicles and roadside
      units, reasonable market penetration, the ability of vehicles to
      share information about a specific geographic location over
      multiple-hops and the ability to validate information propagated
      through multiple hops.

4.1.2.  Traffic efficiency and management use cases

   Such applications are focusing on improving the vehicle traffic flow,
   traffic coordination and traffic assistance and provide updated local
   information, maps and in general, messages of relevance bounded in
   space and/or time.  Two typical groups of this type of applications
   are speed management and co-operative navigation are two typical
   groups of this type of applications [ETSI-TR-102-638], [KaAl11].



Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   o  Speed management; Speed management applications aim to assist the
      driver to manage the speed of his/her vehicle for smooth driving
      and to avoid unnecessary stopping.  Regulatory/contextual speed
      limit notification and green light optimal speed advisory are two
      examples of this type.

   o  Co-operative navigation; This type of applications is used to
      increase the traffic efficiency by managing the navigation of
      vehicles through cooperation among vehicles and through
      cooperation between vehicles and road side units.  Some examples
      of this type are traffic information and recommended itinerary
      provisioning, co-operative adaptive cruise control and platooning.

4.1.3.  Infotainment applications

   Such applications are neither traffic safety applications nor traffic
   efficiency & management applications and are mainly supported by
   e.g., media downloading use cases, see [CVIS], [C2C-CC_Manifesto],
   [ETSI-TR-102-638], [PREDRIVE-C2x], [KaAl11]:

   o  Co-operative local services; This type of applications focus on
      infotainment that can be obtained from locally based services such
      as point of interest notification, local electronic commerce and
      media downloading.

   o  Global Internet services; In this type of applications the focus
      is on data that can be obtained from global Internet services.
      Typical examples are Communities services, which include insurance
      and financial services, fleet management and parking zone
      management, and ITS station life cycle, which focus on software
      and data updates.

5.  Security Considerations

   No security considerations are considered in this document.

6.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA considerations are considered in this document.

7.  Contributors

8.  Acknowledgements

   Part of this work was supported by the European Commission under the
   collaborative project eCo-FEV.  The authors would like to thank all
   partners within eCo-FEV for their cooperation and contribution.




Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   We would like to thank the members of the IETF ITS and GeoNet
   community for their comments and discussions.  Furthermore, we would
   like to thank the authors of the Internet draft [draft-karagiannis-
   traffic-safety-requirements], G.  Karagiannis, R.  Wakikawa, J.
   Kenney, C.  J.  Bernardos and F.  Kargl, since some parts of the
   traffic safety application descriptions are taken from the mentioned
   draft.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [C2C-CC]   "C2C-CC official website, http://www.car-2-car.org/,
              (visited in October 2009).", .

   [C2C-CC_MANIFESTO]
              "Car to Car Communication Consortium, "Car to Car
              Communication Consortium Manifesto: Overview of the C2C-CC
              System", C2C-CC, version 1.1, 2007.", .

   [CVIS]     "CVIS EU FP6 project website, http://www.cvisproject.org,
              (visited in October 2009).", .

   [ETSI-EN-302-636-4-1]
              "ETSI TS 102 636-4-1, "Intelligent Transport Systems
              (ITS); Vehicular communications; GeoNetworking; Part 4:
              Geographical addressing and forwarding for point-to-point
              and point- to-multipoint communications; Sub-part 1:
              Media-Independent Functionality", ETSI specification ETSI
              TS 102 636-4-1 V1.1.1, June 2011.", .

   [ETSI-TC-ITS]
              "ETSI official website, http://www.etsi.org/, (visited in
              October 2009).", .

   [ETSI-TR-102-638]
              "ETSI TR 102 638, "Intelligent Transport System (ITS);
              Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications;
              Definition", ETSI specification TR 102 638, v.1.1.1, June
              2009.", .






Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   [GEONET]   "GeoNet EU FP7 project website,
              http://www.geonet-project.eu, (visited in October 2009).",
              .

   [IEEE-1609.3]
              "IEEE Std P1609.3, "IEEE Trial-Use Standard for Wireless
              Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE)-Networking
              Services", 2007.", .

   [KaAl11]   "Karagiannis, G. Altintas, O., Ekici,E., Heijenk, G.J.,
              Jarupan, B., Lin, K., Weil, T., "Vehicular networking: A
              survey and tutorial on requirements, architectures,
              challenges, standards and solutions", IEEE Communications
              Surveys & Tutorials, 13 (4). pp.  584- 616. ISSN
              1553-877X, 2011.", .

   [PREDRIVE-C2x]
              "Pre-Drive C2X EU FP7 project website,
              http://www.pre-drive-c2x.eu, (visited in October 2009).",
              .

   [SAFESPOT]
              "SAFESPOT EU FP6 project website,
              http://www.safespot-eu.org, (visited in October 2009).", .

   [SEVECOM]  "SEVECOM EU FP6 project website, http://www.sevecom.org,
              (visited in October 2009).", .

   [VSC]      "Vehicle Safety Communications Project, Final Report, DOT
              HS 810 591, April 2006.", .

   [VSC-A]    "Vehicle Safety Communications - Applications (VSC-A)
              Project, Final Annual Report, DOT HS 811 073, January
              2009.", .

   [VSC-A_1609.2]
              "VSC-A presentation, "Security in VSC-A", slides presented
              at IEEE 1609 meeting on August 26 - 28, 2008, to be found
              via: http://vii.path.berkeley.edu/1609_wave/aug08/
              presentations/ VSCA-1609_080827.pdf", .

   [draft-karagiannis-traffic-safety-requirements]
              "Karagiannis, G., Wakikawa, R., Kenney, J., Bernardos,
              C.J., Kargl, F.,"Traffic safety applications requirements,
              IETF Internet draft (work in progress), draft-karagiannis-
              traffic-safety-requirements-02.txt, February 2010;", .





Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   [ecofev-d200.1]
              "eCo-FEV Deliverable D200.1, Use cases and requirements
              for an efficient cooperative platform, version 2.3,
              dissemination PU, www.eco-fev.eu, 28 February 2013, file
              name eCo-FEV-WP200-20140321v2.3-DL-D200.1 Use cases and
              requirements_web.pdf, freely available at URL
              http://www.eco-fev.eu/deliverables.html?f ile=files/eco-
              fev/content/PDFs/ eCo-FEV-WP200-20140321v2.3-DL-D200.
              1%20Use%20cases%20and%20requirements_web.pdf downloaded on
              June 11th, 2014.", .

   [etsi-ts-101-556-1-2-12]
              "ETSI Technical Specification; Intelligent Transport
              Systems (ITS); Infrastructure to Vehicle Communication;
              Electric Vehicle Charging Spot Notification Specification,
              ETSI TS 101 556-1 V1.1.1 (2012-07), file name
              ts_10155601v010101p.pdf, freely available at URL
              http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/101500_101599/
              10155601/01.01.01_60/ts_10155601v010101p.pdf downloaded on
              June 10th, 2014.", .

   [etsi-ts-102-637-1]
              "ETSI Technical Specification; Intelligent Transport
              Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communication; Basic Set of
              Applications, ETSI TS 102 637-1 V1.1.1 (2010-09), file
              name ts_10263701v010101p.pdf, freely available at URL
              http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/102600_102699/
              10263701/01.01.01_60/ts_10263701v010101p.pdf downloaded on
              June 11th, 2014.", .

   [ieee802.11p-2010]
              "IEEE Std 802.11p(TM)-2010, IEEE Standard for Information
              Technology - Telecommunications and information exchange
              between systems - Local and metropolitan area networks -
              Specific requirements, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
              Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,
              Amendment 6: Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments;
              document freely available at URL
              http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/
              download/802.11p-2010.pdf retrieved on September 20th,
              2013.", .

Appendix A.  ChangeLog

   The changes are listed in reverse chronological order, most recent
   changes appearing at the top of the list.





Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   From draft-petrescu-disseminate-to-RSU-00.txt to draft-wissingh-
   disseminate-to-RSU-00.txt

   o  Added section "Dissemination of ITS information to mobile RSUs"

   o  Added section "vehicle to RSU dissemination"

   o  Added section references

   From draft-petrescu-disseminate-to-RSU-00.txt to draft-petrescu-
   disseminate-to-RSU-00.txt:

   o  first version.

Authors' Addresses

   Bastiaan Wissingh
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft  2612 CT
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31888664252
   Email: bastiaan.wissingh@tno.nl


   Alexandru Petrescu
   CEA, LIST
   CEA Saclay
   Gif-sur-Yvette, Ile-de-France  91190
   France

   Phone: +33169089223
   Email: Alexandru.Petrescu@cea.fr


   Georgios Karagiannis
   University of Twente
   P.O. Box 217
   Enschede  7500 AE
   The Netherlands

   Email: g.karagiannis@utwente.nl








Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             disseminate to RSUs                 June 2014


   Geert Heijenk
   University of Twente
   P.O. Box 217
   Enschede  7500 AE
   The Netherlands

   Email: geert.heijenk@utwente.nl












































Wissingh, et al.        Expires December 21, 2014              [Page 17]
