





INTERNET-DRAFT                                      Kurt D. Zeilenga
Intended Category: Standard Track                OpenLDAP Foundation
Expires in six months                                   30 June 2003



                          The LDAP No-Op Control
                    <draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-02.txt>


Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  This document is intended to be, after appropriate review and
  revision, submitted to the IESG for consideration as a Standard Track
  document.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.  Technical
  discussion of this document will take place on the IETF LDAP
  Extensions Working Group mailing list <ldapext@ietf.org>.  Please send
  editorial comments directly to the author <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>. The list of
  Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

  Please see the Full Copyright section near the end of this document
  for more information.


Abstract

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  No-Op control which can be used to disable the normal effect of an
  operation.  The control can be used to discover how a server might
  react to a particular update request without updating the directory.




Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-02          30 June 2003


1.  Overview

  It is often desirable to be able to determine if a directory [X.500]
  operation would successful complete or not without having the normal
  effect of the operation take place.  For example, an administrative
  client might want to verify that new user could update their entry
  (and not other entries) without the directory actually being updated.
  The mechanism could be used to build more sophisticated security
  auditing tools.

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  [RFC3377] No-Op control.  The presence of the No-Op control in an
  operation request message disables the normal effect of the operation.

  For example, when present in a LDAP modify operation [RFC2251], the
  modify operation will do all processing necessary to perform the
  operation but not actually modify the directory.

  The No-Op control is not intended to be used by user clients to
  determine "effective rights".

1.1.  Terminology

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119].

  DN stands for Distinguished Name.
  DSA stands for Directory System Agent.
  DSE stands for DSA-specific entry.


2.  No-Op Control

  The No-Op control is an LDAP Control [RFC2251] whose controlType is
  1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2, criticality is TRUE, and controlValue is
  absent.  Criticality of TRUE is REQUIRED to prevent unintended
  modification of the directory.  There is no corresponding response
  control.

  The control is appropriate for LDAP Add, Delete, Modify and ModifyDN
  operations [RFC2251].

  When the control is attached to an LDAP request, the server SHALL do
  all normal processing possible for the operation without modification
  of the directory.  That is, when the control is attached to an LDAP
  request, that operation SHALL NOT return success (0).




Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-02          30 June 2003


  A result code other than noOperation (TBD) means that the server is
  not able or willing to complete the processing for the reasons
  indicated by the result code.  A result code of noOperation (TBD)
  indicates that the server found no reason why the operation would fail
  if submitted without the No-Op control.

  Servers SHOULD indicate their support for this control by providing
  1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2 as a value of the supportedControl attribute
  type in their root DSE entry.  A server MAY choose to advertise this
  extension only when the client is authorized to use this operation.


3.  Security Considerations

  The No-Op control mechanism allows directory administrators (and
  users) to verify that access control and other administrative policy
  controls are properly configured.  The mechanism may also lead to the
  development (and deployment) of more sophisticated security auditing
  tools.

  The No-Op control mechanism is believed not to introduce any security
  risks beyond those of the base operation it is attached to.  Security
  considerations for the base operations, as well as general LDAP
  security considerations, are discussed in RFCs comprising the LDAP
  Technical Specification [RFC3377].


4.  IANA Considerations

4.1  LDAP Protocol Mechanism

  Registration of this protocol mechanism is requested [RFC3383].

  Subject: Request for LDAP Protocol Mechanism Registration
  Object Identifier: 1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2
  Description: No-Op Control
  Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Kurt Zeilenga <kurt@openldap.org>
  Usage: Control
  Specification: RFC XXXX
  Author/Change Controller: IESG
  Comments: none

  This OID was assigned [ASSIGN] by OpenLDAP Foundation, under its
  IANA-assigned private enterprise allocation [PRIVATE], for use in this
  specification.





Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-02          30 June 2003


4.2  LDAP Result Code

  Assignment of an LDAP Result Code called 'noOperation' is requested.

      Subject: LDAP Result Code Registration
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
          Kurt Zeilenga <kurt@OpenLDAP.org>
      Result Code Name: noOperation
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments:  none


5.  Author's Address

  Kurt D. Zeilenga
  OpenLDAP Foundation
  <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>


6. Normative References

  [RFC2119]     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14 (also RFC 2119), March 1997.

  [RFC2251]     Wahl, M., T. Howes and S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory
                Access Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.

  [RFC3377]     Hodges, J. and R. Morgan, "Lightweight Directory Access
                Protocol (v3): Technical Specification", RFC 3377,
                September 2002.


7. Informative References

  [X.500]       International Telecommunication Union -
                Telecommunication Standardization Sector, "The Directory
                -- Overview of concepts, models and services,"
                X.500(1993) (also ISO/IEC 9594-1:1994).

  [RFC3383]     Zeilenga, K., "IANA Considerations for LDAP", BCP 64
                (also RFC 3383), September 2002.

  [ASSIGN]      OpenLDAP Foundation, "OpenLDAP OID Delegations",
                http://www.openldap.org/foundation/oid-delegate.txt.

  [PRIVATE]     IANA, "Private Enterprise Numbers",
                http://www.iana.org/assignments/enterprise-numbers.



Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-02          30 June 2003


Intellectual Property Rights

  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
  intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain
  to the implementation or use of the technology described in this
  document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or
  might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any
  effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the IETF's
  procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
  standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
  claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
  licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
  obtain a general license or permission for the use of such proprietary
  rights by implementors or users of this specification can be obtained
  from the IETF Secretariat.

  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
  rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
  Director.



Full Copyright

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
  or as required to translate it into languages other than English.











Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 5]

