Internet Engineering Task Force                              Atul Sharma
Mobile IP Working Group                                     (Nokia, Inc) 
INTERNET-DRAFT                                               May 4, 2004  
Expires: November 4, 2004



	                 Secure Mobility Dimensions
              <draft-sharma-secure-mobility-dimensions-01.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract

   Several solutions to internet mobility have been offered. But the
   solutions are sometimes for different kinds of mobility with 
   different kinds of requirements. It becomes confusing to see these 
   disparate types of mobility being discussed in the same vein. This 
   document is an attempt to delineate and classify different types of 
   network mobility. This attempt shall help us in understanding already 
   existing mobility solutions and at the same time help us in proposing
   new solutions. Adding security to mobility adds a new dimension by 
   itself. Various types of secure mobility are discussed closely 
   following the types of mobility.












Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



Table of Contents


1. Introduction .......................................................3
2. State of Device during Mobility ....................................3
2.1 Always-ON Mobility ................................................3
2.2 Secure Always-ON Mobility .........................................3
2.3 Switch-OFF/Switch-ON Mobility .....................................4
2.4 Secure Switch-OFF/Switch-ON Mobility ..............................4
3. Connectivity Domain during Mobility ................................5
3.1 Mobile Connectivity to the Home Network ...........................5
3.2 Secure Mobile Connectivity to the Home Network ....................5
3.3 Mobile Connectivity to Everyone ...................................5
3.4 Secure Mobile Connectivity to Everyone ............................6
4. Location and Security with respect to Home (Security) Gateway ......6
4.1 Mobility behind a Gateway (Access Point Mobility) .................6
4.2 Secure Access Point Mobility ......................................6
4.3 WLAN Mobility (Mobility across controller-gateways) ...............7
4.4 Secure WLAN Mobility ..............................................7
5. Homogeneity of the Network(s) of Mobility ..........................8
5.1 Mobility within a Homogeneous network .............................8
5.1.1 Wired Mobility ..................................................8
5.1.2 WLAN Mobility ...................................................8
5.1.3 Cellular Wireless Mobility ......................................8
5.2 Secure Mobility within or between Homogeneous networks ............8
5.3 Mobility between Heterogeneous networks ...........................9
5.4 Secure Mobility between heterogeneous networks ....................9
6. Hidden Mobility vs. Visible Mobility ...............................9
6.1 Hidden Mobility ...................................................9
6.2 Secure Hidden Mobility ...........................................10
6.3 Visible Mobility .................................................10
6.4 Secure Visible Mobility ..........................................10
7. Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Mobility .................................11
7.1 Symmetric Mobility ...............................................11
7.2 Secure Symmetric Mobility ........................................11
7.3 Asymmetric Mobility ..............................................11
7.4 Secure Asymmetric Mobility .......................................12
8. Type of Element Mobility ..........................................12
8.1 Mobility of Nodes ................................................12
8.2 Secure Mobility of Nodes .........................................12
8.3 Mobility of Routers ..............................................13
8.4 Secure Mobility of Routers .......................................13
8.5 Network Mobility .................................................13
8.6 Secure Network Mobility ..........................................13
9. Security Considerations............................................13
10. References .......................................................13







Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



1. Introduction

   There has been considerable activity for mobility in IETF. Several 
   working groups Mobile IP4 (MIPv4), Mobile IPv6 (MIP6), Mobile Ad-hoc
   Networks (MANET), Network Mobility (NEMO). And very recently secure
   mobility is handled in MOBIKE, the IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming, 
   working group. This document tries to understand, delineate, and 
   classify various types of secure mobility in the intranet and the
   internet. This shall help us to understand and refine existing 
   solutions. At the same time it shall help us in proposing new 
   solutions for different types of mobility.

   The document is organized by proposing a dimension of Mobility and
   then discuss possible types of Mobility in that dimension. No new
   solutions are offered in this document. But possibly already existing 
   Mobility solutions may be classified in a dimension.



2. State of the device during Mobility

   The powered state of the device during the mobility can be a basis of
   differentiation in Mobility. Some devices like cellular phones, PDAs
   or may hybrid devices can be always ON, i.e. ON during mobility. Some 
   devices like laptops, or even cellular phones, PDAs, and many hybrids 
   can be switched OFF then switched ON after changing location.


2.1 Always-ON Mobility

   In this type of Mobility, the device is ON while moving. This shall
   imply some kind of active hand-off between controlling elements of 
   the networks. So in cellular phones, it may mean hand-off between 
   base stations. In Wireless LAN, it may mean hand-off between access 
   points or WLAN switch-controllers. Based on the current location of 
   the device an appropriate controller is controlling the device. A 
   roaming laptop in a WLAN will need the support of such Mobility.

   Having hand-offs between the heterogeneous networks, for example WLAN
   and Cellular networks, shall help in providing true Always-ON 
   Mobility betweeen the heterogeneous networks. One possibility is to 
   have multi-modal devices able to communicate with different types of 
   networks at the same time. A critical requirement for true Always-ON
   Mobility between heterogeneous networks could be the preservation of 
   the state and operation while the device moves. 


2.2 Secure Always-ON Mobility

   Here besides keeping the device up and operational during and after
   moving, we have to keep the device secure during and after moving.


Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



   That means security state (in IPsec terminology Security 
   Associations) should be preserved during the move. The goals of 
   MOBIKE working group[3] is to support such type of Mobility. The aim
   is that a renegotiation of the security policy should not be 
   necessary after the move. Attempt should be made to keep operating 
   with the old secure connection just with the change in address.

   Again depending on the type of secure connection, ways to preserve
   secure connection may be different. Secure connection can be between
   Mobile endpoint to a remote endpoint, or between Mobile endpoint and
   remote gateway, or between the gateway Mobile device is visiting and
   a remote gateway or endpoint. (This remote gateway or endpoint can be
   in the home corporate network or anywhere in the internet). 

   As long as the secure connection terminates in the Mobile device, 
   preserving secure connection during the move may mean changing the 
   address of the Mobile device at the remote endpoint/gateway, as being
   worked on by the MOBIKE working group. But if the Mobile device is 
   always behind some gateway terminating the secure connection, it may
   not be simple to preserve the secure connection from one visited 
   gateway to another visited gateway. The new visited gateway shall 
   need to get the state of the secure connection besides making change 
   in the gateway address at the remote end.


2.3 Switch-OFF/Switch-ON Mobility

   In this type of Mobility, the device is powered OFF while moving. A 
   road warrior would power OFF the laptop, move to a remote site, and
   power ON there. No active hand-off is performed. But some kind of
   deregistration and registration is performed when the device is
   powered OFF and then ON after moving. Now with advent of several
   wireless LAN technologies even laptops could be mobile while ON. But
   still there will be scenarios when the laptop would have to be
   switched OFF during the move.

   The Always-ON devices would also typically support Switch-OFF/
   Switch-ON Mobility. The converse may not be true.


2.4 Secure Switch-OFF/Switch-ON Mobility

   Since the device is going to be power cycled during the move, the 
   active security policy need not be preserved. Once powered ON at the
   new location, security policy can be negotiated along with Mobility 
   registration.







Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



3. Connectivity Domain during Mobility
     
   Another dimension of Mobility is the domain of the connectivity after
   the move. One possibility could be to just keep connectivity to the 
   home network, may be the corporate network. Another possibility is to 
   keep the connectivity with everyone including both the internet and 
   the corporate intranet.


3.1 Mobile Connectivity to the Home Network

   This is the case of the road warrior trying to maintain continuous
   mobile connectivity to the corporate network. The only goal is to 
   access corporate resources. Internet connectivity is not a 
   requirement, but may come for free. Also it is not expected that 
   hosts internal to home network will try to initiate connection with
   the Mobile device. Mobile IP [1] can accomplish such type of 
   Mobility. But if maintaining the home address is not a requirement
   Mobile IP may not be needed. The modem pool / dial-up mechanism to 
   provide access to corporate network can also simply accomplish this 
   type of Mobility.


3.2 Secure Mobile Connectivity to the Home Network

   Security will be of paramount importance for Mobile Connectivity to
   the Home Network over the internet. The corporate information should
   not be available on the insecure path between the Home Network and 
   the Visiting Network. An IPsec client or an SSL browser on the mobile
   device can be used to connect to the gateway on the corporate 
   network. In addition Mobile IP can be used if local presence in the
   home network is required. Mobile IP payload can be secured by let us
   say IPsec. Another way to have secure local presence is by innovative
   mechanism proposed in [2] using DHCPv4 and IPsec.
 

3.3 Mobile Connectivity to Everyone (End to End Mobility)

   Here the Mobile connectivity to both the home network and the 
   internet is required. Connecting to an ISP will give accessibility to
   the internet and will also expose the externally visible resources of
   a corporate home network. If local presence on the corporate network
   is required then Mobile IP shall be needed. Mobile IP besides 
   enabling mobile connectivity to the home network, shall also provide
   connectivity to everyone (internet) via home network.








Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



3.4 Secure Mobile Connectivity to Everyone (End to End Secure Mobility)
   
   Securing traffic while on a remote site may mean having either IPsec
   client or a SSL-enabled browser on the mobile device or the remote 
   site has gateway terminating IPsec connections. Any host in the home
   network or behind a gateway else where on the internet can setup a
   secure connection with the mobile device, via IPsec or SSL.

   If Mobile-IP is being employed, securing that mechanism shall need
   Hop-by-Hop security for connecting to some one not in the home 
   network. First secure connection between the connecting host/device 
   to the home agent is required. Then secure connection between the
   home agent and mobile device at the remote site shall be required.
   For connecting to a host in the home network, only secure connection
   between mobile device and home agent shall be needed.

   Secure local presence solution offered in [2] shall not be able to 
   provide this type of Mobility, as secure connection to just the home
   network and not the rest of the internet shall not be enabled.
   


4. Location and Security with respect to Home (Security) Gateway 

   One basis of differentiation for Mobility can be the location of and 
   security with respect to the home gateway. It shall depend if mobile 
   device is mobile behind a gateway in the home WLAN or roaming away 
   from the home WLAN to another WLAN on campus or entirely new site. 
   Here we assume the existence of a WLAN controller-gateway having the 
   functionality of controlling the access points and also act as a 
   gateway between WLAN and outside world or the corporate network.


4.1 Mobility behind a Gateway (Access Point Mobility)

   This is Access Point Mobility behind a gateway within a Wireless LAN.
   This is link-layer Mobility as specified by WLAN technologies 
   (802.11 a/b/g). Nothing more is required over and above what is 
   provided by the WLAN technology.


4.2 Secure Access Point Mobility 

   The connection from the mobile device on the WLAN to the corporate
   network needs to be secured, as over-the-air is an insecure medium.
   The security provided by WEP was inadequate, so an IPsec connection
   between the mobile device (an IPsec client) and the corporate WLAN 
   gateway can be used. With 802.11i, the security is deemed adequate
   and no IPsec connection between the mobile device and local WLAN 
   corporate gateway shall be needed.



Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



   The connection from the Mobile device on WLAN to the outside world
   can be secured and terminated by the local WLAN controller-gateway.
   Mobility within the LAN will not exert anymore requirements on 
   security.


4.3 WLAN Mobility (Mobility across controller-gateways)

   The mobile device can roam away from the home WLAN to another WLAN in
   the campus or it may roam to another campus/site connected to the 
   home site via internet or a private link. Mobility from one WLAN to 
   another WLAN on campus would be Always-ON kind of mobility, while the
   Mobility to a different campus could be a Switch-ON/Switch-OFF kind 
   of mobility. 

   From one WLAN to another WLAN within a campus shall require a 
   hand-off between the WLAN controllers on the two WLANs. The IP 
   address of the mobile device shall need to be changed as part of the 
   hand-off. Any existing communication going on with the mobile device 
   should seemlessly continue after the move with the new IP address.

   Mobile IP can help in supporting this type of Mobility. It shall
   still need some form of hand-off mechanism for it to fully work.
   Mobile IP can tunnel the traffic to the new WLAN, provided hand-off
   mechanism has done proper registarion and provisioning with the new
   WLAN. Issues with Mobile connectivity to the home WLAN or to everyone 
   else shall also come up here.

   To support Always-ON roaming to another campus/site would need 
   multimode device able to hand-off between different types of 
   networks.


4.4 Secure WLAN Mobility

   If we rely on 802.11i to secure the air link, and trust the two WLANs
   on the campus, we do not have to perform any more security between 
   the roaming mobile device and the corporate home network. 

   If we do not trust the link between the two WLANs or the visitng 
   WLAN, we shall need IPsec link between the mobile device (IPsec 
   client) to the home corporate network gateway. Then we will also have 
   to make sure that the security policy be preserved and need not be 
   renegotiated with the move.

   Security can also be maintained between the visitng WLAN gateway and
   the corporate gateway or the outside world.






Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



5. Homogeneity of the Network(s) of Mobility

   One dimension to Mobility can be the type of the network(s) where the
   mobile device is mobile. It could be within a or between two 
   homogeneous networks. It could be between two heterogeneous networks.


5.1 Mobility within a Homogeneous network

   When a mobile node moves between same type of networks say within a
   WLAN or between two adjacent WLANs or within a cellular network, the
   mobility is homogeneous. For Always-ON mobility, the hand-offs in a
   homogeneous network are already defined or acheived with relative 
   ease. Devices can be just single devices.

   Homogeneous Mobility can be further classified based on type of 
   Network, viz: wired IP network, WLAN, Cellular wireless networks.

5.1.1 Wired Mobility

   Mobility is possible in wired networks also. It would be Switch-OFF/
   Switch-ON type of mobility. A wired laptop can be detached from one
   place in the internet and then attached somewhere else on the 
   internet. Mobile IP can solve this kind of mobility.

5.1.2 WLAN Mobility

   Mobile devices can roam within and between WLANs. WLAN technologies 
   (802.11 a/b/g) enable Mobility within a WLAN. To enable Mobility 
   between two WLANs within a campus, we need support outside the WLAN
   technology.

5.1.3 Cellular Wireless Mobility

   Cellular Wireless networks are of different kinds (GSM, GPRS, CDMA,
   W-CDMA, 3G). Then with each type each operator may have different
   networks. Mobility is enabled within one operator network within the
   same type of cellular neteork.


5.2 Secure Mobility within or between Homogeneous networks

   Security in a homogeneous network may be enabled by the technology 
   itself (802.11i fro WiFi networks). Security may be needed when 
   underlying technology does not have adequate security or the medium 
   by its nature is insecure or when traffic from/to the mobile device 
   has to traverse insecure public networks.

   Even when moving within a homogeneous network, one goal of the Secure
   Mobility would be to preserve secure connection during the move for 



Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



   Always-ON type of Mobility within the homogeneous network. Again this
   may be done differently depending on whether the Mobile device is 
   terminating the secure connection or not. If a visited gatweway 
   terminates the secure connection, homogeneity of the network may not
   help, as the preserved state of the connection shall need to be 
   transferred to the new visited gateway.


5.3 Mobility between Heterogeneous networks

   When the mobile device moves between two heterogeneous networks, it
   needs to be multimodal so that it can communicate in both the 
   networks. If the goal is that we have Always-ON Mobility, we have to
   also make sure that some kind of hand-off between the two 
   heterogeneous networks is performed. Just Switch-OFF/Switch-ON type
   of Mobility may not be good enough for applications like voice.


5.4 Secure Mobility between heterogeneous networks

   The real challenge is when the secure connection needs to be moved 
   over to a heterogeneous network. The need to preserve secure 
   connection during the move is one requirement of Always-ON Mobility. 
   The question is: Does the heterogeneity of the networks add any more 
   requirements to Secure Mobility? 

   Once the hand-off mechanism over the heterogeneous networks is 
   enabled, preserving secure connection being terminated in the Mobile 
   device would mean making changes in the addresses known to the secure  
   connection, like being proposed in MOBIKE working group. 
   Heterogeneity of networks, makes the goal of preserving the secure 
   connection from one visited gateway tougher.



6. Hidden Mobility vs. Visible Mobility

   Whether Mobility of the Mobile device is visible to the hosts/devices
   it is communicating with can be the basis of classification of 
   Mobility.


6.1 Hidden Mobility 

   When to the Home (Corporate) network and the internet, the device
   still seems to exist in the home network, i.e. it has Local Presence,
   we can call it Hidden Mobility. Mobile IP facilitates such type of
   Mobility. Only Home Agent is aware of the new location of the Mobile
   device. The Home Agent hides the new location of the Mobile device




Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



   and acts as the go-between the Mobile device and the other device it
   is trying to communicate with.

6.2 Secure Hidden Mobility 

   If we want to secure the Hidden Mobile connection, we can protect
   Mobile IP with IPsec. That may mean presence of two clients (Mobile 
   IP client and IPsec client) on the Mobile device, if IPsec connection
   is being terminated at the Mobile device. Alternatively, the IPsec
   connection could be to the visited gateway, then Mobile device need
   not have IPsec client.

   Another option is the one offered by [2], where after an IPsec 
   connection between the Mobile device, DHCP is used to give the Mobile 
   device an IP address which is local to the home network. The Mobile
   device communicates with the Home network using this Local Presence
   IP address on a virtual interface and coomunicates with everyone else
   using the IP address on the real interface.


6.3 Visible Mobility 

   When the new location of the Mobile device is visible to the hosts/
   devices it is trying to communicate with, the Mobility can be called
   Visible Mobility. A road warrior when connects to the home corporate 
   network without security to access externally visible resources of 
   the corporate network, the hosts in the home corporate network see 
   the new location of the Mobile host.


6.4 Secure Visible Mobility

   Typically the home corporate networks do not allow insecure 
   connection to the road warriors. A secure connection is established
   with the corporate gateway, before giving access to the corporate 
   resources. IPsec or SSL/TLS can be used to securely connect to the
   corporate network. Still the new location of the Mobile device shall
   be visible to corporate network.

   Besides having a secure access to the corporate network, another
   requirement could be to preserve secure connection during Always-ON
   Secure Mobility. The Secure Mobility being solved by MOBIKE working
   group shall fall under this category, as the remote security gateway/
   endpoint is made aware of the new address of the Mobile device.









Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



7. Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Mobility

   Symmetry in the Secure Mobile communication can be considered another
   dimension of Mobility. Symmetry may mean the path taken by traffic,
   after the move, be the same in both directions. Symmetry may also 
   mean whether the source address used by the Mobile device is the same
   as the destination address used to reach it. Sometimes Mobility may 
   be symmetric with respect to path but not with respect to address or 
   vice-versa or symmetric with respect to both simultaneously. 

   Symmetry can also mean whether the way to connect to the home 
   corporate network is different than the way to connect to the 
   Internet.


7.1 Symmetric Mobility 

   Symmetric Mobility is when communication is symmetric in evey 
   respect: the path taken in both the directions is same; the source 
   address used by Mobile device is the same as the destination address 
   used to reach it; the way to connect to home corporate network is the 
   same as the way to connect to the internet.

   In case of Mobile IP, the path taken by the traffic from a host on 
   the internet to reach Mobile device may be different from the path 
   taken by the traffic from Mobile device to the internet. So it can be
   asymmetric.

   Symmetry may not always be practical, desirable, or required. For 
   example if traffic from Mobile Host can directly reach the internet
   host, why tunnel it to the Home Agent first? But as we shall see it 
   in the next section, sometimes Symmetric Mobility may be the only 
   way possible.


7.2 Secure Symmetric Mobility

   If we want Secure Mobility, we may need to perform Symmetric 
   Mobility, as we may not understand and able to perform Asymmetric 
   Security. We do not know how to have a secure connection with one set
   of addresses in one direction and a different secure connection over
   a different path with different set of addresses in the other 
   direction. So when we want to secure Mobility, symmetry may be the 
   only choice.


7.3 Asymmetric Mobility 

   We can introduce asymmetry in any aspect of Mobility for the sake of 
   practicality. Mobile IP allows two different paths when communicating



Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



   to an internet host with communication initiated by the internet 
   host. From the internet host, traffic goes to the home agent, where
   it is tunneled to the current location of the Mobile device. 

   Another asymmetry could be that communication initiated by the Mobile
   host to the home network uses the Home Agent (and hence home address
   as the source address) to maintain local presence, but directly 
   contacts an internet host (without Home Agent) using its current 
   visited location as the source address.

   Any time there is communication via Home Agent, the Mobile device
   shall tend to use its home address as the source address. But should
   it use the home address as the source address to communicate with the
   other hosts on the visited network?  


7.4 Secure Asymmetric Mobility 

   Securing Asymmetric Mobility may be a tough problem, depending on how
   the Mobility is asymmetric. With the known current security 
   technologies, it is not obvious how to have different secure 
   connections with different paths and/or different addresses in both 
   the directions traffic flows.



8. Type of Element Mobility

   What network element is mobile in the network can also be a dimension
   of Mobility. We could have hosts mobile within a network or between
   networks. We could also conceivably think that even the routers
   besides the hosts are mobile. Even further step would be if the whole
   networks are mobile as a unit.


8.1 Mobility of Nodes

   Here just the nodes (hosts or devices) are mobile in the network or 
   between the networks. Most type of Mobility we have talked about 
   shall fall under this category. Mobile IP(v4 or v6), WLAN, Cellular 
   Wireless are about mobility of the hosts or devices.


8.2 Secure Mobility of Nodes

   The Secure Mobility we have considered till now with its various 
   aspects is basically Secure Mobility of Nodes.






Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



8.3 Mobility of Routers 

   When even routers and gateways of a network are mobile, we have Adhoc
   Networks. The MANET working group works on the Mobility of all hosts
   and routers. How to perform routing in such networks shall be of 
   critical importance.


8.4 Secure Mobility of Routers

   How we shall secure traffic in Adhoc networks, or preserve secure 
   connection during mobility, are all open areas.


8.5 Network Mobility 

   When the whole network is mobile, for example say a network on an
   airplane or a train, we get Network Mobility. The NEMO working group
   is working on this type of Mobility. Here the assumption is that even
   though network is mobile, there is only one gateway on the network,
   the primary contact with rest of the internet. The network being 
   Mobile is a stub network, i.e. it terminates communication. No 
   traffic shall be in transit through the network. 


8.6 Secure Network Mobility

   Most aspects of security with mobile networks shall be open areas. 
   But we can surmise that the gateway on the network can terminate 
   secure connections for hosts.



9. Security Considerations

   Impact of security on Mobility is discussed in relevant sections
   prior in the document.



10. References

10.1 Normative References

   [1] C. Perkins.  IP Mobility Support.  Request for Comments (Proposed
       Standard) 3344, Internet Engineering Task Force, August 2002. 







Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Secure Mobility Dimensions             May 2004



10.2 Informative References

   [2] B. Patel et al. DHCPv4 Configuration of IPsec Tunnel Mode. 
       RFC 3456, Internet Engineering Task Force, January 2003.

   [3] T. Kivinen. Design of MOBIKE protocol. 
       draft-kivinen-mobike-design (work in Progress), Mar 2004





Author's Address

   Atul Sharma
   5 Wayside Road, #4091
   Burlington, MA 01803 USA

   Email: atul.sharma@nokia.com


































Sharma, A.              Expires November 4, 2004               [Page 14]
