



MPLS Working Group                                              R. Torvi
Internet-Draft                                                 R. Bonica
Intended status: Informational                          Juniper Networks
Expires: August 17, 2015                                        I. Minei
                                                            Google, Inc.
                                                                 M. Conn
                                                              D. Pacella
                                                             L. Tomotaki
                                                               M. Wygant
                                                                 Verizon
                                                       February 13, 2015


                             LSP Self-Ping
                     draft-bonica-mpls-self-ping-04

Abstract

   LSP Self-ping is a new, light-weight protocol that ingress LSRs can
   use to verify an LSPs readiness to carry traffic.  LSP Self-ping does
   not consume control plane resources on the egress LSR.

   When an ingress LSR executes LSP Self-ping procedures, it constructs
   a probe message.  The probe message is an IP datagram whose
   destination address represents an interface on the ingress LSR.

   The ingress LSR forwards the probe through the LSP under test.  If
   the LSP is ready to forward traffic, the egress LSR receives the
   probe.  Because the probe is addressed to the ingress LSR, the egress
   LSR forwards the probe back to the ingress.  When the ingress LSR
   receives the probe, it has verified LSP readiness without consuming
   control plane resources at the egress LSR.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  LSP Self Ping Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Bidirectional LSP Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Rejected Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   Ingress Label Switching Routers (LSR) can use RSVP-TE [RFC3209] to
   establish a MPLS Label Switched Paths (LSP) [RFC3032].  The following
   paragraphs outline RSVP-TE procedures.

   The ingress LSR calculates path between itself and an egress LSR.
   The calculated path can be either strictly or loosely routed.  Having
   calculated a path, the ingress LSR constructs an RSVP PATH message.
   The PATH message includes an Explicit Route Object (ERO) and the ERO
   represents the calculated path between the ingress and egress LSRs.

   The ingress LSR forwards the PATH message towards the egress LSR,
   following the path defined by the ERO.  Each transit LSR that
   receives the PATH message executes admission control procedures.  If
   the transit LSR admits the LSP, it sends the PATH message downstream,
   to the next node in the ERO.





Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   When the egress LSR receives the PATH message, it binds a label to
   the LSP.  The label can be implicit null, explicit null, or non-null.
   The egress LSR then installs forwarding state (if necessary), and
   constructs an RSVP RESV message.  The RESV message contains a Label
   Object and the Label Object contains the label that has been bound to
   the LSP.

   The egress LSR sends the RESV message upstream towards the ingress
   LSR.  The RESV message visits the same transit LSRs that the PATH
   message visited, in reverse order.  Each transit LSR binds a label to
   the LSP, updates its forwarding state and updates the RESV message.
   As a result, the RESV message contains a Label Object and the Label
   Object contains the label that has been bound to the LSP.  Finally,
   the transit LSR sends the RESV message upstream, along the reverse
   path of the LSP.

   When the ingress LSR receives the RESV message, it installs
   forwarding state.  Once the ingress LSR installs forwarding state it
   can forward traffic through the LSP.

   Some implementations optimize the procedure described above by
   allowing LSRs to send RESV messages before installing forwarding
   state.  This optimization is desirable, because it allows LSRs to
   install forwarding state in parallel, thus accelerating the process
   of LSP signaling and setup.  However, this optimization creates a
   race condition.  When the ingress LSR receives a RESV message, some
   downstream LSRs may not have installed forwarding state yet.  In this
   case, if the ingress LSR forwards traffic through the LSP, traffic
   will be black-holed until forwarding state is installed on all of the
   downstream LSRs.

   The ingress LSR can prevent back-holing by verifying the LSPs
   readiness to carry traffic before forwarding traffic through it.  LSP
   Ping [RFC4379] and BFD [RFC5884] are mechanisms that the ingress LSR
   could use to verify LSP readiness.  However, LSP Ping and BFD consume
   control plane resource on the egress LSR.  During periods of network
   restoration or reoptimzation, control plane resources may be scarce.
   Therefore, a mechanism that does not consume control plane resources
   on the egress LSR is required.

   LSP Self-ping is a new, light-weight protocol that ingress LSRs can
   use to verify an LSPs readiness to carry traffic.  Unlike LSP Ping,
   LSP Self-ping does not consume control plane resources on the egress
   LSR.

   When an ingress LSR executes LSP Self-ping procedures, it constructs
   a probe message.  The probe message is an IP datagram whose
   destination address represents an interface on the ingress LSR.



Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   The ingress LSR forwards the probe through the LSP under test.  If
   the LSP is ready to forward traffic, the egress LSR receives the
   probe.  Because the probe is addressed to the ingress LSR, the egress
   LSR forwards the probe back to the ingress.  When the ingress LSR
   receives the probe, it has verified LSP readiness without consuming
   control plane resources at the egress LSR.

   While LSP Self-ping does not consume control plane resources at the
   egress LSR, it cannot detect some failures that can be detected by
   protocols that consume control plane resources at the egress.  For
   example, LSP Self-ping cannot detect a misrouted LSP.  Furthermore,
   LSP Self-ping cannot be used to verify LSPs that were signaled using
   LDP independent mode.

2.  LSP Self Ping Procedures

   In order to verify that an LSP is ready to carry traffic, the ingress
   LSR creates a short-lived LSP Self-ping session.  All session state
   is maintained locally on the ingress LSR.  Session state includes the
   following:

   o  Session-id: A 32-bit number that identifies the session

   o  verification-status: A boolean variable indicating whether LSP
      readiness has been verified.  The initial value of this variable
      is FALSE.

   o  retries: The number of times that the ingress LSR probes the LSP
      before giving up.  The initial value of this variable is
      determined by configuration.

   o  retry-timer: The number of milliseconds that the LSR waits after
      probing the LSP.  The initial value of this variable is determined
      by configuration.

   The ingress LSR executes the following procedure until verification-
   status equals TRUE or retries is less than 1:

   o  Format a MPLS Echo Reply [RFC4379] message

   o  Send the MPLS Echo Reply message through the LSP under test

   o  Set a timer to expire in retry-timer milliseconds

   o  Wait until either a) a MPLS Echo Reply message associated with the
      session returns or b) the timer expires.  If an MPLS Echo Reply
      message associated with the session returns, set verification-
      status to TRUE.  Otherwise, decrement retries.  Optionally,



Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


      increase the value of retry-timer according to an appropriate back
      off algorithm.

   As per [RFC4379], the MPLS Echo Reply message is encapsulate in a
   User Datagram Protocol (UDP) [RFC0768] header.  If the protocol
   messages used to establish the LSP were delivered over IPv4
   [RFC0791], the UDP datagram is encapsulated in an IPv4 header.  If
   the protocol messages used to establish the LSP were delivered over
   IPv6 [RFC2460], the UDP datagram is encapsulated in an IPv6 header.

   In either case, message contents are as follows:

   o  IP Source Address is configurable.  By default, it is the address
      of the egress LSR

   o  IP Destination Address is the address of the ingress LSR

   o  IP Time to Live (TTL) / Hop Count is 255

   o  IP DSCP is configurable.  By default, it is equal to CS6 (Ox48)
      [RFC4594]

   o  UDP Source Port is any port selected from the dynamic range
      (49152-65535) [RFC6335]

   o  UDP Destination Port is any port selected from the dynamic range

   o  MPLS Echo Global Flags are clear (i.e., set to 0)

   o  MPLS Echo Type is equal to "MPLS Echo Reply" (2)

   o  MPLS Echo Reply Mode is "Reply via an IPv4/IPv6 UDP packet" (2)

   o  MPLS Echo Senders Handle is equal to the Session-ID

   o  MPLS Echo Sequence Number is equal to retries

   o  MPLS Echo Time Stamp Sent is equal to the current time

   The reader should note that the ingress LSR probes the LSP by sending
   an MPLS Echo Reply message, addressed to itself, through the LSP.
   The egress LSR forwards the MPLS Echo Reply message back to the
   ingress LSR, exactly as it would forward any other IP packet.

   If the LSP under test is ready to carry traffic, the egress LSR
   receives the MPLS Echo Reply message.  The MPLS Echo Reply message
   can arrive at the egress LSR with or without an MPLS header,
   depending on whether the LSP under test executes penultimate hop-



Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   popping procedures.  If the MPLS Echo Reply message arrives at the
   egress LSR with an MPLS header, the egress LSR removes that header.

   The egress LSR forwards the MPLS Echo Reply message to its
   destination, the ingress LSR.  The egress LSR forwards the MPLS Echo
   Reply message exactly as it would forward any other IP packet.  If
   the egress LSR's most preferred route to the ingress LSR is through
   an LSP, the egress LSR forwards the MPLS Echo Reply message through
   that LSP.  However, if the egress LSR's most preferred route to the
   ingress LSR is not through an LSP, the egress LSR forwards the MPLS
   Echo Reply message without MPLS encapsulation.

   If the ingress LSR receives an MPLS Echo Reply message with Senders
   Handle equal to the Session-ID, it sets the verification-status to
   TRUE.  The Sequence Number does not have to match the last Sequence
   Number sent.

   When an LSP Self-ping session terminates, it returns the value of
   verification-status to the invoking protocol.  For example, assume
   that RSVP-TE invokes LSP Self-ping as part of the LSP set-up
   procedure.  If LSP Self-ping returns TRUE, RSVP-TE makes the LSP
   under test available for forwarding.  However, if LSP Self-ping
   returns FALSE, RSVP-TE takes appropriate remedial actions.

   LSP Self-ping fails if all of the following conditions are true:

   o  The Source Address of the MPLS Echo Reply message is equal to its
      default value (that is, the address of the egress LSR)

   o  The penultimate hop pops the MPLS label

   o  The egress LSR executes Unicast Reverse Path Forwarding (uRPF)
      procedures

   In this scenario and in similar scenarios, the egress LSR discards
   the MPLS Echo Reply message rather than forwarding it.  In such
   scenarios, the calling application can set the source address to a
   more appropriate value.

3.  Bidirectional LSP Procedures

   In order to verify a bidirectional LSP's readiness to carry traffic,
   the procedures described in Section 2 are executed twice, once by
   each LSP endpoint.  Each LSP endpoint tests LSP readiness in one
   direction.






Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


4.  Rejected Approaches

   In a rejected approach, the ingress LSR uses LSP-Ping, exactly as
   described in [RFC4379] to verify LSP readiness to carry traffic.
   This approach was rejected for the following reasons.

   While an ingress LSR can control its control plane overhead due to
   LSP Ping, an egress LSR has no such control.  This is because each
   ingress LSR can, on its own, control the rate of the LSP Ping
   originated by the LSR, while an egress LSR must respond to all the
   LSP Pings originated by various ingresses.  Furthermore, when an MPLS
   Echo Request reaches an egress LSR it is sent to the control plane of
   the egress LSR, which makes egress LSR processing overhead of LSP
   Ping well above the overhead of its data plane (MPLS/IP forwarding).
   These factors make LSP Ping problematic as a tool for detecting LSP
   readiness to carry traffic when dealing with a large number of LSPs.

   By contrast, LSP Self-ping does not consume any control plane
   resources at the egress LSR, and relies solely on the data plane of
   the egress LSR, making it more suitable as a tool for checking LSP
   readiness when dealing with a large number of LSPs.

   In another rejected approach, the ingress LSR does not verify LSP
   readiness.  Alternatively, it sets a timer when it receives an RSVP
   RESV message and does not forward traffic through the LSP until the
   timer expires.  This approach was rejected because it is impossible
   to determine the optimal setting for this timer.  If the timer value
   is set too low, it does not prevent black-holing.  If the timer value
   is set too high, it slows down the process of LSP signalling and
   setup.

   Moreover, the above-mentioned timer is configured on a per-router
   basis.  However, its optimum value is determined by a network-wide
   behavior.  Therefore, changes in the network could require changes to
   the value of the timer, making the optimal setting of this timer a
   moving target.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.








Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


6.  Security Considerations

   MPLS Echo messages are easily forged.  Therefore, an attacker can
   send the ingress LSR a forged MPLS Echo message, causing the ingress
   LSR to terminate the LSP Self-ping session prematurely.

7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Yakov Rekhter, Ravi Singh, Eric Rosen, Eric Osborne and
   Nobo Akiya for their contributions to this document.

8.  Normative References

   [RFC0768]  Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol", STD 6, RFC 768,
              August 1980.

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September
              1981.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC3032]  Rosen, E., Tappan, D., Fedorkow, G., Rekhter, Y.,
              Farinacci, D., Li, T., and A. Conta, "MPLS Label Stack
              Encoding", RFC 3032, January 2001.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4379]  Kompella, K. and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol
              Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", RFC 4379,
              February 2006.

   [RFC4594]  Babiarz, J., Chan, K., and F. Baker, "Configuration
              Guidelines for DiffServ Service Classes", RFC 4594, August
              2006.

   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007.

   [RFC5884]  Aggarwal, R., Kompella, K., Nadeau, T., and G. Swallow,
              "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) for MPLS Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5884, June 2010.







Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   [RFC6335]  Cotton, M., Eggert, L., Touch, J., Westerlund, M., and S.
              Cheshire, "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
              Procedures for the Management of the Service Name and
              Transport Protocol Port Number Registry", BCP 165, RFC
              6335, August 2011.

Authors' Addresses

   Ravi Torvi
   Juniper Networks

   Email: rtorvi@juniper.net


   Ron Bonica
   Juniper Networks

   Email: rbonica@juniper.net


   Ina Minei
   Google, Inc.
   1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   U.S.A.

   Email: inaminei@google.com


   Michael Conn
   Verizon

   Email: michael.e.conn@verizon.com


   Dante Pacella
   Verizon

   Email: dante.j.pacella@verizon.com


   Luis Tomotaki
   Verizon

   Email: luis.tomotaki@verizon.com






Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                LSP Self-Ping                February 2015


   Mark Wygant
   Verizon

   Email: mark.wygant@verizon.com















































Torvi, et al.            Expires August 17, 2015               [Page 10]