



Network Working Group                                          B. Harris
Internet-Draft                                                 June 2005
Expires: December 3, 2005


   Improved Arcfour Modes for the Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer
                                Protocol
                   draft-harris-ssh-arcfour-fixes-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 3, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document specifies methods of using the Arcfour cipher in the
   Secure Shell (SSH) protocol which mitigate the weakness of the
   cipher's key-scheduling algorithm.

1.  Introduction

   Secure Shell (SSH) [I-D.ietf-secsh-architecture] is a secure remote-
   login protocol.  It allows for the use of an extensible variety of



Harris                  Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Improved Arcfour Modes for SSH            June 2005


   symmetric cipher algorithms to provide confidentiality for data in
   transit.  One of the algorithms specified in the base protocol is
   "arcfour", which specifies the use of Arcfour (also known as RC4), a
   fast stream cipher.  As [I-D.ietf-secsh-transport] says, though,
   "Arcfour (and RC4) has problems with weak keys, and should be used
   with caution."  These problems are described in more detail in
   [MANTIN01], along with a recommendation to discard the first 1536
   bytes of keystream so as to ensure that the cipher's internal state
   is thoroughly mixed.  This document specifies new cipher algorithms
   for SSH which follow this recommendation.

2.  Conventions Used in this Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Applicability Statement

   Implementations of Arcfour are typically slightly faster and much
   smaller than those of any other encryption algorithm currently
   defined for SSH.  This must be balanced, though, against the known
   security problems with Arcfour described in Section 5.  In most
   cases, where speed and code size aren't critical issues, the
   algorithms specified by [I-D.ietf-secsh-newmodes] should be used
   instead.

4.  Algorithm Definitions

   The "arcfour128" algorithm is the RC4 cipher as described in
   [SCHNEIER], using a 128-bit key.  The first 1536 bytes of keystream
   generated by the cipher MUST be discarded, with the first byte of the
   first encrypted packet being encrypted using the 1537th byte of
   keystream.

   The "arcfour256" algorithm is the same, but using a 256-bit key.

5.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations in [I-D.ietf-secsh-architecture] apply.

   The discarded bytes of keystream MUST be kept secret and MUST NOT be
   transmitted over the network.  The contents of these bytes could
   reveal information about the key.

   There are two classes of attack on Arcfour described in [MIRINOV].
   Strong distinguishers distinguish an Arcfour keystream from
   randomness given the start of the stream, and are defended against by



Harris                  Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Improved Arcfour Modes for SSH            June 2005


   the algorithm defined in this document.  Weak distinguishers can
   operate on any part of the keystream, and the best ones, described in
   [FMcG] and [MANTIN05], can use data from multiple different
   keystreams.  A consequence of this is that encrypting the same data
   (for instance, a password) sufficiently many times in separate
   Arcfour keystreams can be sufficient to leak information about it to
   an adversary.  It is thus RECOMMENDED that Arcfour (either in the
   form described here or that described in [I-D.ietf-secsh-
   architecture]) not be used for high-volume password-authenticated
   connections.

6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to assign the Encryption Algorithm Names
   "arcfour128" and "arcfour256" in accordance with [I-D.ietf-secsh-
   assignednumbers].

7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-secsh-architecture]
              Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, "SSH Protocol Architecture",
              draft-ietf-secsh-architecture-22 (work in progress),
              March 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-secsh-transport]
              Lonvick, C., "SSH Transport Layer Protocol",
              draft-ietf-secsh-transport-24 (work in progress),
              March 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-secsh-assignednumbers]
              Lehtinen, S. and C. Lonvick, "SSH Protocol Assigned
              Numbers", draft-ietf-secsh-assignednumbers-12 (work in
              progress), March 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-secsh-newmodes]
              Bellare, M., "SSH Transport Layer Encryption Modes",
              draft-ietf-secsh-newmodes-04 (work in progress),
              April 2005.

   [SCHNEIER]
              Schneier, B., "Applied Cryptography Second Edition:
              protocols algorithms and source in code in C", John Wiley
              and Sons, New York, NY, 1996.



Harris                  Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Improved Arcfour Modes for SSH            June 2005


7.2  Informative References

   [FMcG]     Fluhrer, S. and D. McGrew, "Statistical Analysis of the
              Alleged RC4 Keystream Generator", The Proceedings of the
              Fast Software Encryption Workshop 2000, 2000,
              <http://www.mindspring.com/~dmcgrew/rc4-03.pdf>.

   [MANTIN01]
              Mantin, I., "Analysis of the Stream Cipher RC4", M.Sc.
              Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science, 2001, <http://
              www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~itsik/RC4/Papers/Mantin1.zip>.

   [MIRINOV]  Mirinov, I., "(Not So) Random Shuffles of RC4",
              CRYPTO 2002, 2002.

   [MANTIN05]
              Mantin, I., "Predicting and Distinguishing Attacks on RC4
              Keystream Generator", EUROCRYPT 2005, 2005.


Author's Address

   Ben Harris
   37 Milton Road
   CAMBRIDGE  CB4 1XA
   GB

   Email: bjh21@bjh21.me.uk

Trademark notice

   "RC4" and "SSH" are registered trademarks in the United States.



















Harris                  Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Improved Arcfour Modes for SSH            June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Harris                  Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 5]


