
Telephone Number Mapping (enum)                              D. Ranalli
                                                                D. Peek
                                                              R. Walter
Internet Draft Document:                                      NetNumber
<draft-ranalli-peek-walter-ENUM-T1roles-01.txt>           February 2001
Category: Informational 
 
 
                            Tier-1 ENUM System 
                        Roles and Responsibilities 
    
 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
1. Abstract 
    
   This document describes the actors in a global Tier-1 ENUM system 
   and the roles and responsibilities that each of the actors fulfills.  
   In this context, a "Tier-1 ENUM system" refers to an Internet 
   directory system for registering E164 telephone numbers in a DNS 
   top-level domain as described in RFC 2916.  The population of NAPTR 
   records with URI's in a Tier-2 ENUM system as described in RFC 2916 
   is not discussed in this draft. 
    
    
    












Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        1 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
 
    
3. Introduction 
    
   Starting with the assignment of an E164 telephone number to an end-
   user ("Subscriber"), the roles and responsibilities of various 
   actors in a global Tier-1 ENUM System are described.    
    
   Please send comments on this document to the ENUM working group or 
   directly to Doug Ranalli at dranalli@netnumber.com 
    
 
4. Actors In The Tier-1 ENUM System  
    
4.1 E.164 Administration System 
    
   Well-defined process within the Public Switched Telephone Network 
   (PSTN) for defining dialing plans, creating E164 numbers, and 
   distributing blocks of numbers to network operators and telephone 
   service providers.   In the context of a Tier-1 ENUM System, the key 
   players within the E164 Administration System include the following: 
    
   - International Telecommunications Union (ITU):  Defines country 
     codes. 
 
   - National PSTN Regulatory Agencies:  Provide regulatory control 
     over the PSTN numbering system within a country or region. 
 
   - National Numbering Plan Administrators:  Administer a numbering 
     plan within a country or region under contract from a National 
     PSTN Regulatory Agency.  Create area-codes/city-codes.  Distribute 
     blocks of numbers to network operators and telephone service 
     providers. 
 
   - Number Portability Administrator:  Administers the number 
     portability process within a country or region under contract from 
     a National PSTN Regulatory Agency.  Provides mechanisms for 
     shifting control of individual E164 numbers from one Telephone 
     Number Provider to another based on Subscriber choice. 
 
 
4.2 Telephone Number Provider (TNP)   
 
  - E164 Control:  Entity with contractual control over a block of 
     E164 numbers and/or a set of ported E164 numbers via the E164 

Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        2 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
     Administration process.   Example:  Network operator, application 
     service provider, PSTN service provider, or their agents or 
     assignees. 
 
  - E164 Sub-allocation or Assignment:  Entity that sub-allocates or 
     assigns E164 numbers received from the E164 Administration System 
     to Subscribers. 
 
  - Tier-1 ENUM Service Disconnect:  Entity with authority, but not 
     the obligation, to cancel Tier-1 ENUM service for a given E164 
     number if the TNP has revoked a Subscriber's assignment of the 
     number for any reason.  Example: TNP disconnects a Subscriber's 
     telephone service and puts an E164 number back into a pool for 
     future assignment to a new Subscriber.  The Registry disconnect 
     right applies to E164 numbers under contractual control of the TNP 
     through the E164 Administration allocation and sub-allocation 
     process.      
 
  - Dialing Plan Change Updates:  Entity with the authority, but not 
     the obligation, to submit dialing plan changes to the Tier-1 ENUM 
     Registry relating to E164 numbers under the control of the TNP via 
     the E164 Administration Process.   
 
 
4.3 Subscriber  
   
  - Individual or Enterprise that has been allocated or assigned an 
     E164 number by a TNP and as a result, has day-to-day control over 
     an E164 number.    
 
 

4.4 Registrant 
 
  - Subscriber, or an Agent (i.e.: service provider) acting on behalf 
     of a Subscriber, that registers an E164 number with a Tier-1 ENUM 
     service through an ENUM Registrar.   
   
  - Agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the Tier-1 ENUM 
     "Registration Agreement".  Warrants that the e164 number being 
     registered is under the day-to-day control of the Subscriber who's 
     number is being registered. 
   
  - Agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of the Tier-1 ENUM 
     "Conflict Resolution Process". 
 
 
4.5 Tier-1 ENUM Registry ("Registry") 
 
   Entity that operates a Tier-1 ENUM directory service.  
   Responsibilities include: 
    

Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        3 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
   - Delegation Services:  Delegation of a complete E164 name to the 
     appropriate Tier-2 ENUM service provider.  
 
   - Registrant Database:  Publicly accessible database with minimal 
     information about Registrants to be used to identify potential 
     registration conflicts.   
 
   - Conflict Resolution:  Service provided by the Registry for 
     resolving conflict between two Registrants over valid control of 
     an E164 number that has been registered in the Tier-1 Registry. 
 
   - Validation Policy:  Definition of the acceptable mechanisms that 
     Registrars may employ for validating Registrant authority over an 
     E164 number before submitting a registration in the Tier-1 ENUM 
     service.   
 
   - Dialing Plan Changes:  Service provided by the Registry for 
     modifying existing registrations to reflect dialing plan changes 
     submitted by authorized TNP's.   
 
 
4.6 ENUM Registrar ("Registrar")   
 
  - Entity that has been authorized by the Tier-1 ENUM Registry 
     operator to register E164 names and associated NS/A records into 
     the Tier-1 ENUM Registry.   
 
  - Registrant Validation:  Responsible for complying with the 
     validation policies defined by the Tier-1 Registry operator for 
     validating that the E164 numbers being registered are under the 
     day-to-day control of the Subscriber being represented by the 
     Registrant.    
 
  - TNP Validation:  Responsible for validating the identity of any 
     TNP requesting disconnection of Tier-1 ENUM services, or 
     requesting dialing plan changes for Tier-1 ENUM services, to 
     confirm that the TNP has contractual control over the E164 
     number(s) in question via the E164 Administration process.   
 
 
 

 
4.7 Tier-2 ENUM Provider 
 
  - Entity that provides Tier-2 ENUM services which involves the 
     registration of URI's in DNS NAPTR resource records as defined in 
     RFC 2916.  The full scope of services provided by a Tier-2 ENUM 
     provider is outside the scope of this Internet-Draft. 
    
    


Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        4 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
5. Entity Relationship Diagram _ Tier-1 ENUM System 
    
    
                 ------------------- 
                 |      E.164      | 
                 | Administration  | 
                 |     System      | 
                 ------------------- 
                          | 
                          | 
                          V 
                 ------------------- 
                 |    Telephone    |---- 
                 | Number Provider |   | 
                 -------------------   | 
                          |            | 
                          |            | 
                          V            | 
                 -------------------   | 
                 |    Registrant   |   | 
                 |  (Subscriber or |   | 
                 |      Agent)     |   | 
                 -------------------   | 
                          |            | 
                          |            | 
                          V            | 
                 -------------------   | 
                 |       ENUM      |   | 
                 |     Registrar   |<--- 
                 ------------------- 
                          | 
                          | 
                          V 
                 ------------------- 
                 |    Tier-1 ENUM  | 
                 |      Registry   | 
                 ------------------- 
                          | 
                          | 
                          V 
                 ------------------- 
                 |    Tier-2 ENUM  | 
                 |      Provider   | 
                 ------------------- 
    
    







Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        5 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
6. Typical Use Cases 
 
 
6.1 ENUM Registration 
 
   Registrant (Subscriber or an Agent acting on behalf of a Subscriber) 
   registers an E164 number with a Tier-1 ENUM service through an ENUM 
   Registrar by providing the E164 number and address (NS/A records) of 
   the appropriate Tier-2 ENUM Provider to the Registrar.   
    
   Registrar validates the identity of the Registrant to confirm day-
   to-day control over the E164 number being registered.   
    
   Registrar submits the E164 number, the NS/A records for the 
   appropriate Tier-2 ENUM Provider, and the required Registrant 
   information to the Registry. 
    
   The Registry either accepts or rejects the registration.  If the 
   registration is rejected due to a conflict over control of an E164 
   number, the Registry initiates the Conflict Resolution Process.  
    
    
6.2 Conflict Resolution 
 
   Conflict occurs in the Tier-1 ENUM registration process when two 
   Registrants claim day-to-day control over the same E164 number.   
    
   The Conflict Resolution service provided by the Registry is utilized 
   by ENUM Registrars to resolve registration conflicts. 
 

 
6.3 Service Termination By TNP 
 
   TNP terminates a Subscriber's service and reclaims day-to-day 
   control over an E164 number. 
    
   TNP makes a request to an ENUM Registrar to terminate Tier-1 ENUM 
   service for the E164 number. 
    
   Registrar validates that the TNP is the entity with contractual 
   control over the E164 number as defined by the E164 Administration 
   System.  
    
   The Registrar communicates the termination request to the Registry. 
    
   The Registry terminates service and sends an e-mail message to the 
   Registrant explaining the reason for the termination and the name of 
   the TNP that terminated the service.   
      
 
7. Security Considerations 

Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        6 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
    
   Tier-1 ENUM registry operators have the responsibility to protect 
   physical and network resources, as well as, to ensure the validity 
   of the DNS and its associated information. General ENUM users must 
   be assured that they will receive valid information, and that they 
   will be allowed access to this data without interruption. Registrars 
   that have authority to manage entries must be assured that they are 
   updating data in an authentic registry, have uninterrupted access to 
   the data and are allowed to update the data after providing valid 
   credentials.  When preparing to prevent security breaches, the 
   following types of attacks must be considered: 
    
   Impersonation:  Registrars that attempt to add and update entries 
                   must be able to unequivocally prove their identity 
                   to the registry. Spoofing or misrepresentation of  
                   the identity of the originator of the information 
                   could allow unauthorized updates to the database. 
                   Invalid or missing data could in turn cause 
                   malicious redirection and denial of service. 
    
   Eavesdropping:  If the privacy of the information that is being 
                   transmitted is compromised, then registrar-sensitive 
                   information such as the registrar's username and 
                   password, could be obtained by a malicious intruder. 
    
   Data Tampering: During the transmission of directory records, valid 
                   URI's could be replaced by invalid URI's, in turn 
                   causing malicious redirection as discussed below.  
                   Since a higher percentage of security breaches such 
                   as data tampering are caused by "insiders", physical 
                   and network security must be addressed. 
    
   Malicious       Malicious entries into the database will cause users 
   Redirection:    to retrieve fraudulent or damaging content. This can 
                   be accomplished by either data tampering or server 
                   impersonation whereby a malicious server is  
                   masquerading as a registry server. 
      
   Denial of       There are several ways that a client could be denied 
   Service:        access to the desired registry resources.  First, a 
                   malicious intruder could remove data from DNS, thus 
                   making it impossible for the client to access the 
                   information. Secondly, the system could be flooded 
                   with bogus requests that prevent communications. 
                   And finally, by breaching the physical security of 
                   the system, for example, by cutting off electricity 
                   to the facility. 
    
   The SSL protocol is not an IETF Standards Track protocol. However, 
   it is widely available and considered a defacto-standard for 
   securely transmitting data over the Internet. The Transport Layer 
   Security protocol is a Standards Track protocol that provides SSL 
   v3.0 compatibility features and will be used when widely available. 
Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        7 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
    
 
8. References 
 
   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",  
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14,RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [3]  A. Brown, "Telephone Number Mapping", draft-enum-rqmts-01-
   txt,June 2000. 
    
   [4]  P. Faltstrom, "E.164 number and DNS," RFC 2916, September 2000. 
    
    
9. Acknowledgements 
 
   We would like to extend our special thanks to Lynette Khirallah for 
   her expert advice on security considerations. 
    
    
    
    
10. Author's Addresses 
    
   Douglas Ranalli 
     NetNumber 
     650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
     Lowell, MA  01854 
     Phone: +1-978-454-4210 x22 
     Email: dranalli@netnumber.com 
    
   David P. Peek 
     NetNumber 
     650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
     Lowell, MA  01854 
     Phone: +1-603-362-4315 
     Email: dpeek@netnumber.com 
    
   Robert Walter 
     NetNumber 
     650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
     Lowell, MA 01854 
     Phone: +1-978-454-4210 x24 
     Email: rwalter@netnumber.com  
     
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 

Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        8 
                Tier-1 ENUM Roles and Responsibilities   February 2001  
 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
 














Ranalli, et al          Expires - August 2001                        9 
