
     Internet Engineering Task Force                             Mike Pierce 
     Internet Draft                                                    Artel 
      
     draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-req-00.txt                 Don Choi 
     October 2002                                                       DISA 
     Expires April 2003 
      
      
          Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP 
                  draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-req-00.txt 
      
     Status of this memo 
         
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
        all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
        Drafts. 
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
        at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
         
        To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
         
         
     Copyright 
      
        Copyright (C) Internet Society 2002. All rights reserved. 
        Reproduction or translation of the complete document, but not of 
        extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted. 
         
     Abstract 
      
        Assured Service refers to the set of capabilities used to ensure 
        that mission critical communications are setup and remain connected. 
        This memo describes the requirements for such capabilities in 
        support of specific networks such as those used by the US military 
        and government. 
      
         
         
                                Table of Contents 
      
     0.  Changes............................................................2 
     1.  Introduction.......................................................3 
     2.  Background.........................................................4 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 1] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

     3.  High Level Requirements............................................5 
     4.  Functional Requirements............................................5 
       4.1.  Precedence Level Marking.......................................5 
       4.2.  Authentication/Authorization...................................6 
       4.3.  Preferential Treatment.........................................6 
       4.4.  Diversion if Not Answered......................................7 
       4.5.  Notifications to Preempted Party...............................7 
       4.6.  Acknowledge by Preempted Party.................................7 
       4.7.  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure............7 
       4.8.  Accounting.....................................................7 
       4.9.  Call Control Signaling Precedence..............................8 
       4.10. Interworking...................................................8 
     5.  Current Situation..................................................8 
       5.1.  IPv4...........................................................8 
       5.2.  DiffServ.......................................................8 
       5.3.  IntServ/RSVP...................................................9 
       5.4.  MPLS...........................................................9 
       5.5.  SIP............................................................9 
     6.  Possible Approaches...............................................10 
       6.1.  Precedence Level Marking......................................10 
       6.2.  Authentication/Authorization..................................11 
         6.2.1.  Architecture..............................................11 
         6.2.2.  Authentication Procedures.................................12 
         6.2.3.  Authorization Procedures..................................12 
       6.3.  Preferential Treatment........................................12 
       6.4.  Diversion if Not Answered.....................................13 
       6.5.  Notification to Preempted Party...............................13 
       6.6.  Acknowledge by Preempted Party................................13 
       6.7.  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure...........13 
       6.8.  Accounting....................................................13 
       6.9.  Call Control Signaling Precedence.............................14 
       6.10. Interworking..................................................14 
     7.  Security Considerations...........................................15 
       7.1.  Authentication/authorization of User Access...................15 
       7.2.  Security of Signaling Information.............................15 
       7.3.  Security of Routing Data......................................16 
     8.  IANA Considerations...............................................16 
     9.  References........................................................16 
     10. Authors' Addresses................................................17 
         
         
     0.   Changes 
         
        This draft was originally submitted under SIPPING. This revision is 
        being resubmitted to IEPREP in order to ensure that the Assured 
        Service requirements are considered along with those of the related 
        IEPS discussions 
         
        (SIPPING) 00 Original draft 
         
        (SIPPING) 01 Indicated informative material which would not be a 
        part of final. Moved some to Annex. 
          
        (SIPPING) 02 Removed material to draft-pierce-sipping-pref-treat-
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 2] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        examples-00 and draft-pierce-sipping-assured-service-arch-00. 
        Added requirement to maintain records of use of service. 
         
        (IEPREP) 00 
        .   Updated references. 
        .   Added additional requirements related to preferential treatment 
            in 4.3. 
        .   Added requirement in 4.8 for accounting records. 
        .   Added requirement in 4.9 that preferential treatment must be 
            applied to call control signaling as well as to voice packets. 
        .   Added requirement in 4.10 for interworking between Assured 
            Service and other priority schemes (e.g., IEPS) 
      
      
     1.   Introduction 
         
        Throughout many decades of evolution of the telephony network and 
        its supporting protocols, there has been a need to provide special 
        services to a limited subset of the users and calls within a network 
        or domain in order to ensure completion of important calls. Examples 
        of this need have been in support of emergency traffic for natural 
        disasters, network restoration traffic, and high priority traffic in 
        a military network. Provision of the required capabilities with the 
        signaling protocols and within the switching systems has been 
        defined in a number of national and international standards, most 
        notably a service referred to as Multi-Level Precedence and 
        Preemption as defined in an American National Standard [T1.619] in 
        the US and in corresponding ITU-T Recommendations [I.255.3, Q.735.3, 
        and Q.955.3]. In addition, a service called High Probability of 
        Completion (HPC) was defined in [T1.631] and, most recently, two 
        ITU-T Recommendations define the requirements for the International 
        Emergency Preference Scheme (IEPS) [E.106] and the International 
        Emergency Multimedia Service (IEMS) [F.706]. 
         
        Other drafts submitted to the IETF have addressed aspects of IEPS. 
        Some of these are [Folts], which presents the functional 
        requirements for the Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS); and 
        [Carlberg], which provides a framework for IEPS for telephony over 
        IP. 
         
        MLPP was the solution to providing Assured Service capabilities 
        within the circuit switched environment. It is essential that 
        equivalent Assured Service capabilities are defined and implemented 
        for the packet-based, connectionless environment of the Internet, 
        and specifically SIP. Without these capabilities, SIP can not be 
        used for those applications which require such capabilities, and is 
        less than optimal for many other uses. 
         
        This memo builds on these references and identifies the specific 
        requirements for Assured Service capabilities in support of these 
        specific types of environments.  The term "Assured Service" is used 
        to refer to the required capabilities, rather than the previous term 
        of MLPP or the related but different IEPS, since the envisioned set 
        of capabilities and protocols to achieve them are not expected to be 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 3] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        exactly the same as those other services. 
         
        Although these requirements are derived from previous military and 
        government applications, many of the same requirements and 
        capabilities may be applied for non-military or government networks, 
        for example, in support of commercial network restoration efforts. A 
        presentation in the TEWG during the August 2001 meeting demonstrated 
        real-life situations from the past in which total network failures 
        required extensive efforts, presumably including communication via 
        other unaffected networks, to bring the affected network back on 
        line. If one considered a situation in which the very network which 
        had failed was needed to carry the network management traffic 
        required to get it back on line, it would be hard to imagine how it 
        could ever be brought back up in the face of overwhelming customer 
        attempts. Capabilities would be required to give priority to the 
        network management traffic, even to the extent of blocking all non-
        emergency traffic for a period of time. 
         
         
     2.   Background 
         
        In the circuit switched environment, specific circuits or channels 
        were used for each call. These were typically 64 kbit/s channels 
        which were a part of a TDM transmission structure. Later 
        developments used packet/cell based transport instead of dedicated 
        64 kbit/s channels, however, the effect was the same. There was 
        still a dedicated transport capacity assigned for each call. 
         
        Assured Service in the circuit switched environment may be provided 
        by one or more of the following techniques. Note that the 
        capabilities included within IEPS [E.106], are included here for 
        reference but not dealt with further in this memo. They are further 
        dealt with in [Folts]: 
         
        -   Giving priority to return of dial tone (IEPS). 
             
        -   Marking of signaling messages for better handling, for example, 
            being last to be dropped in case of congestion in the signaling 
            network (HPC). 
             
        -   Extra routing possibilities for higher priority calls. (IEPS) 
             
        -   Exemption from restrictive management controls (IEPS) such as 
            hard-to-reach codes and code gapping. 
             
        -   Reservation of specific facilities (trunks) for higher priority 
            traffic (IEPS). 
             
        -   Higher priority calls may preempt existing lower priority calls, 
            causing the network to release the lower priority call to free 
            up resources for immediate reuse by the higher priority call 
            (MLPP). 
             
        Identification of traffic authorized to use one or more of these 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 4] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        techniques may be via the following methods: 
         
        -   Calls placed from physical lines or devices authorized for its 
            use 
             
        -   Calls placed to specific telephone numbers or blocks of numbers 
             
        -   Entry of a special ID code and PIN from any telephone device 
      
      
     3.   High Level Requirements 
         
        While the existing requirements and capabilities have been developed 
        with the circuit switched environment in mind, many are directly 
        applicable to the packet environment and specifically the Voice over 
        IP application being defined using SIP. Some of the capabilities 
        need to be adapted or modified for application in the packet mode 
        environment. In addition, there will likely be new techniques which 
        can be defined specifically for the SIP case. 
         
        At a high level, the Assured Service requirements can be stated as 
        the need to ensure that mission critical voice-mode calls get set up 
        and remain connected. 
         
        (While this draft focuses on Voice over IP, there should be a 
        consideration of the impact/solutions for other media flows which 
        carry mission critical communication, for example, video and instant 
        messaging. Most of the following requirements can be equally applied 
        to these other media.) 
         
         
     4.   Functional Requirements 
         
        The functional requirements for Assured Service being detailed here 
        are specifically those needed to support the US government 
        requirements, primarily for the military environment. This memo 
        concentrates on those portions mentioned in Section 2 which are 
        derived from the requirements for MLPP as defined in [T1.619]. 
         
        Many of these requirements are the same as, or very similar to, 
        those of the IEPREP work as described in [Baker]. 
         
        The basic requirements can be defined as follows; 
         
     4.1.   Precedence Level Marking 
         
        It must be possible for the originator to select and signal one of 
        five precedence levels for a call, with the call defaulting to the 
        lowest if none is specified. It must be possible to carry this call 
        associated precedence level though the IP network. It must be 
        possible to deliver the originally signaled precedence level to the 
        called party. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 5] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

     4.2.   Authentication/Authorization 
         
        It must be possible to verify that the calling party is authorized 
        to use the Assured Service and the requested precedence level value 
        and to take the appropriate action if the calling party attempts to 
        use a higher level. The preferred action is to reject the call, and 
        send an indication of the reason to the caller. 
         
     4.3.   Preferential Treatment 
         
        It must be possible to provide preferential treatment to higher 
        precedence calls in relation to lower precedence calls. Examples of 
        preferential treatments are: 
         
        -   reservation of network resources for precedence calls 
             
        -   usage of higher Call Acceptance limits for higher precedence 
            calls 
             
        -   preferential queuing of signaling messages based on precedence 
            level 
             
        -   preferential queuing of user data packets based on precedence 
            level 
             
        -   discarding of packets of lower precedence call 
             
        -   preemption of one or more existing calls of lower precedence 
            level 
             
        -   preemption of some of the resources being used by a call of 
            lower precedence level 
             
        -   preemption of the reservation of resources being held for other 
            traffic 
         
        The provision of preferential treatment must be in place before the 
        need to use it occurs. That is, initiation of the appropriate 
        measures must not require manual intervention or configuration of 
        network entities, for example, establishment of dedicated bandwidth 
        for high priority traffic. It is not desirable for preferential 
        treatment to be provided through any scheme of dedicated or pre-
        reserved bandwidth or resources. In those cases in which such 
        dedicated bandwidth or resources for a higher priority level must be 
        used, when such dedicated or pre-reserved bandwidth or resources 
        have been consumed by the high priority traffic, further traffic of 
        that same high priority must be provided the same treatment as the 
        next lower priority level. 
         
        Possible methods of providing Preferential Treatment using the 
        provisions of this memo, as well as other existing IETF protocols, 
        are described in [Pierce1]. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 6] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

     4.4.   Diversion if Not Answered 
         
        If a precedence call (one higher that the lowest level) does not 
        answer within a designated time or the called party is busy with a 
        call of equal or higher precedence such that an indication of the 
        new call can not be given to the intended called party, the call 
        must be diverted to a predetermined alternate party. In general, 
        this must operate similar to a normal "Call Forwarding on No Answer" 
        service. 
         
     4.5.   Notifications to Preempted Party 
         
        All preempted parties must be provided with a distinct notification 
        informing them that their call has been preempted. 
         
     4.6.   Acknowledge by Preempted Party 
         
        When an existing call is preempted for delivery of a higher 
        precedence call to the same party, after the party is notified that 
        a new call is being presented, the party must acknowledge the 
        preemption before the new call is connected. That is, there must be 
        a positive acknowledgement before any audio information is 
        transferred in either direction. 
      
     4.7.   Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure 
         
        Although protection is not actually an integral part of the Assured 
        Service functionality, it is specifically identified here since this 
        capability is always required in those networks which are assumed to 
        be the primary users of Assured Service. 
         
        It is required that sensitive information not be made available to 
        non-secure portions of the network or to any non-secure network 
        through which the traffic passes. It is also important that it not 
        be accessible by users connected to the network. This non-disclosure 
        requirement especially applies to information which is used to 
        control link state routing protocols based on knowledge of the 
        current traffic load at each precedence level on each route. 
         
        Further, it is desirable that the precedence information regarding 
        each call (as well as the other information such as calling/called 
        party identity) be protected from disclosure to the greatest extent 
        possible. 
      
     4.8.   Accounting 
         
        Proper administration of the Assured Service capability requires 
        that use of the service can be reviewed after the fact for potential 
        abuse. Therefore, it is required that appropriate records be kept of 
        calls made, including the calling and called parties' identity, time 
        of the call, and the precedence level used. This is similar to the 
        requirements for Call Detail Recording (CDR) for billing purposes 
        for other services in a commercial environment. 
         
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 7] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

     4.9.   Call Control Signaling Precedence 
         
        It is necessary to apply preferential treatment to the call control 
        signaling, since it competes for the same transport resources as the 
        voice packets. It is essential that: 
         
        -   the call control signaling does not adversely affect the voice 
            (e.g., by introducing excessive packet delay variation due to 
            extremely long messages). 
             
        -   the voice traffic does not significantly delay important call 
            control signaling (e.g., by preventing release messages from 
            getting through). 
      
     4.10.  Interworking 
         
        Assured Service calls will need to interwork with other priority 
        schemes such as the one defined for IEPS []. This includes the 
        following two cases: 
         
        - both types of traffic may exist in a single network, for example, 
        an IEPS call may be originated from within a military network which 
        also supports "Assured Service" calls. Procedures to determine the 
        relative priority are required. 
         
        - a network which provides "Assured Service" needs to support 
        interworking of calls to and from a network which provides another 
        scheme such as IEPS. Mapping between the priority values must be 
        supported. 
         
         
     5.   Current Situation 
         
        Current support for Assured Service within various IETF defined 
        protocols and ongoing initiatives is not considered to be 
        sufficient. 
         
     5.1.   IPv4 
         
        Although support for the traditional five precedence levels was 
        included in the TOS field of IPv4 from the earliest days, support 
        for this field is not universal, and it only provides packet level 
        priority. It does not provide call setup priority or control of call 
        retention. 
      
     5.2.   DiffServ 
         
        Within DiffServ, Assured Forwarding defined in RFC 2597 provides 
        four classes and three drop precedences for each class. One of these 
        classes could be used for the signaling messages for session 
        establishment and release. The multiple drop precedences could be 
        used for various signaling messages, as is being done with the 
        equivalent call control messages in ISUP for SS#7. 
         
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 8] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        Expedited Forwarding defined in RFC 3246 is intended for voice, but 
        it treats all such voice packets the same. It does not define 
        multiple drop precedences as AF does. 
         
     5.3.   IntServ/RSVP 
         
        Although RSVP includes mention of preemption of existing 
        reservations in favor of other higher priority ones, it does not 
        provide detailed procedures for doing so. In principle, it should be 
        straightforward to do so. However, it is not believed that the 
        procedures required for establishment of a path using RSVP, and the 
        additional procedures that would be necessary for preemption of an 
        existing path, would allow this to be useful for the provision of 
        Assured Service capabilities to individual calls. 
         
     5.4.   MPLS 
         
        Since MPLS is fundamentally a means to emulate circuit-mode 
        operation by establishment of a "path" which then functions like a 
        "connection", the principles of priority and preemption could be 
        applied to the setup and retention of this path the same as they are 
        in the circuit-mode environment. RFC 2702 describes the requirements 
        for such capabilities as applied to "traffic trunks". However, it 
        uses the term "traffic trunk" to refer to a facility which is 
        established to carry an aggregate of traffic, i.e., many telephone 
        calls. This is the equivalent of a "trunk group" in standard 
        telephony terminology [T1.523]. Because of the extensive procedures 
        that are required to establish and remove such a Label Switched 
        Path, it is believed that this prevents MPLS from being used to 
        setup paths for individual calls. 
         
        MPLS may be applicable for the establishment of the equivalent of 
        dedicated trunk groups between switching entities. Each of these 
        "trunk groups" or "traffic trunks" could exist to support a specific 
        precedence level of traffic between two points and could be setup 
        using the procedures defined in [RFC3212] or those in [RFC3209]. 
        These documents allow the signaling of the required five levels of 
        precedence as well as separate setup and holding priorities. 
         
     5.5.   SIP 
         
        SIP [RFC3261] defines four tokens for priority levels, however, they 
        are not intended to be used to control call setup nor do they equate 
        to the levels required for Assured Service. 
         
        The proposed Resource Priority Header [Polk] provides for the five 
        precedence levels required for per call marking. 
         
        Security is discussed in [RFC3261] and many drafts, but it has been 
        recognized in various Working Group discussions that security for 
        all aspects of call control needs to be considered in a unified 
        manner. Security for each individual component of call setup and 
        release can not be designed separately. 
         
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                  [Page 9] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        The procedure being proposed for authorization of call set-up and 
        media allocation [SIP-CALL-AUTH] appears to be too time consuming to 
        expect it to occur each time a user attempts to place a telephone 
        call, especially a high-priority one. The probable delay in 
        establishing this authorization would be contrary to the goals and 
        requirements for Assured Service. Use of this type of procedure 
        would require that preferential treatments also be applied to all 
        message interactions and proxy processing of the sequence of 
        messages required for the authorization. Overloads of the proxies 
        responsible for the Call Authorization would prevent or unacceptably 
        delay setup of the high precedence call. 
         
         
     6.   Possible Approaches 
         
        The following identify possible approaches to meeting the 
        requirements stated above. This section is included in the draft to 
        stimulate discussion on ways of meeting the requirements, but is not 
        expected to be included in the final version when it is advanced 
        toward RFC status. 
         
     6.1.   Precedence Level Marking 
         
        The approaches to be used for precedence level marking are different 
        for each of the following cases: 
         
        A. Individual call setup: 
         
        There needs to be a definition of a field to be carried in SIP which 
        identifies the precedence levels of 0-4 of the call setup. 
        Currently, the US military uses five values which have specific 
        meanings (as currently defined in MLPP) and the standard may reflect 
        these meanings. However, it is preferable to provide easy support 
        for other network applications which utilize a different number of 
        levels or different meanings. 
         
        The specification may allow more than 5 levels. There is no need for 
        the 65k levels defined in [RFC2751] nor is there currently a 
        requirement to carry the separate preemption and defending 
        priorities of [RFC2751] or the separate setup and holding priorities 
        proposed in [RFC3212] and [RFC3209]. 
         
        [Polk] is expected to result in a specification which satisfies this 
        requirement. 
         
        B. Packet forwarding: 
         
        To support preferential treatment on the packet transfer level, the 
        current lack of any priority mechanism within the single Expedited 
        Forwarding class of DiffServ will need additional capabilities to 
        provide the required functionality. Just as Assured Forwarding 
        includes multiple drop precedences for each class, there should be 
        multiple drop precedences for EF, which is intended for voice. In 
        fact, voice transport is more tolerable to dropped packets than many 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 10] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        of the intended uses of AF classes.  
         
        (It should be emphasized again that such multiple "drop precedence" 
        levels for EF would not provide an actual priority forwarding 
        mechanisms per packet, e.g., priority queuing of some packets ahead 
        of other within that EF class, just as there is no such capability 
        included within the AF PHB definition.) 
         
        In order to provide the required preferential treatments for the 
        five call precedence levels, it is required to provide five 
        corresponding drop precedence levels for the voice packet handling. 
         
        C. Trunk group establishment: 
         
        For MPLS, RFC 2702 defines the idea of a "traffic trunk" for which a 
        priority may be signaled by the label distribution protocol in order 
        to establish telephony "trunk groups". If LDP is used for label 
        distribution, the priority defined in [RFC3212] should be used. If 
        RSVP is used for label distribution, the priority defined in 
        [RFC3209] should be used. 
         
        It should be noted that the traditional definition of a "trunk 
        group" does not include the notion of a "priority" associated with a 
        trunk group. The priority is only associated with individual calls 
        placed on that trunk group. It is possible that the routing logic 
        could reserve a trunk group for higher priority traffic, but this is 
        also not the normal application, since it wastes facilities during 
        periods when very little high priority traffic exists and it can not 
        support the heavier load of high priority traffic when conditions 
        cause such a high volume. 
         
     6.2.   Authentication/Authorization 
         
        This draft uses the following definitions from draft-ietf-aaa-
        transport-07: 
         
        -   Authentication: The act of verifying a claimed identity, in the 
            form of a pre-existing label from a mutually known name space, 
            as the originator of a message (message authentication) or as 
            the end-point of a channel (entity authentication). 
             
        -   Authorization: The act of determining if a particular right, 
            such as access to some resource, can be granted to the presenter 
            of a particular credential. 
         
       6.2.1. Architecture 
         
        In many other cases besides call setup for Assured Service it is 
        also necessary to perform authentication and authorization. 
        Appropriate security mechanisms have already been defined which may 
        be used. 
         
        Refer to [pierce2] for a discussion of the architecture required to 
        support the authentication/authorization requirements. 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 11] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

         
         
       6.2.2. Authentication Procedures 
         
        It is essential that a framework for security for SIP be established 
        that allows a security association to be established between a 
        user's terminal and their dedicated SIP proxy at the time of an 
        initial registration. This initial registration, which includes 
        authentication, may require an extensive number of messages and 
        interactions with numerous network elements, including a Policy 
        Server, and may require a rather large time as a password is 
        verified. This registration and authentication would normally be 
        done when a terminal is turned on, activated, or places the first 
        call. It is not performed for each call. This reduces the need to 
        apply preferential treatment procedures to the authentication 
        process. 
         
        For the purpose of Assured Service provision, as with other SIP-
        based services, it is expected that Authentication may be performed 
        based on the entry of an ID and password or the use of terminal 
        resident biometrics (e.g., iris scan) so that permission to use the 
        services can be associated with an individual, not a device. Once 
        registration is done, this permission is then associated with the 
        device. 
         
       6.2.3. Authorization Procedures 
         
        Authorization per call must consist only of added fields/information 
        within the normal messages used for basic call setup as defined in 
        [RFC3261]. It should not require additional messages to be added to 
        the call setup sequence. 
         
     6.3.   Preferential Treatment 
         
        The preferential treatments would not be standardized unless they 
        require signaling between network elements. Currently, most 
        treatments envisioned are local matters within a proxy or router. 
        Consideration of preferential treatments depends on the case: 
         
        A. Per call: 
         
        Preemption of existing calls, if done, would require coordination 
        between network elements, and therefore protocol standards, 
        especially if distinct actions are expected to reserve the preempted 
        resources for setup of the higher precedence call. 
         
        It is not expected that network initiated preemption of calls 
        (sessions) within the IP environment will be necessary. Instead, 
        sufficient preferential treatment can be provided by applying higher 
        call admission control limits and lower drop precedence procedures 
        to higher precedence calls. Examples of these procedures are shown 
        in [Pierce1]. 
         
        B. Packet Level: 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 12] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

         
        Current capabilities of DiffServ, with additional code points for 
        drop precedences within the EF class, will provide the necessary 
        preferential treatments regarding voice packet transfer, including 
        indications of discard priority. It will also be necessary to define 
        new capabilities to provide the necessary preferential treatment for 
        call control signaling. 
         
        C. MPLS/RSVP Paths: 
         
        There should be no need for preemption of MPLS/RSVP established 
        traffic trunks (trunk groups) as described in [RFC2702] and 
        [RFC2205]. The required capability should be provided by mechanisms 
        to reduce the traffic engineering limits placed on lower priority 
        trunk groups (even by reducing to zero) to allow the capacity to be 
        used for the establishment of higher priority calls in other traffic 
        engineered traffic trunks. 
         
     6.4.   Diversion if Not Answered 
         
        Diversion should be based on procedures that are developed for a 
        Call Forwarding on No Answer type service. However, it must not be 
        dependent on a timing performed by the original called party. It 
        must be the function of a proxy serving the called party as shown in 
        draft-ietf-sipping-service-examples-02. 
         
     6.5.   Notification to Preempted Party 
         
        Notification to the preempted party should follow whatever is done 
        for notifications for any network-initiated release. Since it is 
        expected that actual call preemption will only be needed in the 
        circuit mode environment, the gateway between it and the IP 
        environment should deal with such preemption by application of the 
        required notification (in-band) to party on the IP side. 
         
     6.6.   Acknowledge by Preempted Party 
         
        Acknowledge by the preempted party (before connection of a new call) 
        should follow the same general procedures as done for normal call 
        presentation, that is, the new call must be acknowledged (answered) 
        before any audio is transferred in either direction between end 
        users. (Note that this does not refer to the transfer of "media" 
        between the terminals, only the transfer of actual audio between the 
        persons using the terminals.) 
      
     6.7.   Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure 
         
        See Section 7. 
         
     6.8.   Accounting 
         
        Call detail records (CDR) can be maintained by the proxy, since it 
        knows which users are authorized to place Assured Service calls and 
        knows when they do. Since not actually done to support billing 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 13] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        functions, it is not expected that a record of call duration is 
        required. 
         
     6.9.   Call Control Signaling Precedence 
         
        Adequate precedence (and preferential treatment) can be provided to 
        call control signaling, with respect to user data carried by EF, by 
        utilization of a single AF class (single queue) for all call control 
        signaling. A weighted queue serving algorithm is then required to 
        guarantee that this queue receives a minimum percentage of the 
        bandwidth of the outgoing facility, if it needs it, regardless of 
        the volume of "higher priority" packers (such as voice in an "EF" 
        queue). It is expected that this percentage for call control 
        signaling would be less than 5% of the total bandwidth. 
         
        To address the situation in which the signaling traffic exceeds the 
        minimum guaranteed and there is excessive traffic, thereby blocking 
        some call control messages, the multiple drop precedence capability 
        of AF must be available. Relative drop precedences for SIP messages 
        can be modeled on those use in ISUP. 
         
        In order to address the other side of the problem - preventing long 
        call control messages from adversely affecting the performance of 
        the voice packets - it may be necessary to utilize a packet 
        segmentation scheme. 
         
     6.10.  Interworking 
         
        Interworking requirements can be met in the following manner: 
         
        Within a single network which supports two or more priority schemes, 
        the network operator will need to determine the relative priority 
        and preferential treatments to apply. For example, the operator may 
        decide that the IEPS priority for "Authorized Emergency" will fall 
        between the Assured Service levels of Immediate and Flash. 
         
        At the gateway between two networks which support two different 
        priority schemes, the operator of the gateway will need to determine 
        the mapping between the two schemes. For example, for the priority 
        schemes defined for Assured Service (in the Defense Switched Network 
        or DSN) and for IEPS [] (in the public network), the mapping could 
        be: 
         
        From DSN           To public network   
        ------------       --------------------- 
        Routine        --> Normal 
        Priority       --> Normal 
        Immediate      --> Normal 
        Flash          --> Authorized Emergency 
        Flash Override --> Authorized Emergency 
         
        and 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 14] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        From Public network      TO DSN 
        --------------------     ------- 
        Normal               --> Routine 
        Authorized Emergency --> Flash 
         
         
     7.   Security Considerations 
         
     7.1.   Authentication/authorization of User Access 
         
        Discussions within SIP continue to identify the need to 
        authenticate/authorize all access to capabilities, since virtually 
        any function could be misused, resulting in harm to the network or 
        to other users. Because Assured Service is intended to provide an 
        authorized user with better service than other users, including the 
        potential of actually preempting resources, it is even more 
        important to authenticate/authorize the user's access to the Assured 
        Service capabilities. However, the requirement definitely exists for 
        all cases, not just Assured Service, therefore the solution is not 
        unique to Assured Service. 
         
        [RFC3261] describes the use of a stateless challenged-based 
        mechanism for authentication in which a proxy server or user agent 
        may challenge the initiator of a request to provide assurance of 
        their identity. For real-time needs such as placing telephone calls, 
        especially those for which Assured Service capabilities are being 
        applied, such a challenge-based system will likely be too slow, or 
        would itself be hampered by the very network condition which 
        requires Assured Service to be applied. Pre-establishment of 
        security associations is required, in order to allow for the timely 
        exchange of security information needed to perform authentication/ 
        authorization of individual actions. 
      
     7.2.   Security of Signaling Information 
         
        The need to protect signaling information from disclosure is 
        independent from the provision of Assured Service. Military/ 
        government networks have long been built on the premise that such 
        information needs to be protected. Bulk encryption of signaling 
        links (as well as the user data channels) between secure switches 
        provided much of this protection. In addition, the Signal Transfer 
        Points of the SS#7 network could be secured against unauthorized 
        access. It should be noted that commercial networks have recognized 
        the need for the same level of protection previously only applied to 
        military networks. 
         
        In the IP environment, the signaling packets as well as the user 
        data traverse many routers and could be accessed by unauthorized 
        persons at any one of them. While the contents of the individual 
        signaling messages could be hidden by encryption of the request and 
        response for end-to-end protection of information, the header must 
        be visible to intermediate routers. It is preferable to not require 
        decryption/ encryption at each router. The approach has been to 
        encrypt the contents of the signaling message but not the headers 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 15] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        which are needed by the routers. However, the headers themselves may 
        contain sensitive information such as precedence level and called 
        party identification. 
         
        [RFC3261] describes the transport and network layer security methods 
        which may be used to protect signaling traffic. 
         
     7.3.   Security of Routing Data 
         
        Of more concern than the information about an individual call is the 
        information normally needed by Link State routing logic used by an 
        originating device to select a route though an entire network. Such 
        a routing function requires knowledge of the state (busy or not) of 
        various portions of the network. When Assured Service based on 
        precedence levels is added, this requires that the routing point 
        also know the current loading of various precedence levels for each 
        portion of the network. Especially in a large network, this is 
        highly sensitive information and must not be revealed to 
        unauthorized network elements. 
         
        It should be noted that the constraint-based LSP setup proposed in 
        [RFC3212] depends on the routing point knowing this information. 
         
         
     8.   IANA Considerations 
         
        It is not expected that there will be any IANA involvement in 
        support of Assured Service beyond what is described in [Polk].  
         
         
     9.   References 
         
        [T1.523] ANSI T1.523-2001, "Telecommunications Glossary". 
         
        [T1.619] ANSI T1.619-1992 (R1999), "Multi-Level Precedence and 
        Preemption (MLPP) Service, ISDN Supplementary Service Description". 
         
        [T1.619a] ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999), "Addendum to MLPP". 
         
        [T1.631] ANSI T1.631-1993 (R1999), "Telecommunications - Signalling 
        System No. 7 (SS7) - High Probability of Completion (HPC) Network 
        Capability". 
         
        [E.106] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2000), "International Emergency 
        Preference Scheme (IEPS)". 
         
        [F.706] ITU-T Recommendation F.706 (draft), "International Emergency 
        Multimedia Service (IEMS)". 
         
        [I.255.3] ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), "Multilevel 
        precedence and preemption service (MLPP)". 
         
        [Q.735.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.735.3 (1993), "Description for 
        community of interest supplementary services using SS No. 7 - 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 16] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        Multilevel precedence and preemption (MLPP)". 
         
        [Q.955.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.955.3 (1993), "Description for 
        community of interest supplementary services using DSS1 - Multilevel 
        precedence and preemption (MLPP)". 
         
        [RFC2205] RFC 2205, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)", 
        September 1997 
         
        [RFC2597] RFC 2597, "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", June 1999. 
         
        [RFC3246] RFC 3246, "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", March 2002. 
         
        [RFC2702] RFC 2702, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over 
        MPLS",  September 1999. 
         
        [RFC2751] RFC 2751, "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element", 
        January 2000. 
         
        [RFC3209] RFC 3209, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", 
        December 2001. 
         
        [RFC3212] RFC 3212, "CR-LDP: Constraint-based LSP Setup using LDP", 
        January 2002. 
         
        [SIP-CALL-AUTH] draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-05, "SIP Extension for 
        Media Authorization", May 2002.  RFC ???? 
         
        [RFC3261] RFC 3261, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", June 2002. 
         
        [Baker] draft-baker-ieprep-requirements-00, "IEPS Requirement 
        Statement", February 2002. 
         
        [Carlberg] draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-02, "Framework for Supporting 
        IEPS in IP Telephony", Ken Carlberg, June 2002. 
         
        [Folts] draft-folts-ieprep-requirements-00, "Requirements for 
        Emergency Telecommunication Capabilities in the Internet ", Hal 
        Folts, May 2002. 
         
        [Pierce1] draft-pierce-ieprep-pref-treat-examples-00, "Examples for 
        Provision of Preferential Treatment in Voice over IP", October 2002. 
         
        [Pierce2] draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-arch-00, "Architecture 
        for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP", October 2002. 
         
        [Polk] draft-polk-sipping-resource-00, "SIP Communications Resource 
        Priority Header", February 2002. 
         
         
     10.  Authors' Addresses 
         
        Michael Pierce 
        Artel 
      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 17] 
     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       October 2002 

        1893 Preston White Drive 
        Reston, VA 20191 
        Phone: +1 410.817.4795 
        Email: pierce1m@ncr.disa.mil 
         
        Don Choi 
        DISA 
        5600 Columbia Pike 
        Falls Church, VA 22041-2717 
        Phone: +1 703.681.2312 
        Email: choid@ncr.disa.mil 
         
         
     Full Copyright Statement 
         
        Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
         
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
        or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
        and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
        kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
        are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
        document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
        the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
        Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
        developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
        copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
        followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
        English. 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
        revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
         
        This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
        "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
        TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
        BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
        HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
        MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
         













      
     Mike Pierce               Expires April 2003                 [Page 18] 
