Internet Engineering Task Force                                Kushanava Laha
Internet Draft                                                   Vikram Nair 
Document: draft-laha-megaco-cas-mntc-00.txt          Hughes Software Systems 
Category: Informational                                            March 2003
 
 


                    Megaco/H.248 CAS Maintenance Package

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
   provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
   (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft 
   documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or 
   obsolete by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use 
   Internet- Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   This document is work in progress and defines the CAS Maintenance package 
   in association with the Megaco/H.248 Protocol that can be used to control a 
   Media Gateway (MG) from an external controller, called a Media Gateway 
   controller (MGC). It is intended to satisfy the requirements in section 12 
   of the Megaco/H.248 requirement document [2].


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to 
   be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [3].


3. Document Organization

   The subsequent portion of this draft is organized into the following major 
   sections:

   * Introduction 
   * Description of Trunk Maintenance package
   * References
   * Author's Address


Laha, Nair               Informational - Expires September 2003             1
                       Megaco/H.248 CAS Maintenance Package 

4. Introduction

   The CAS Maintenance package presented in this draft is a baseline package. 
   This package defines events and signals to be used over the MEGACO protocol 
   to exchange maintenance states of CAS terminations between the MGC and MG. 
   It is assumed that the CAS terminations physically terminate at the MG.  
   
   The package description assumes that the MGC is transparent of the 
   transmission details of the maintenance signals exchanged at the physical 
   layer. The MG is assumed to be provisioned with the actual signaling 
   frequencies along with their properties such as amplitude, tone duration, 
   cadence etc for realizing the CAS maintenance signals. 


5. CAS Maintenance Package


5.1 Package

   Package Name: CAS Maintenance Package
   Package ID:   casmntc (To be allocated through IANA)
   Description:  This package provides basic events and signals for exchanging 
                 maintenance states between MGC and MG for terminations 
                 realizing any CAS protocol.
   Version:      1
   Extends:      None


5.2 Properties

   none defined by this package.


5.3 Events

   The line signaling condition that convey the line signaling events on the 
   physical interface are provisioned in the MG.


5.3.1

    Event Name:    Block
    EventID:       blk (0x0001)
    Description:   Indicates remote blocking/engaged condition encountered 
                   by MG on a CAS termination.
    EventsDescriptor Parameters:
                   none defined by this package
    ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
                   none defined by this package





Laha, Nair               Informational - Expires September 2003             2
                       Megaco/H.248 CAS Maintenance Package 

5.3.2

    Event Name:    Unblock
    EventID:       ublk (0x0002)
    Description:   Indicates remote unblocking condition encountered by MG 
                   on a CAS termination that removes the engaged condition.
    EventsDescriptor Parameters:
                   none defined by this package
    ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
                   none defined by this package
 

5.4 Signals

   The line signals that are actually sent out on the physical interface are
   provisioned in the MG.


5.4.1

    Signal Name:   Block
    SignalID:      blk (0x0001)
    Description:   Turning this signal to ON implies that the MG renders the
                   CAS termination as blocked/engaged for the remote end.
                   Turning this signal to OFF implies that the MG renders an
                   engaged/blocked CAS termination as idle.
    Signal Type:   (OO) On-off 
    Duration:      Not applicable
    Additional Parameters: None


5.5 Statistics

   none defined by this package.


7. References

[1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9, RFC 
     2026, October 1996.

[2]  F. Cuervo, N. Greene, A. Rayhan, C. Huitema, B. Rosen, J. Segers, "Megaco
     Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 3015, November 2000.

[3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", 
     BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997








Laha, Nair               Informational - Expires September 2003             3
                       Megaco/H.248 CAS Maintenance Package 

7. Author's Addresses

   Kushanava Laha
   Hughes Software Systems, Ltd.
   Gurgaon,Haryana,India. 122015.
   Ph: (91)-124-2346666. Ext-2226
   Email: klaha@hss.hns.com

   Vikram Nair
   Hughes Software Systems, Ltd.
   Gurgaon,Haryana,India. 122015.
   Ph: (91)-124-2346666. Ex-1632
   Email: vnair@hss.hns.com

   


Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (June,2001). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and 
   derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its 
   implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole 
   or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
   copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 
   derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
   way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet 
   Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required 
   to translate it into languages other than English.  The limited permissions 
   granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society 
   or its successors or assigns.  This document and the information contained 
   herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
















Laha, Nair               Informational - Expires September 2003             4
