

Network Working Group                                           F. Baker
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: May 31, 2004                                      December 2003


            Implementing MLPP in the Internet Protocol Suite
                  draft-baker-tsvwg-mlpp-that-works-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 31, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Defense Information Systems Agency of the United States
   Department of Defense, with is contractors, has proposed a service
   architecture for military (NATO and related agencies) telephone
   systems. This is called the Assured Service, and is defined in two
   documents: "Architecture for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice
   over IP" and "Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice
   over IP". Responding to these are three documents: "Reason Header
   Field for the Session Initiation Protocol", "Extending the Session
   Initiation Protocol Reason Header to account for  Preemption Events",
   "Communications Resource Priority for the Session Initiation
   Protocol".

   What remains to this specification is to provide a Call Admission



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   Control procedure and a Per Hop Behavior for the data which meet the
   needs of this architecture.

Table of Contents

   1.    Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1   Multi-Level Preemption and Precedence  . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2   Assumptions about the Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.3   Assumptions about application behavior . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.4   Desired Characteristics in an Internet Environment . . . . .  6
   1.5   The use of bandwidth as a solution for QoS . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.    Solution Proposal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   2.1   Call admission/preemption procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.2   Voice handling characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.3   Bandwidth admission procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.3.1 Alternatives that fall short . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.3.2 Recommended procedure: explicit call admission - RSVP
         Admission using Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   2.4   Authentication and authorization of calls placed . . . . . . 14
   2.5   Defined User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   3.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 22

























Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


1. Overview

   The Defense Information Systems Agency of the United States
   Department of Defense, with is contractors, has proposed a service
   architecture for military (NATO and related agencies) telephone
   systems. This is called the Assured Service, and is defined in two
   documents: "Architecture for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice
   over IP" [25] and "Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in
   Voice over IP" [26]. Responding to these are three documents: "Reason
   Header Field for the Session Initiation Protocol" [22], "Extending
   the Session Initiation Protocol Reason Header to account for
   Preemption Events" [23], "Communications Resource Priority for the
   Session Initiation Protocol" [24].

   What remains to this specification is to provide a Call Admission
   Control procedure and a Per Hop Behavior for the data which meet the
   needs of this architecture.

1.1 Multi-Level Preemption and Precedence

   Before doing so, however, let us discuss the problem that MLEF is
   intended to solve and the architecture of the system. The Assured
   Service is designed as an IP implementation of an existing ITU-T/
   NATO/DoD telephone system architecture known as Multi-Level
   Precedence and Preemption [27][28][29], or MLPP. MLPP is an
   architecture for a prioritized call handling service such that in
   times of emergency in the relevant NATO and DoD commands, the
   relative importance of various kinds of communications is strictly
   defined, allowing higher priority communication at the expense of
   lower priority communications. These priorities, in descending order,
   are:

   Flash Override Override: used by the Commander in Chief, Secretary of
      Defense, and Joint Chiefs of Staff, Commanders of combatant
      commands when declaring the existence of a state of war.

   Flash Override: used by Commander in Chief, Secretary of Defense, and
      Joint Chiefs of Staff, Commanders of combatant commands when
      declaring the existence of a state of war.

   Flash: reserved generally for telephone calls pertaining to command
      and control of military forces essential to defense and
      retaliation, critical intelligence essential to national survival,
      conduct of diplomatic negotiations critical to the arresting or
      limiting of hostilities, dissemination of critical civil alert
      information essential to national survival, continuity of federal
      government functions essential to national survival, fulfillment
      of critical internal security functions essential to national



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


      survival, or catastrophic events of national or international
      significance.

   Immediate: reserved generally for telephone calls pertaining to
      situations that gravely affect the security of national and allied
      forces, reconstitution of forces in a post-attack period,
      intelligence essential to national security, conduct of diplomatic
      negotiations to reduce or limit the threat of war, implementation
      of federal government actions essential to national survival,
      situations that gravely affect the internal security of the
      nation, Civil Defense actions, disasters or events of extensive
      seriousness having an immediate and detrimental effect on the
      welfare of the population, or vital information having an
      immediate effect on aircraft, spacecraft, or missile operations.

   Priority: reserved generally for telephone calls requiring
      expeditious action by called parties and/or furnishing essential
      information for the conduct of government operations.

   Routine: designation applied to those official government
      communications that require rapid transmission by telephonic means
      but do not require preferential handling.

   The rule, in MLPP, is that more important calls override less
   important calls. MLPP is built as a proactive system in which callers
   must assign one of the precedence levels listed above at call
   initiation; this precedence level cannot be changed throughout that
   call. If there is end to end capacity to place a call, any call may
   be placed at any time. However, when any trunk (in the circuit world)
   or interface (in an IP world) reaches utilization capacity, a choice
   must be made as to which call continues. The system will seize the
   trunks or bandwidth necessary to place the more important calls in
   preference to less important calls by preempting an existing call (or
   calls) of lower precedence to permit a higher precedence call to be
   placed.

   More than one call might properly be preempted if more trunks or
   bandwidth is necessary for this higher precedence call. A video call
   (perhaps of 384 KBPS, or 6 trunks) is a good example of this
   situation. This is occurs when the called handset is in use (the
   general calls the colonel, who at the time is talking with the
   captain), or may be used to clear a circuit (all circuits are busy,
   but a lower precedence call may be cleared to create room for the
   higher precedence call). When preemption happens, each preempted
   speaker will hear an audible tone indicating they have just been
   preempted. In this example, the colonel and the captain will each
   hear a audible tone indicating s/he must hang up; upon doing so, the
   colonel will receive the incoming call from the general.



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


1.2 Assumptions about the Network

   IP networks generally fall into two categories: those with
   constrained bandwidth, and those that are massively overprovisioned.
   In a network wherein over any interval that can be measured
   (including sub-second intervals) capacity exceeds offered load by at
   least 2:1, the jitter and loss incurred in transit are nominal. This
   is generally a characteristic of properly engineered Ethernet LANs
   and of optical networks (networks that measure their link speeds in
   multiples of 51 MBPS); in the latter, circuit-switched networking
   solutions such as ATM, MPLS, and GMPLS can be used to explicitly
   place routes, and so improve the odds a bit.

   Between those networks, in places commonly called "inter-campus
   links", "access links" or "access networks", for various reasons
   including technology and cost, it is common to find links whose
   offered load can approximate or exceed the available capacity. Such
   events may be momentary, or may occur for extended periods of time.

   In addition, primarily in tactical deployments, it is common to find
   bandwidth constraints in the local infrastructure of networks. For
   example, the US Navy's network afloat connects approximately 300
   ships, via satellite, to five network operation centers, and those
   NOCs are in turn interconnected via the DISA backbone. A typical ship
   may have between two and six radio systems aboard, and it is unusual
   for any of them to exceed 64 KBPS due to a combination of encryption
   and allocation constraints. In US Army networks, current radio
   technology likewise limits tactical communications to links below 100
   KBPS. Future radio capabilities are projected to be on the order of
   1-10 MBPS, and certainly less than 45 MBPS.

   Over this infrastructure, military communications expect to deploy
   voice communication systems (30-80 KBPS per session), video
   conferencing using MPEG 2 (3-7 MBPS) and MPEG 4 (80 KBPS to 800
   KBPS), in addition to traditional mail, file transfer, and
   transaction traffic.

1.3 Assumptions about application behavior

   Parekh and Gallager [30][31] published a series of papers analyzing
   what is necessary to ensure a specified service level for a stream of
   traffic. In a nutshell, they showed that to predict the behavior of a
   stream of traffic in a network, one must know two things:

   o  the rate and arrival distribution with which traffic in a class is
      introduced to the network, and

   o  what network elements will do, in terms of the departure



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


      distribution, injected delay jitter and loss characteristics, with
      the traffic they see.

   For example, TCP tunes its effective window (the amount of data it
   sends per round trip interval) so that the ratio of the window and
   the round trip interval approximate the available capacity in the
   network. As long as the round trip delay remains roughly stable and
   loss is nominal (which are primarily behaviors of the network), TCP
   is able to maintain a predictable level of throughput. In an
   environment where loss is random or in which delays wildly vary, TCP
   behaves in a far less predictable manner.

   Voice and video systems do not tune their behavior to that of the
   network. Rather, they send traffic at a rate specified by the codec
   depending on what it perceives is required. In an MPEG-4 system, for
   example, if the camera is pointed at a wall, the codec determines
   that an 80 KBPS data stream will describe that wall, and issues that
   amount of traffic. If a person walks in front of the wall or the
   camera is pointed an a moving object, the codec may easily send 800
   KBPS in its effort to accurately describe what it sees. In commercial
   broadcast sports, which may line up periods in which advertisements
   are displayed, the effect is that traffic rates suddenly jump across
   all channels at certain times because the eye-catching ads require
   much more bandwidth than the camera pointing at the green football
   field.

   As described in RFC 1633 [1], when dealing with a real-time
   application, there are basically two things one must do to ensure
   Parekh's first requirement. To ensure that one knows how much offered
   load the application is presenting, one must police (measure load
   offered and discard excess) traffic entering the network. If that
   policing behavior has a debilitating effect on the application, as
   non-negligible loss has on voice or video, one must admit sessions
   judiciously according to some policy. A key characteristic of that
   policy must be that the offered load does not exceed the capacity
   dedicated to the application.

   In the network, the other thing one must do is ensure that the
   application's needs are met in terms of loss, variation in delay, and
   end to end delay. One way to do this is to supply sufficient
   bandwidth that loss and jitter are nominal. Where that cannot be
   accomplished, one must use queuing technology to deterministically
   apply bandwidth to accomplish the goal.

1.4 Desired Characteristics in an Internet Environment

   The key elements of the MLPP service include the following:




Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   Call Admission/Preemption Policy: There is likewise a clear policy
      regarding calls that may be in progress at the called instrument.
      During call admission (SIP/H.323), if they are of lower
      precedence, they must make way according to a prescribed
      procedure. All callers on the preempted call must be informed that
      the call has been preempted, and the call must make way for the
      higher precedence call.

   Bandwidth Admission Policy: There is a clear bandwidth admission
      policy: sessions may be placed which assert any of several levels
      of precedence, and in the event that there is need and
      authorization is granted, other sessions will be preempted to make
      way for a call of higher precedence.

   Authentication and Authorization of calls placed: Unauthorized
      attempts to place a call at an elevated status are not permitted.
      In the telephone system, this is managed by controlling the policy
      applied to an instrument by its switch plus a code produced by the
      caller identifying himself or herself to the switch. In the
      Internet, such characteristics must be explicitly signaled.

   Voice handling characteristics: A call made, in the telephone system,
      gets a circuit, and provides the means for the callers to conduct
      their business without significant impact as long as their calls
      are not preempted. In a VoIP system, one would hope for
      essentially the same service.

   Defined User Interface: If a call is preempted, the caller and the
      callee are notified via a defined signal, so that they know that
      their call has been preempted and that at this instant there is no
      alternative circuit available to them at that precedence level.

   A VoIP implementation of the MLPP service must, by definition,
   provide those characteristics.

1.5 The use of bandwidth as a solution for QoS

   There is a discussion in Internet circles concerning the relationship
   of bandwidth to QoS procedures, which needs to be put to bed before
   this procedure can be adequately analyzed. The issue is that it is
   possible and common in certain parts of the Internet to solve the
   problem with bandwidth. In LAN environments, for example, if there is
   significant loss between any two switches or between a switch and a
   server, the simplest and cheapest solution is to buy the next faster
   interface - substitute 100 MBPS for 10 MBPS Ethernet, 1 Gigabit for
   100 MBPS, or for that matter upgrade to a ten gigabit Ethernet.
   Similarly, in optical networking environments, the simplest and
   cheapest solution is often to increase the data rate of the optical



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   path either by selecting a faster optical carrier or deploying an
   additional lambda. In places where the bandwidth can be
   overprovisioned to a point where loss or queuing delay are
   negligible, 10:1 overprovisioning is often the cheapest and surest
   solution, and by the way offers a growth path for future
   requirements. However, there are places in communication networks
   where bandwidth is not free and is therefore not effectively
   infinite. It is in these places, and only these places, where the
   question of resource management is relevant.

   The places where bandwidth constriction takes place is typically
   where one pays a significant amount for bandwidth, such as in access
   paths, or where available technology limits the options. In military
   networks, Type 1 encryption often presents such a barrier, as do
   satellite links and various kinds of radio systems.

   In short, the fact that we are discussing this class of policy
   control says that such constrictions in the network exist and must be
   dealt with. Get over it. However much we might like to, in those
   places we are not solving this with bandwidth.































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


2. Solution Proposal

   A typical Voice or video network, including a backbone domain, is
   shown in figure 1.

      ...............             ......................
     .                .          .                      .
    .  H  H  H  H      .        .   H  H  H  H           .
   .  /----------/      .       .  /----------/           .
   .     R     SIP      .       .    R      R              .
   .      \             .       .   /        \              .
   .       R  H  H  H   . .......  /          \             .
   .      /----------/  ..      ../            R     SIP    .
    .              R  ..         /.           /----------/  .
      .....       ..\.    R-----R  .           H  H  H  H   .
            ......  .\   /       \  .                      .
                    . \ /         \  .                    .
                    .  R-----------R  ....................
                    .   \         /   .
                    .    \       /   .
                    .     R-----R   .
                     .             .
                       ............
             SIP   = SIP Proxy
             H     = SIP-enabled Host (Telephone, call gateway or PC)
             R     = Router
             /---/ = Ethernet or Ethernet Switch

   Figure 1: Typical VoIP or Video/IP Network

   Reviewing that figure, it becomes obvious that call flows are very
   different than call flows in the PSTN. In the PSTN, call control
   traverses a switch, which in turn controls data handling services
   like ATM switches or circuit multiplexors. While they may not be
   physically co-located, the control plane software and the data plane
   services are closely connected; the switch routes a call using
   bandwidth that it knows is available. In a voice/video-on-IP network,
   call control is completely divorced from the data plane: It is
   possible for a telephone instrument in the United States to have a
   Swedish telephone number if that is where its SIP proxy happens to
   be, but on a given call use only data paths in the Asia/Pacific
   region, data paths provided by a different company, and often
   multiple companies.

   Call management therefore addresses a variety of questions, all of
   which must be answered:

   o  May I make this call from an administrative policy perspective?



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   o  What IP address correlates with this telephone number or SIP URI?

   o  Is the other instrument "on hook"? If it is busy, under what
      circumstances may I interrupt?

   o  Is there bandwidth available to support the call?

   o  Does it actually work?


2.1 Call admission/preemption procedure

   Administrative Call Admission is the objective of SIP and H.323. It
   asks fundamental questions like "what IP address is the callee at?"
   and "Did you pay your bill?".

   For specialized policy like call preemption, two capabilities are
   necessary from an administrative perspective: "Reason Header Field
   for the Session Initiation Protocol" [22] provides a reason code when
   a call fails or is refused, indicating the cause of the event. If it
   is a failure, it may make sense to redial the call. If it is a
   policy-driven preemption, even if the call is redialed it may not be
   possible to place the call. "Communications Resource Priority for the
   Session Initiation Protocol" [24] provides a way to communicate
   policy-related information regarding the precedence of the call. This
   informs both the use of DSCPs by the callee (who needs to use the
   same DSCP as the caller to obtain the same data path service) and to
   facilitate policy-based preemption of calls in progress when
   appropriate.

2.2 Voice handling characteristics

   The Quality of Service architecture used in the data path is that
   ofDifferentiated Services [6]. Differentiated Services uses a flag in
   the IP header called the DSCP [5] to identify a data stream, and then
   applies a procedure called a Per Hop Behavior, or PHB, to it.

   In the data path, the Expedited Forwarding [19][20] PHB describes the
   fundamental needs of voice and video traffic. This PHB entails
   ensuring that sufficient bandwidth is dedicated to real-time traffic
   to ensure minimal variation in delay and a minimal loss rate, as
   codecs are hampered by excessive loss[32][33][34][35][36][37]. In
   parts of the network where bandwidth is heavily overprovisioned,
   there may be no remaining concern. In places in the network where
   bandwidth is more constrained, this may require the use of a priority
   queue. If a priority queue is used, the potential for abuse exists,
   meaning that it is also necessary to police traffic placed into the
   queue to detect and manage abuse. A fundamental question is "where



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   does this policing need to take place?". The obvious places would be
   the first hop routers and any place where converging data streams
   might congest a link.

   For policy reasons, DISA would like to mark traffic with various code
   points marked with code points appropriate to the service level of
   the call. In normal service, if the traffic is all in the same queue
   and EF service requirements are met (applied capacity exceeds offered
   load, variation in delay is minimal, and loss is negligible), details
   of traffic marking should be irrelevant, as long as they get the
   packets into the right service class. The question is primarily one
   of appropriate policing of traffic, especially around route changes.
   SRTCM [7] or TRTCM [8], in their color-aware modes, can be trivially
   extended to an arbitrary number of colors given that one knows the
   bandwidth to be admitted into each service class.

   Parekh's second condition has been met: we must know what the network
   will do with the traffic. If the offered load exceeds the available
   bandwidth, the network will remark and drop the excess traffic. The
   key questions become "How does one limit offered load to a rate less
   than or equal to available bandwidth?" and "how much traffic does one
   admit with each appropriate marking?"

2.3 Bandwidth admission procedure

   Since the available voice and video codecs require a nominal loss
   rate to deliver acceptable performance, Parekh's first requirement is
   that offered load be within the available capacity. There are several
   possible approaches.

2.3.1 Alternatives that fall short

   There have been many proposals for measurement-based admission.
   Fundamentally, these work on the same principle as Keshav's
   packet-pair algorithm: if a pair of packets or a data stream are
   added to a stable network data flow, and the result is acceptable,
   then adding the voice or video data stream is acceptable, and the end
   system can presume the data flow to have been accepted by the
   network. While the case can be made in theory for fixed volume data
   streams, variable data streams such as G.711/G.729 voice with Voice
   Activity Detection (VAD), the Internet Limited Bandwidth Codec [21],
   or MPEG-4 video do not work well. These have the property that they
   can behave benignly for a while, and then change their behavior
   dramatically. Voice with VAD, for example, may send no data at all
   for an extended period of time, or only a modicum of comfort noise,
   and then suddenly jump to life. MPEG-4 will send about 80 KBPS while
   the camera is pointed at the wall, and jump to 800 KBPS when the
   camera is pointed at a moving field such as a waving hand. ILBC will



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   send at a relatively low bit rate under normal circumstances, but
   when loss sets in will increase its offered load by as much as 50%.
   The effect of these is all too predictable with end system
   measurement-based admission: many data flows will be admitted during
   periods of lower activity, only to be trashed as a class when
   activity increases.

   The most sensible end system behavior in a situation where loss sets
   in, under end system measurement-based admission, is opt-out
   admission - the system detecting that it is being adversely affected
   drops its call. In such a case, however, end systems can be expected
   to detect the condition - if they detect it at all - in random order,
   and therefore apply their admission policy randomly, with little real
   policy control. Many may suddenly detect the condition and drop their
   calls, resulting in more calls than necessary being lost, and any
   affected call may be dropped, not just the new ones being added to
   the mix. One could argue, academically, that a sufficiently complex
   and randomized opt-out policy could be designed to minimize the
   issues in this, and maybe one would be right. The fine tuning that
   would be involved, however, would be extensive, and would not be
   easily done under combat conditions.

   An approach that is commonly used in H.323 networks is to limit the
   number of calls simultaneously accepted by the gatekeeper. SIP
   networks do something similar when they place a SIP proxy near a
   single ingress/egress to the network. This is able to impose an upper
   bound on the total number of call sin the network or the total number
   of calls crossing the significant link. However, the gatekeeper has
   no knowledge of routing, so the engineering must be very
   conservative, and usually requires a single ingress/egress - a single
   point of failure. While this may serve as a short term work-around,
   it is not a general solution that is readily deployed. This limits
   the options in network design.

2.3.2 Recommended procedure: explicit call admission - RSVP Admission
      using Policy

   The "Integrated Services in the Internet Architecture: an Overview"
   [1] provides for signalled admission. This is currently implemented
   using the "Resource ReSerVation Protocol" [2][4](RSVP). As originally
   written, RSVP had scaling limitations due to its data plane behavior.
   This has, in time, largely been corrected. In edge networks, RSVP is
   used to signal for individual microflows, admitting the bandwidth.
   However, Differentiated Services is used for the data plane behavior.
   Admission and policing may be performed anywhere, but need only be
   performed in the first hop router (which, if the end system sending
   the traffic is a DTE, constitutes a DCE for the remaining network)
   and in routers that have interfaces threatened by congestion. In



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   figure 1, these would normally be the links that cross network
   boundaries, and may also include any type 1 encrypted interface, as
   these are generally limited in bandwidth by the encryption.

   In backbone networks, networks that are normally awash in bandwidth,
   RSVP and its affected data flows may be carried in a variety of ways.
   If the backbone is a maze of tunnels between its edges - true of MPLS
   networks and of networks that carry traffic from an encryptor to a
   decryptor, and also of VPNs - applicable technologies include those
   documents in "RSVP Extensions for IPSEC Data Flows" [3], "RSVP
   Operation Over IP Tunnels" [9], and "Differentiated Services and
   Tunnels" [13]. Other networks may simply choose to aggregate the
   reservations across themselves as described in "Aggregation of RSVP
   for IPv4 and IPv6 Reservations" [16].

   In the PATH message, the DCLASS object described in "Format of the
   RSVP DCLASS Object" [14] is used to indicate the DSCP that will be
   used for the data in the stream. This is reflected back in the RESV
   message. This permits both bandwidth admission within a class and the
   building up of the various rates or token buckets for the extended
   color-aware SRTCM or TRTCM algorithm.

   Policy is carried and applied as described in "A Framework for
   Policy-based Admission Control" [12]. The "RSVP Extensions for Policy
   Control" [11], which include the "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy
   Element" [17] and the "Identity Representation for RSVP" [18], allow
   for policies which preempt calls under the control of either a local
   or remote policy manager. The policy manager assigns a precedence
   level to the admitted data flow. If it admits a data flow that
   exceeds the available capacity of a system, the expectation is that
   the RSVP affected RSVP process will tear down a session among the
   lowest precedence sessions it has admitted. The RESV Error resulting
   from that will go to the receiver of the data flow, and be reported
   to the application (SIP or H.323). That application is responsible to
   disconnect its call, with a reason code of "bandwidth preemption".

   One will ask the value of the multiple DSCPs. They are, in fact, of
   limited to no value in normal operation, as all vice and video
   traffic should have been admitted, and therefore capacity will have
   been assigned to them. The behavior of this service will be
   indistinguishable from the EF PHB regardless of traffic marking.
   However, around route changes - common in manet networks - IP data
   streams will be shifted around before RSVP admission gets to verify
   the utility of the new path. While this is normally at most a few
   seconds, military policy attempts to preserve call quality for more
   important data flows first. An extended SRTCM or TRTCM, in the
   color-aware mode, will accomplish this, reducing call quality from
   lower precedence data flows, while RSVP decides to either admit them



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   (changing affected xxTCM quanta) or preempt them.

2.4 Authentication and authorization of calls placed

   It will be necessary, of course, to ensure that any policy is applied
   to an authenticated user; it is the capabilities assigned to an
   authenticated user that may be considered to have been authorized for
   use in the network. For bandwidth admission, this will require the
   utilization of "RSVP Cryptographic Authentication" [10][15]. In SIP
   and H.323, AAA procedures will also be needed.

2.5 Defined User Interface

   The user interface - the chimes and tones heard by the user - should
   ideally remain the same as in the MLPP PSTN. This, of course, depends
   on positive signals, not unreliable measures based on changing
   measurements.


































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


3. IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.













































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


4. Security Considerations

   This document outlines a networking capability composed entirely of
   existing specifications. It has significant security issues, in the
   sense that a failure of the various authentication or authorization
   procedures can cause a fundamental breakdown in communications.
   However, the issues are internal to the various component protocols,
   and are covered by their various security procedures.











































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


5. Acknowledgements

   This document was developed with the knowledge and input of many
   people, far too numerous to be mentioned by name. Key contributors of
   thoughts include, however, Francois Le Faucheur, Haluk Keskiner,
   James Polk, Pete Babendreier, Rohan Mahy, Scott Bradner, Scott
   Morrison, and Subha Dhesikan.












































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


References

   [1]   Braden, B., Clark, D. and S. Shenker, "Integrated Services in
         the Internet Architecture: an Overview", RFC 1633, June 1994.

   [2]   Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. Jamin,
         "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
         Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [3]   Berger, L. and T. O'Malley, "RSVP Extensions for IPSEC Data
         Flows", RFC 2207, September 1997.

   [4]   Braden, B. and L. Zhang, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)
         -- Version 1 Message Processing Rules", RFC 2209, September
         1997.

   [5]   Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F. and D. Black, "Definition of
         the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and
         IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998.

   [6]   Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z. and W.
         Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated Services", RFC 2475,
         December 1998.

   [7]   Heinanen, J. and R. Guerin, "A Single Rate Three Color Marker",
         RFC 2697, September 1999.

   [8]   Heinanen, J. and R. Guerin, "A Two Rate Three Color Marker",
         RFC 2698, September 1999.

   [9]   Terzis, A., Krawczyk, J., Wroclawski, J. and L. Zhang, "RSVP
         Operation Over IP Tunnels", RFC 2746, January 2000.

   [10]  Baker, F., Lindell, B. and M. Talwar, "RSVP Cryptographic
         Authentication", RFC 2747, January 2000.

   [11]  Herzog, S., "RSVP Extensions for Policy Control", RFC 2750,
         January 2000.

   [12]  Yavatkar, R., Pendarakis, D. and R. Guerin, "A Framework for
         Policy-based Admission Control", RFC 2753, January 2000.

   [13]  Black, D., "Differentiated Services and Tunnels", RFC 2983,
         October 2000.

   [14]  Bernet, Y., "Format of the RSVP DCLASS Object", RFC 2996,
         November 2000.




Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   [15]  Braden, R. and L. Zhang, "RSVP Cryptographic Authentication --
         Updated Message Type Value", RFC 3097, April 2001.

   [16]  Baker, F., Iturralde, C., Le Faucheur, F. and B. Davie,
         "Aggregation of RSVP for IPv4 and IPv6 Reservations", RFC 3175,
         September 2001.

   [17]  Herzog, S., "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element", RFC
         3181, October 2001.

   [18]  Yadav, S., Yavatkar, R., Pabbati, R., Ford, P., Moore, T.,
         Herzog, S. and R. Hess, "Identity Representation for RSVP", RFC
         3182, October 2001.

   [19]  Davie, B., Charny, A., Bennet, J., Benson, K., Le Boudec, J.,
         Courtney, W., Davari, S., Firoiu, V. and D. Stiliadis, "An
         Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per-Hop Behavior)", RFC 3246, March
         2002.

   [20]  Charny, A., Bennet, J., Benson, K., Boudec, J., Chiu, A.,
         Courtney, W., Davari, S., Firoiu, V., Kalmanek, C. and K.
         Ramakrishnan, "Supplemental Information for the New Definition
         of the EF PHB (Expedited Forwarding Per-Hop Behavior)", RFC
         3247, March 2002.

   [21]  Andersen, S., "Internet Low Bit Rate Codec",
         draft-ietf-avt-ilbc-codec-03 (work in progress), October 2003.

   [22]  Oran, D., Schulzrinne, H. and G. Camarillo, "The Reason Header
         Field for the Session Initiation Protocol",
         draft-ietf-sip-reason-01 (work in progress), May 2002.

   [23]  Polk, J., "Extending the Session Initiation Protocol Reason
         Header to account for  Preemption Events",
         draft-polk-sipping-reason-header-for-preemption-00 (work in
         progress), October 2003.

   [24]  Schulzrinne, H. and J. Polk, "Communications Resource Priority
         for the Session Initiation Protocol  (SIP)",
         draft-ietf-sip-resource-priority-01 (work in progress), July
         2003.

   [25]  Pierce, M. and D. Choi, "Architecture for Assured Service
         Capabilities in Voice over IP",
         draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-arch-01 (work in progress),
         June 2003.

   [26]  Pierce, M. and D. Choi, "Requirements for Assured Service



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


         Capabilities in Voice over IP",
         draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-req-01 (work in progress),
         June 2003.

   [27]  International Telecommunications Union, "Multilevel Precedence
         and Preemption Service (MLPP)", ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3,
         1990.

   [28]  American National Standards Institute, "Telecommunications -
         Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) - Multi-Level
         Precedence and Preemption (MLPP) Service Capability", ANSI
         T1.619-1992 (R1999), 1992.

   [29]  American National Standards Institute, "MLPP Service Domain
         Cause Value Changes", ANSI ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999), 1990.

   [30]  Parekh, A. and R. Gallager, "A Generalized Processor Sharing
         Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services Networks: The
         Multiple Node Case", INFOCOM 1993: 521-530, 1993.

   [31]  Parekh, A. and R. Gallager, "A Generalized Processor Sharing
         Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services Networks: The
         Single Node Case", INFOCOM 1992: 915-924, 1992.

   [32]  Viola Networks, "Netally VoIP Evaluator", January 2003, <http:/
         /www.sygnusdata.co.uk/white_papers/viola/
         netally_voip_sample_report_preliminary.pdf>.

   [33]  ETSI Tiphon, "ETSI Tiphon Temporary Document 64", July 1999,
         <http://docbox.etsi.org/tiphon/tiphon/archives/1999/
         05-9907-Amsterdam/14TD113.pdf>.

   [34]  Nortel Networks, "Packet Loss and Packet Loss Concealment",
         2000, <http://www.nortelnetworks.com/products/01/succession/es/
         collateral/tb_pktloss.pdf>.

   [35]  Clark, A., "Modeling the Effects of Burt Packet Loss and
         recency on Subjective Voice Quality", 2000, <http://
         www.telchemy.com/references/tech_papers/iptel2001.pdf>.

   [36]  Cisco Systems, "Understanding Codecs: Complexity, Hardware
         Support, MOS, and Negotiation", 2003, <http://www.cisco.com/en/
         US/tech/tk652/tk701/
         technologies_tech_note09186a00800b6710.shtml#mos>.

   [37]  Chen, M. and M. Murthi, "On The Performance Of ILBC Over
         Networks With Bursty Packet Loss", July 2003.




Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


Author's Address

   Fred Baker
   Cisco Systems
   1121 Via Del Rey
   Santa Barbara, California  93117
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-526-4257
   Fax:   +1-413-473-2403
   EMail: fred@cisco.com








































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft               MLPP for VoIP                 December 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Baker                     Expires May 31, 2004                 [Page 23]

