



Internet Engineering Task Force                   Ken Carlberg
INTERNET DRAFT                                    G11
May 14, 2004                                      Charlie Perkins
                                                  Nokia



                 Requirements for MIPv4 Mobility Agents
             Support of Emergency Telecommunication Service
                     <draft-carlberg-ets-MIP-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in  full  conformance  with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents  of  the  Internet  Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also  distribute  working  documents  as  Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at  any
   time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-  Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The  list   of   current   Internet-Drafts   can   be   accessed   at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt The list of Internet-Draft
   Shadow       Directories       can       be        accessed        at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   For   potential   updates   to   the   above    required-text    see:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt


Abstract

   This document presents a list of requirements for the IPv4 Mobile  IP
   (MIP) protocol to support Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS).


1.  Introduction

   Effective  telecommunications  capabilities  can  be  imperative   to
   facilitate immediate recovery operations for serious disaster events,
   such as, hurricanes, floods,  earthquakes,  and  attacks  by  hostile
   individuals.  Disasters can happen any time, any place, unexpectedly.
   Quick response for recovery operations requires immediate  access  to
   any   public   telecommunications   capabilities   at   hand.   These
   capabilities include: conventional telephone,  cellular  phones,  and
   Internet  access  (possibly at 802.11 hotspots) via online terminals,



Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 1]





Internet Drafts         ETS Requirements for MIP            May 14, 2004


   IP telephones, and wireless PDAs.  The commercial  telecommunications
   infrastructure  is  rapidly  evolving  to  Internet-based technology.
   Therefore, the Internet community should accept the responsibility to
   consider  how  it  can best support emergency management and recovery
   operations.

   Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS) involves authorized access
   and use of services (i.e., resources) set aside for users involved in
   disaster response or recovery.  The manner in which  these  resources
   are  identified  and  allocated for ETS users is outside the scope of
   this document.

   A general set of requirements for ETS has been defined in [2], and is
   meant to act as a baseline for future and more specific requirements.
   The requirements presented in section 3 below represent an  extension
   to  [2]  and are aimed at the mobility agents specified in the Mobile
   IP (MIP) protocol [3].

   Note, all references to MIP  in  this  document  refer  to  the  IPv4
   version  of  the  protocol.   However,  similar considerations can be
   expected to be applied for IPv6 MIP whenever the  appropriate  access
   control  points  are  able to be identified.  For IPv4, it is easy to
   specify the foreign agent as the requisite control point.


2.  Mobile IP

   MIP is used to support a mobile host that operates in either its home
   or  in  foreign  networks.   These  networks  have  mobility  agents,
   designated as either foreign agents  or  home  agents,  that  forward
   traffic  between  the  mobile  device and correspondent hosts.  Agent
   Discovery involves an exchange  of  messages  (Agent  Advertisements)
   that  allow  the  mobile  host  to  determine whether it is connected
   within its home domain or  in  a  foreign  network.   This  discovery
   process  also  indicates  if  the  host  has  moved to a different IP
   network.

   Beyond  the  discovery  of  other  MIP  nodes  and  movement,   Agent
   Advertisements are used by mobility agents to advertise services on a
   link.  These messages are sent as an extension  of  the  ICMP  Router
   Advertisement.  The Mobility Agent Advertisement Extension message is
   an example of the extentions defined in MIP and is used to convey one
   of  several  services  that  are offered by the node -- such as "this
   node is a Home Agent and/or Foreign Agent".  Of particular importance
   to this document is that this extension may indicate that the Foreign
   Agent is BUSY and  will  not  accept  registrations  from  additional
   mobile nodes.




Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 2]





Internet Drafts         ETS Requirements for MIP            May 14, 2004


   The existance of a busy condition implies  that  a  threshold  exists
   that  prevents  any  additional  registrations to be accepted by that
   mobility agent.  During times of disasters, a need may arise to allow
   mobile users involved in disaster recovery or response to bypass this
   "busy" condition.  This function, and the requirements of how  it  is
   accomplished, is the concern of this document.  The precise manner in
   which this bypass is accomplished with respect to conveying  existing
   and  requested  service  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  document.
   However, contraints and references  to  previous  related  RFCs  with
   respect to security are listed.


3. Requirements

   We divide the set of requirements  into  two  subgroups.   The  first
   involves the list of requirements concerning the advertisement of ETS
   support and the request/registration of that service.  The second set
   of   requirements   pertain  to  security  and  the  authorization  &
   authentication features needed by  the  system  to  ensure  that  the
   correct set of users are enabled to obtain their desired service.

3.1 Conveying ETS Information

   The requirements below pertain  to  those  entities  that  choose  to
   support  ETS  type  users.  For those that choose not to provide this
   support users, either because of legacy  implementations  of  [3]  or
   because of lack of configuration, the following do not apply.

3.1.1  Mobility Agent Indicates ETS Support

   In order for  mobile  hosts  to  determine  if  ETS  type  users  are
   supported,  mobility agents are required to be able to advertise this
   service and therefore  distinguish  themselves  from  other  mobility
   agents.

3.1.2  Form of ETS Advertisement by Mobility Agent

   The advertisement of ETS support by mobility agents can either  be  a
   binary  indicator,  or  a more descriptive format that identifies the
   sets of ETS users  supported  by  that  agent.   Tradeoffs  regarding
   scarcity  of  unreserved  fields  in  existing  MIP  messages  versus
   significant changes to MIP deserve close consideration.

3.1.3  Role of Mobility Agents

   Mobility Agents may  support  non-ETS  users  at  the  same  time  as
   providing support for ETS users.




Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 3]





Internet Drafts         ETS Requirements for MIP            May 14, 2004


3.1.4  Mobile Host Requesting ETS Support

   If a mobile host needs to use an  ETS  capable  mobility  agent,  the
   means by which a mobile host obtains that service has to be specified
   -- this is particularly important when mobile agents support for  ETS
   and  non-ETS users.  This is likely to involve defining a new message
   format that explicitly signals the requested service, but it may also
   involve others means of identification.

3.1.5  Preemption

   Mobility agents  that  provide  ETS  support  may  preempt  (or  even
   terminate)  existing  registrations  of non-ETS users in favor of ETS
   users.  This action is subject  to  local  policies  of  that  agent.
   Refer  to  [2]  for  additional  insight in the role of policies with
   respect to ETS.


3.2 Security Requirements

   The operation of  ETS  is  expected  to  introduce  certain  security
   requirements, which are mentioned in this section.

3.2.1  MIP AAA compatibility

   Solutions  are  expected  to  remain  compatible  with  the  MIP  AAA
   requirements document of RFC 2977[4].

3.2.2  Foreign agent operation

   Foreign agents are required to be able to check that a mobile  device
   is  authorized to use ETS.  Otherwise, arbitrary mobile devices could
   routinely obtain services for applications that have  no  requirement
   for emergency services.


4. Security Considerations

   If a foreign agent does not protect against  unauthorized  invocation
   of  ETS  features,  the  danger  exists that the additional resources
   required would be unavailable in the case of real need.  Moreover,  a
   malicious  node would typically target ETS to disable the delivery of
   needed support in conflict situations.  Vulnerability to such attacks
   should be minimized.







Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 4]





Internet Drafts         ETS Requirements for MIP            May 14, 2004


5. References

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "General Requirements for Emergency
      Telecommunication Service (ETS)", RFC 3689, February 2004

   3  Perkins, C., ed., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
      August 2002.

   4  Glass, S., et. al, "Mobile IP Authentication, Authorization,
      and Accounting Requirements", RFC 2977, October 2000




6.  Author's Addresses

   Ken Carlberg                            Charlie Perkins
   G11                                     Communications Systems Laboratory
   123a Versailles Circle                  Nokia Research Center
   Baltimore, MD                           313 Fairchild Drive
   USA                                     Mountain View, CA 94303
                                           USA
   carlberg@g11.org.uk                     Charles.Perkins@nokia.com



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet  Society  (2004).  All  Rights  Reserved.
   This  document  and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain  it
   or  assist  in  its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in  part,  without  restriction  of  any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies  and  derivative  works.   However,  this
   document  itself  may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society  or  other
   Internet   organizations,   except  as  needed  for  the  purpose  of
   developing Internet  standards  in  which  case  the  procedures  for
   copyrights   defined  in  the  Internet  Standards  process  must  be
   followed, or as required to translate it into  languages  other  than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will  not  be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.



Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 5]





Internet Drafts         ETS Requirements for MIP            May 14, 2004


   This document and the information contained herein is provided as  an
   "AS  IS"  basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS  OR  IMPLIED,  INCLUDING
   BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO  ANY  WARRANTY  THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS  OR  ANY  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES  OR
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.













































Carlberg & Perkins          Expires November 14, 2004           [Page 6]


