


Network Working Group                                           J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Updates: 826,903,2390,1931,2225                         October 22, 2008
(if approved)
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: April 25, 2009


  IANA Allocation Guidelines for the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
                     draft-arkko-arp-iana-rules-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2009.

Abstract

   This document specifies the IANA guidelines for allocating new values
   in the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP).  This document also
   reserves some numbers for experimentation purposes.


1.  Introduction

   This document specifies the IANA guidelines [RFC5226] for allocating
   new values for various fields in the Address Resolution Protocol
   (ARP) [RFC0826].  The change is also applicable to extensions of ARP



Arkko                    Expires April 25, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               ARP IANA Rules                 October 2008


   defined in [RFC0903], [RFC2390], [RFC1931], and [RFC2225].  The
   guidelines are given in Section 2.  Previously, no IANA guidance
   existed for such allocations.

   This document also reserves some numbers for experimentation
   purposes.  These numbers are given in Section 3.


2.  IANA Considerations

   The following rules apply to the fields of ARP:

   ar$hrd (16 bits) Hardware address space

      Requests for individual new ar$hrd values are made through First
      Come First Served [RFC5226].  Requests for a batch of several new
      ar$hrd values are made through Expert Review [RFC5226].  The
      expert should determine that the need to allocate the new values
      exists and that the existing values are insufficient to represent
      the new hardware address types.

   ar$pro (16 bits) Protocol address space

      These numbers share the Ethertype space.  The Ethertype space is
      administered as described in [RFC5342].

   ar$op (16 bits) Opcode

      Requests for new ar$op values are made through IETF Review or IESG
      Approval [RFC5226].


3.  Allocations Defined in This Document

   When testing new protocol extension ideas, it is often necessary to
   use an actual constant in order to use the new function, even when
   testing in a closed environment.  This document reserves the
   following numbers for experimentation purposes in ARP:

   o  One new ar$hrd value is allocated for experimental purposes,
      HW_EXP (TBD).

   o  Two new values for the ar$op are allocated for experimental
      purposes, OP_EXP1 (TBD) and OP_EXP2 (TBD).

   Note that [RFC5342], Section B.2 lists two Ethertypes that can be
   used for experimental purposes.




Arkko                    Expires April 25, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               ARP IANA Rules                 October 2008


4.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not change the security properties of the
   affected protocols.

   However, a few words are necessary about the use of the experimental
   code points defined in Section 3.  Production networks do not
   necessarily support the use of experimental code points in ARP.
   Potentially harmful side-effects from the use of the experimental
   values should be carefully evaluated before deploying any experiment
   across networks that the owner of the experiment does not entirely
   control.

   The network administrators should also ensure that each code point is
   used consistently to avoid interference between experiments.


5.  Acknowledgments

   The lack of any current rules has come up as new values were
   requested from IANA.  The author would like to thank Michelle Cotton
   in particular for bringing this issue up.  When no rules exist, IANA
   consults the IESG for approval of the new values.  The purpose of
   this specification is to establish the rules and allow IANA to
   operate based on the rules, without requiring confirmation from the
   IESG.  The author would also like to thank Brian Carpenter, Thomas
   Narten, Scott Bradner, and Dave Thaler for feedback.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC0826]  Plummer, D., "Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or
              converting network protocol addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
              address for transmission on Ethernet hardware", STD 37,
              RFC 826, November 1982.

   [RFC0903]  Finlayson, R., Mann, T., Mogul, J., and M. Theimer,
              "Reverse Address Resolution Protocol", STD 38, RFC 903,
              June 1984.

   [RFC1931]  Brownell, D., "Dynamic RARP Extensions for Automatic
              Network Address Acquisition", RFC 1931, April 1996.

   [RFC2225]  Laubach, M. and J. Halpern, "Classical IP and ARP over
              ATM", RFC 2225, April 1998.

   [RFC2390]  Bradley, T., Brown, C., and A. Malis, "Inverse Address
              Resolution Protocol", RFC 2390, September 1998.



Arkko                    Expires April 25, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               ARP IANA Rules                 October 2008


   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5342]  Eastlake. , D., "IANA Considerations and IETF Protocol
              Usage for IEEE 802 Parameters", BCP 141, RFC 5342,
              September 2008.


Appendix A.  Changes from the Original ARP RFCs

   This document specifies only the IANA rules associated with various
   fields in ARP, and does not make any other changes in the operation
   of the protocol itself.


Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net



























Arkko                    Expires April 25, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               ARP IANA Rules                 October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Arkko                    Expires April 25, 2009                 [Page 5]

