


MIPSHOP WG                                                  Gabor Bajko 
Internet Draft                                                    Nokia 
Intended Status: Standards Track                            August 2007 
Expires: February 20, 2008                                              
                                                                        
    
    
                       Locating Mobility Servers 
                    draft-bajko-mos-dns-discovery-00 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 20, 2008. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document defines application service tags that allow service 
   location without relying on rigid domain naming conventions, and DNS 
   procedures for discovering servers which provide Mobility Services. 
   Mobility Services are used to assist an MN in handover preparation 
   (network discovery) and handover decision (network selection). The 
   services addressed by this document are the Media Independent 
   Handover Services defined in [1]. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    


G. Bajko                   Expires 02/20/08                  [Page 1] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
Terminology and abbreviations used in this document 
    
   Mobility Services: comprises of a set of different services provided 
   by the network to mobile nodes to facilitate handover preparation 
   and handover decision. 
    
   Mobility Server: a network node providing Mobility Services. 
    
   MIH: Media Independent Handover, as defined in [1]. 
    
   MIH Service: IS, ES or CS type of service, as defined in [1]. 
    
   Application service:  is a generic term for some type of 
   application, independent of the protocol that may be used to offer 
   it. Each application service will be associated with an IANA-
   registered tag. 
    
   Application protocol: is used to implement the application service. 
   These are also associated with IANA-registered tags. 
 
Table of Content 
    
    
1. Introduction 
         
   IEEE 802.21 [1] defines three distinct service types to facilitate 
   link layer handovers across heterogeneous technologies: 
    
   a) Information Services (IS) 
        IS provides a unified framework to the higher layer entities 
   across the heterogeneous network environment to facilitate discovery 
   and selection of multiple types of networks existing within a 
   geographical area, with the objective to help the higher layer 
   mobility protocols to acquire a global view of the heterogeneous 
   networks and perform seamless handover across these networks. 
    
   b) Event Services (ES) 
        Events may indicate changes in state and transmission behavior 
   of the physical, data link and logical link layers, or predict state 
   changes of these layers. The Event Service may also be used to 
   indicate management actions or command status on the part of the 
   network or some management entity. 
    
   c) Command Services (CS) 
        The command service enables higher layers to control the 
   physical, data link, and logical link layers. The higher layers may 
   control the reconfiguration or selection of an appropriate link 
   through a set of handover commands. 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 2] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
    
   In IEEE terminology these services are called Media Independent 
   Handover (MIH) services. 
   While these services may be co-located, the different pattern and 
   type of information they provide does not necessitate the co-
   location. 
    
   An MN may make use of any of these MIH service types separately or 
   any combination of them.  
    
   It is anticipated that a Mobility Server will not necessarily host 
   all three of these MIH Services together, thus there is a need to 
   discover the MIH Service types separately.  
    
   This document defines a number of application service tags that 
   allow service location without relying on rigid domain naming 
   conventions. 
    
2. Discovering a Mobility Server 
    
   The procedures defined here assume that the MN knows the domain name 
   of the network where it wants to locate a Mobility Server. The 
   domain name can either be pre-configured, discovered using DHCP or 
   learned from a previous Information Service (IS) query [1] [xxx]. 
   The procedures defined here result in an IP address, port and 
   transport protocol where the MN can contact the Mobility Server 
   which hosts the service the MN is looking for. 
    
2.1 Selecting a Mobility Service 
    
   The MN should know the characteristics of the Mobility Services 
   defined in [1] and based on that it should be able to select the 
   service it wants to use to facilitate its handover. The services it 
   can choose from are: 
        - Information Service (IS) 
        - Event Service (ES) 
        - Command Service (CS) 
    
   The service identifiers for the services are "IS", "ES" and "CS" 
   respectively. 
    
   The server supporting any of the above services MUST support UDP and 
   TCP as transport. 
    
2.2 Selecting the transport 
    
   After the desired service has been chosen, the client selects the 
   transport protocol it prefers to use. Note, that transport selection 
   may impact the handover performance. 
    
   The services relevant for the task of transport protocol selection 
   are those with NAPTR service fields with values "IS+M2X" for IS 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 3] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
   service, "ES+M2X" for the ES service, "CS+M2X" for the CS service, 
   where X is a letter that corresponds to a transport protocol 
   supported by the domain. This specification defines M2U for UDP and 
   M2T for TCP. We also establish an IANA registry for NAPTR service 
   name to transport protocol mappings. 
    
   These NAPTR [3] records provide a mapping from a domain to the SRV 
   [2] record for contacting a server with the specific transport 
   protocol in the NAPTR services field. The resource record will 
   contain an empty regular expression and a replacement value, which 
   is the SRV record for that particular transport protocol. If the 
   server supports multiple transport protocols, there will be multiple 
   NAPTR records, each with a different service value.  As per RFC 2915 
   [3], the client discards any records whose services fields are not 
   applicable.  
    
   The MN MUST discard any service fields that identify a resolution 
   service whose value is not "M2X", for values of X that indicate 
   transport protocols supported by the client.  The NAPTR processing 
   as described in RFC 2915 will result in the discovery of the most 
   preferred transport protocol of the server that is supported by the 
   client, as well as an SRV record for the server. 
    
   As an example, consider a client that wishes to find IS service in 
   the example.com domain. The client performs a NAPTR query for that 
   domain, and the following NAPTR records are returned: 
    
           order pref flags  service     regexp       replacement 
   IN NAPTR  50   50   "s"  "IS+M2T"       ""  _IS._tcp.example.com 
   IN NAPTR  90   50   "s"  "IS+M2U"       ""  _IS._ucp.example.com 
    
   This indicates that the domain does have a server providing IS 
   services over TCP and UDP, in that order of preference. Since the 
   client supports TCP and UDP, TCP will be used, targeted to a host 
   determined by an SRV lookup of _IS._tcp.example.com.  That lookup 
   would return: 
    
   ;;          Priority  Weight    Port        Target 
        IN  SRV    0        1      XXXX   server1.example.com 
        IN  SRV    0        2      XXXX   server2.example.com 
    
   It is not necessary for the domain suffixes in the NAPTR replacement 
   field to match the domain of the original query (i.e., example.com 
   above).  However, a domain MUST maintain SRV records for the domain 
   of the original query, even if the NAPTR record is in a different 
   domain, as the access network the MN is attached to might implement 
   policies which restrict access to certain domains.  As an example, 
   even though the SRV record for TCP is _IS._tcp.school.edu, there 
   MUST also be an SRV record at _IS._tcp.example.com. 
    
   If no NAPTR records are found, the client constructs SRV queries for 
   those transport protocols it supports, and does a query for each. 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 4] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
   Queries are done using the service identifier "_IS" for the 
   Information Service, "_ES" for the Event Service and "_CS" for 
   Command Service. A particular transport is supported if the query is 
   successful.  The client MAY use any transport protocol it desires 
   which is supported by the server. 
    
   If no SRV records are found, the client SHOULD use TCP for the IS 
   service and UDP for the ES and CS service.  
    
   If the MN knows the IP address of the server, it may contact the 
   server using the default port number for that service. 
    
    
2.3 Determining IP address and port 
    
   Once the server providing the desired service and the transport 
   protocol has been determined, the next step is to determine the IP 
   address and port. 
    
   If TARGET is a numeric IP address, the MN uses that IP address and 
   the already chosen transport to contact the server providing the 
   desired service. 
    
   If the TARGET was not a numeric IP address, then the MN performs an 
   A or AAAA record lookup of the domain name. The result will be a 
   list of IP addresses, each of which can be contacted using the 
   transport protocol determined previously. 
    
   If the result of the SRV query contains a port number, then the MN 
   SHOULD contact the server at that port number. If the SRV record did 
   not contain a port number then the MN SHOULD contact the server at 
   the default port number of that particular service. 
    
5. IANA considerations 
    
   The usage of NAPTR records described here requires well known values 
   for the service fields for each transport supported by Mobility 
   Services. The table of mappings from service field values to 
   transport protocols is to be maintained by IANA. New entries in the 
   table MAY be added through the publication of standards track RFCs, 
   as described in RFC 2434 [4]. 
    
   The registration in the RFC MUST include the following information: 
    
        Service Field: The service field being registered.  
         
        Protocol: The specific transport protocol associated with that 
        service field.  This MUST include the name and acronym for the 
        protocol, along with reference to a document that describes the 
        transport protocol. 
         

 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 5] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
        Name and Contact Information: The name, address, email address 
        and telephone number for the person performing the 
        registration. 
    
   The following values have been placed into the registry: 
    
   Services Field               Protocol 
   IS+M2T                       TCP 
   IS+M2U                       UDP 
   ES+M2T                       TCP 
   ES+M2U                       UDP 
   CS+M2T                       TCP 
   CS+M2U                       UDP 
    
6. Security considerations 
    
    
    
7. Normative References 
    
   [1] IEEE 802.21 Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: 
   Media Independent Handover Services 
    
   [2] Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P. and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for 
   Specifying the Location of Services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782, February 
   2000. 
    
   [3] Mealling, M., "DDDS, The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 
   3403, October 2002. 
    
   [4] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA 
   Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998. 
    
   [xxx] MoS discovery procedures, work in progress 
    
8. Informative References 
    
    
8. Author's Addresses 
    
   Gabor Bajko 
   Nokia 
   gabor.bajko@nokia.com 
    
    







 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 6] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Services Servers                         August 2008 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
 
 



 
G. Bajko                   Expires 01/10/08                  [Page 7] 
 