

MMUSIC                                                       J.-P. Luoma
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: August 25, 2003                               February 24, 2003


                  Internet Media Guide Metadata Format
                   draft-luoma-mmusic-img-metadata-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines the base metadata format for Internet Media
   Guides (IMGs), applicable to a wide variety of Internet hosts and
   communication links. IMG metadata describes files, resources and
   multimedia programs available for streaming or downloading via
   multicast or unicast. An IMG metadata model, semantics of the IMG
   media metadata entities, and an XML-based framing structure for IMG
   media metadata are defined. The aim is to reuse existing metadata
   standards for the IMG metadata format where possible.








Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.    Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.    The Use of IMG Metadata for IP Media Discovery . . . . . . .  7
   4.1   Initial Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.2   Update Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.3   Subscribing to IMG Update Notifications  . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.    IMG Metadata Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.1   The Relational Part of IMG Metadata  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.1.1 IMG Root . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.1.2 Category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.1.3 IP Service Portal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.1.4 IP Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.2   The Session Part of IMG Metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.2.1 IP Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.2.2 IP Session Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.2.3 Scheduling Info  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.2.4 Transport Channel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.3   The Content Part of IMG Metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.3.1 Content  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.3.2 Content Item . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   5.3.3 Content Bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   5.3.4 Access info  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   5.3.5 Scheduling info  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   6.    Transfer Envelope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   7.    IMG Metadata Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   8.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   9.    Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
         Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   A.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 26
















Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


1. Introduction

   This document defines the Internet Media Guide (IMG) metadata model,
   the framing structure for IMG metadata, and the IMG media metadata
   elements. This is intended as a baseline specification of the IMG
   metadata format that can be supplemented by other specifications,
   e.g. for application-specific extensions.

   The purpose of the IMG metadata is to provide machine- and
   human-readable information describing the files, resources and
   multimedia programs available for streaming or downloading via
   multicast or unicast. The IMG metadata format will be used in the IMG
   framework as a payload format for IMG transport protocols, such as
   MUPPET [4]. The syntax of the IMG metadata framing format is based on
   the Extensible Markup Language (XML). The IMG media metadata (or
   references to it) are encapsulated in IMG metadata framing. The aim
   is to reuse existing metadata standards for the IMG metadata format
   where possible.

































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


2. Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.














































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


3. Terminology

      IMG Fetch

         The client-controlled delivery of IMG metadata to an IMG
         receiver, based on a request-response model using
         acknowledgements if required.

      IMG Media metadata

         Includes the relational part, session part and content part of
         IMG metadata. Does not include the metadata relating to IMG
         delivery, e.g. the fields of the IMG transfer envelope.

      IMG Metadata Model

         Defines the information content, semantics and relations of the
         different IMG metadata entities

      IMG Notify

         Informs IMG receivers about a change in the IMG metadata. It
         shall identify the parts of the IMG metadata that have changed
         without delivering the updated IMG metadata. A unidirectional
         notify provides only an indication, whereas notification on a
         bidirectional link may additionally require a response from the
         receivers.

      IMG Push

         The sender-controlled delivery of IMG metadata to IMG
         receivers. This is inherently unidirectional.

      IMG Push-Notify

         The combination of an IMG push and IMG notify in the same
         message.

      IMG Receiver

         A logical entity that receives media guides from an IMG sender,
         analogous to a client.

      IMG Sender

         A logical entity that delivers IMG metadata to one or more IMG
         receivers, analogous to a server. A sender shall provide
         bandwidth control or congestion control schemes on the output.



Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


         A sender can additionally be a receiver - see IMG transceiver.

      IMG Subscribe

         A request for notifications of IMG metadata updates, from a
         receiver to a sender or proxy.

      IMG Transceiver

         A combination of an IMG receiver and sender. An IMG proxy is an
         example of an IMG transceiver.








































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


4. The Use of IMG Metadata for IP Media Discovery

   The following sections describe the use of IMG metadata to support
   both initial and update discovery of IP media.

4.1 Initial Discovery

   The IMG sender SHOULD make its full IMG metadata available to clients
   using IMG push and/or IMG fetch. An IMG receiver may need to receive
   the full set of metadata for an IMG when the terminal has just
   started receiving a particular IMG, or when its cached copy of the
   metadata cannot be synchronized with IMG update transmissions.

4.2 Update Discovery

   Once the IMG receiver has received and stored sufficient IMG metadata
   in its local database, it may try to detect any changes in the
   received IMG information. The following types of IMG metadata may be
   monitored for changes:

   1.  A sender's full IMG metadata set (IMG push or IMG fetch)

   2.  A sender's IMG metadata update (IMG push or IMG fetch)

   3.  A sender's IMG change notification (IMG notify)

   The receiver will learn of any changes in the IMG metadata by
   continuing to receive the full set of metadata, for example by
   periodically using an IMG fetch service or by receiving transmissions
   of the metadata via an IMG push service. However, the use of update
   IMG metadata transfers and/or IMG update notifications may provide
   more efficient means for update discovery.

   An IMG sender SHOULD provide IMG metadata updates via IMG push, IMG
   fetch or both (in addition to any full IMG metadata transfer). After
   receiving sufficient IMG metadata, an IMG receiver MAY continue
   receiving only these updates, if available, instead of receiving the
   full IMG. Each IMG update transfer consists of the IMG elements that
   have recently changed. The definition of 'recently changed metadata'
   shall be determined by the sender (this may be dependent on time,
   data size and/or number of transmissions). For example, an update may
   include media metadata changed since the previous version(s) of the
   relevant parts of IMG media metadata transferred, or since the last
   full IMG transfer.

   After receiving each IMG metadata update, the IMG receiver MUST
   verify if it has missed an earlier update to this set of IMG media
   metadata; this can be accomplished by checking the version number and



Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   update version number fields in the IMG transfer envelope (Section
   6). It is recommended that the IMG receiver attempt to recover the
   missing update by verifying the current versions of the relevant
   metadata (for example, by obtaining the full set of IMG metadata
   again, or by querying the versions of the locally cached IMG
   metadata).

   In addition to sending an IMG metadata transfer, an IMG sender MAY
   send IMG change notifications. These change notifications consist of
   references to IMG metadata elements that have changed recently (e.g.,
   since the previous version of the IMG transfer). After receiving an
   IMG update notification and discovering the parts of IMG that have
   changed, an IMG receiver MAY obtain the latest full IMG metadata set
   of a sender or an IMG metadata update using either IMG push or IMG
   fetch.

   The version number and update version number of the IMG transfer
   envelope are maintained for IMG change notifications, just as in the
   earlier case of IMG update transfers. Similarly, these fields MUST be
   checked by IMG receivers to learn when it is necessary to again
   obtain the related IMG media metadata as in Section 4.1.

4.3 Subscribing to IMG Update Notifications

   <TBD>


























Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


5. IMG Metadata Model

   The media metadata in an Internet Media Guide is structured in three
   parts: a relatively static part known as the 'relational part' and
   the more dynamic parts known as the 'session part' and 'content
   part'. This chapter describes the metadata entities and their
   relations in the three parts of IMG metadata.

   This chapter describes a baseline metadata model for Internet Media
   Guides that includes metadata entities common for most IMG usage
   scenarios. It should be possible to extend the IMG metadata format,
   e.g. with application-specific parts, but such extensions are outside
   the scope of this document.

   Note, some metadata fields are marked '(optional)' to indicate that
   it is optional whether to use these fields in the respective
   metadata. However, IMG receivers MUST be capable of parsing both
   'mandatory' and 'optional' fields.

5.1 The Relational Part of IMG Metadata

   The relation part of the IMG metadata is used to relate the various
   parts of the metadata. This includes IP service portals based on the
   type of content, and to organize IP services into IP service portals.
   The metadata in the relational part is intended to be browsed by
   end-users and by end-user applications, allowing them to decide on
   what content to receive. For example, an IMG could be rendered as a
   simple hierarchy as shown in Figure 1.























Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


              Root
               |
               +--News                        Category
               |   |
               |   +--CNN                     IP service portal
               |   |   |
               |   |   +--World news          Category
               |   |   |   |
               |   |   |   +--LiveUpdate      IP service
               |   |   |
               |   |   +--Business news       Category
               |   |   |
               |   |   +--Sports news         Category
               |   |
               |   +--BBC World               IP service portal
               |
               +--Entertainment               Category
                   |
                   +--Music                   Category
                       |
                       +--Videos              Category

             Figure 1: Example of an IMG service hierarchy

   The relations between the metadata elements that constitute an IMG
   hierarchy are shown in Figure 2. Note that the cardinalities between
   metadata elements in this and the other entity relationship diagrams
   are denoted as follows:

   o  0..1: zero or one occurences

   o  1: exactly one occurence

   o  *: zero or more occurences

   o  1..*: one or more occurences















Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


                                includes
                                  +---+
                                * |   | 0..1
                                  V   |
       +----------+ includes  +----------+
       | IMG Root |---------->| Category |
       +----------+ 0..1   *  +----------+
                                   ^
                              is-a |
                                   |
                          +-------------------+
                          | IP Service Portal |
                          +-------------------+
                                   | 1..*
                          includes |
                                   V *
                            +------------+
                            | IP Service |
                            +------------+
                                   | 1..*
                          includes |
                                   V *
                            +------------+
                            | IP Session |
                            +------------+

              Figure 2: Hierarchy part of the IMG metadata

   The metadata elements of the hierarchy part are described in the
   following subsections. Note that IP session belongs to the session
   part rather than the hierarchy part of IMG metadata, and is only
   shown in Figure 2 to show the connection between the two parts - see
   Section 5.2.1 for definition of IP session.

5.1.1 IMG Root

   The IMG root is a logical entity that represents one IMG database. It
   is expected that both single logical receivers and single logical
   senders will maintain their own single IMG root (thus a IMG single
   database). Thus an IMG root is unique to a unique logical host.

   It may be desirable or a host to separate IMG roots from different
   senders (or senders in separately administered domains). Thus, a
   practical refinement is that one receiver may maintain more than one
   IMG root (in one or more actual databases). In this case the receiver
   is behaving as multiple logical receivers, possibly sharing actual
   processes, databases and user interfaces.




Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   The document does not impose any requirements on the relationships
   between the deployment of physical devices and of: logical senders;
   logical transceivers; and, logical receivers.

   The following information fields are included in an IMG root:

   o  IMG ID: unique ID of the IMG

   o  IMG Transport: Parameters needed to receive the IMG via IMG Push
      (e.g. source specific multicast channel parameters) or IMG Fetch


5.1.2 Category

   The category provides a classification for content, allowing
   end-users to browse available content according to category or client
   software to automatically filter content. Each category node MAY be
   associated with categories of the next lower hierarchy level. Except
   for root-level categories, one higher-level category node MUST be
   associated with every category node. The following information fields
   are included for a category:

   o  Category ID: the unique identifier of the category

   o  Name: the name of the category

   o  Description (optional): short description for the category

   o  Parental rating (optional): minimum recommended age to access the
      category - if absent it is assumed there are no restrictions

   o  Additional information (optional): a URL for retrieving additional
      information


5.1.3 IP Service Portal

   An IP service portal is a collection of services offered by a single
   service provider or a content provider. An IP service portal MUST be
   associated with one content category node. The path of content
   category nodes from the root of service hierarchy tree to the IP
   service portal (e.g., 'entertainment.music.videos') defines the
   category of the portal.

   IP Service Portal inherits the field of category and also uses:

   o  Contact details (optional): URL to human-readable contact info
      <TBD - machine readable info as well?>



Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   o  Logo (optional): URL to a graphical logo of the service provider /
      content provider


5.1.4 IP Service

   An IP service consists of a number of IP sessions and belongs to one
   or more content categories. The following information fields are
   included:

   o  Service ID: unique identifier of IP service

   o  Name: name of the IP service

   o  Description (optional): short description of the IP service

   o  Genre (optional): genre of the IP service

   o  Parental rating: minimum recommended age to access the IP service
      (optional - if absent it is assumed there are no restrictions)

   o  Client content path (optional): Recommended path in the receiver's
      file system for storing the content of this service. This would be
      a relative path, which also requires a (receiving)
      application-specific base path to identify the complete local
      path.

   o  Response URL (optional): a URL that can be used by clients to
      provide feedback, e.g. a five-star rating for the service

   o  Additional information (optional): A URL for retrieving additional
      information


5.2 The Session Part of IMG Metadata

   The session part of IMG metadata is used to describe the scheduling,
   transport and any audio/video codec parameters of media streams, as
   well as the binding of these media streams into IP sessions (see
   Figure 3). Using this part of IMG metadata, client-side applications
   are able to receive and present media streams belonging to IP
   sessions.









Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


              +-----------------+               +------------+
              | Scheduling info |---------------| IP session |
              +-----------------+ 1           1 +------------+
                                                      | 1
                                          consists of |
                                                      V 1..*
            +--------------------+ delivers +----------------------+
            | Transport channel  |--------->| IP session component |
            +--------------------+ 1..*   1 +----------------------+

               Figure 3: Session part of the IMG metadata


5.2.1 IP Session

   An IP session is the collection of related media streams used for
   delivering IP based content to clients. A session is associated with
   one or more IP services, and shares the category assigned to those IP
   services. The lifetime of an IP session is typically much shorter
   than that of an IP service. The following information fields are
   included in this metadata element:

   o  Session ID: unique identifier of the IP session

   o  Version: version number of the session description

   o  Name: name of the IP session

   o  Owner (optional): name of the owner/creator of the IP session

   o  Bandwidth (optional): total bandwidth requirements of the IP
      session

   o  Encryption info (optional): type of content encryption used and
      related parameters

   o  Authentication info (optional): type of content authentication
      used and related parameters


5.2.2 IP Session Component

   An IP session component refers to a single media stream that is part
   of an IP session, e.g. video, audio or data flow. Each media stream
   is delivered on one more logical transport channels. An IP session
   component is described using the following parameters:

   o  Bandwidth (optional): bandwidth requirements of the IP session



Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


      component

   o  Addressing: The Layer 3 and Layer 4 addressing used for delivering
      the IP session component.

   o  Transport: The transport protocol used.

   o  Codec parameters (optional): The parameters of the audio/video
      codec needed to present the media stream

   o  Encryption info (optional): type of content encryption used and
      related parameters

   o  Authentication info (optional): type of content authentication
      used and related parameters


5.2.3 Scheduling Info

   A delivery schedule is always associated with an IP session. Both the
   start and the end time of an IP session are usually bounded. Either a
   single time period, or a repeating schedule may be specified. The
   following information fields are included:

   o  Start (optional): the start time

   o  End (optional): the end time

   o  Repeat (optional): information on the repetition pattern

   o  Timezone (optional): information on any timezone adjustments
      taking place


5.2.4 Transport Channel

   A logical transport channel in an IP network is defined here by the
   Layer 3 and Layer 4 protocols and addressing parameters used. It
   includes the following:

   o  Source IP address: IPv4 or IPv6 address

   o  Destination/group IP address: IPv4 or IPv6 address

   o  Source port: port number

   o  Destination port: port number




Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   o  Transport protocol: transport layer protocol(s) used, e.g. RTP/UDP

   o  Additional transport parameters (optional): <TBD - for example,
      additional ALC parameters>


5.3 The Content Part of IMG Metadata

   The content part of IMG metadata identifies and describes items of
   content delivered within IP sessions, and grouping of these content
   items into bundles of related content (see Figure 4). This part of
   the IMG metadata provides more details into the available content,
   helping end-users and client applications to decide on which IP
   sessions to receive.

                                  +------------+
                                  | IP session |
                                  +------------+
                                        | 1..*
                               delivers |
                                        V *
                         includes  +---------+          +-------------+
               +------------------>| Content |----------| Access info |
               |             1..*  +---------+ 1   0..1 +-------------+
               |                        ^
               |                        | is-a
               |              +---------+---------+
               |              |                   |
               |     +----------------+   +--------------+
               +-----| Content bundle |   | Content item |
                0..1 +----------------+   +--------------+
                                                  | 1
                                                  |
                                                  | 0..1
                                         +-----------------+
                                         | Scheduling info |
                                         +-----------------+

               Figure 4: Content part of the IMG metadata

   The metadata elements of the content part are described in the
   following subsections. Note that IP session belongs to the session
   part rather than content part of IMG metadata, and is only shown in
   Figure 2 to show the connection between the two parts. See Section
   5.2.1 for definition of IP session.

5.3.1 Content




Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   Any number of instances of content can be included in an IP session.
   Content is used here as an abstract entity that is realized either as
   a content item or a content bundle.

5.3.2 Content Item

   A content item is an atomic item of content delivered by the IP
   network and consumed by the end-user, such as an MP3 file or a
   real-time audio/video stream. The following information fields are
   included:

   o  Content item ID: the unique identifier of the content item

   o  Name: the name of the content item

   o  Content location (optional): the URL or filename used for
      accessing the content item

   o  Genre (optional): the genre of the content item

   o  Creator (optional): the creator of the content item

   o  Owner (optional): the owner rights to this content item (note, the
      rights may be dependent on the context, e.g. copyright ownership
      for streaming delivery)

   o  Description (optional): short description of the content item

   o  Parental rating (optional): minimum recommended age to access the
      content item

   o  Rating URL (optional): a URL that can be used by clients for
      rating the service


5.3.3 Content Bundle

   A content bundle is a set of content items or other content bundles.
   For example, a set of PC game downloads can be defined as a content
   bundle. Similarly, a news broadcast that consists of the domestic,
   foreign and sports news as separate content items can be defined as a
   content bundle. The following information fields are included:

   o  Bundle ID: the unique identifier of the content bundle

   o  Name: the name of the content bundle





Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


5.3.4 Access info

   Access info provides additional information, which a user can base
   their decision on whether to access that content, and may provide the
   receiver with additional parameters and instructions on how to access
   the content.

   For example, pricing/billing information could describe the cost of
   purchasing or subscribing to a content item, as well as the details
   of submitting a payment. <The details of this entity may be outside
   the scope of this document>

5.3.5 Scheduling info

   There may be a delivery schedule associated with an individual
   content item. This information content of this entity is as defined
   in Section 5.2.3.


































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


6. Transfer Envelope

   IMG metadata must be encapsulated into an IMG transfer envelope
   before it is passed to an IMG transport protocol for delivery. The
   same encapsulation is used for the logical operations IMG push, IMG
   notify and IMG fetch. The IMG transfer envelope is an XML structure
   consisting of the following fields:

   o  Transfer ID: Unique identifier for this set of IMG metadata.

   o  Version: Current version number of the full transfer. The version
      number is initially zero, and is increased by one whenever the
      full IMG metadata is changed.

   o  Update version (optional): Current version number of the update
      transfer. This field MUST be present for update metadata transfers
      and update notifications, and MUST NOT be present for full IMG
      metadata transfers. The value of this field is initially zero, and
      is increased by one for whenever the IMG metadata update is
      changed.

   o  Valid from: the time from which the metadata is valid, as wall
      clock time in NTP format describing the time determined by the
      sender

   o  Valid until: the expected time of expiry for the metadata
      delivered in this transfer, in NTP format

   o  Payload: An XML list structure containing the metadata being
      transferred.

   It shall be possible to provide signing and encryption to the IMG
   transfer envelope, limiting the capability of any intermediaries
   between the original IMG sender and the IMG receiver to read and
   modify IMG metadata fields. Signing, encryption or both can be
   applied to the whole transfer envelope or just to parts of it.















Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


7. IMG Metadata Format

   An XML schema will be defined for IMG transfer envelope, and if
   necessary for other parts of the IMG metadata that cannot be
   implemented using existing standards. Currently, the following
   standards are being considered for IMG metadata:

   o  MPEG-7 (content part of IMG media metadata)

   o  SDP or SDPng (session part of IMG media metadata)

   o  XPath or XPointer (references to IMG metadata elements)

   o  XML Encryption Syntax and Processing (IMG transfer envelope)

   o  XML-Signature Syntax and Processing (IMG transfer envelope)



































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


8. Security Considerations

   IMG receivers should only trust IMG metadata received from a trusted
   source, with data integrity and authentication of the original IMG
   sender provided at IMG metadata level or by IMG transport. IMG
   receivers also should not trust IMG metadata modified by an IMG
   transceiver, unless the IMG transceiver is trusted and the integrity
   and authenticity of the changes can be similarly verified. However,
   to operate in a typical network environment lacking infrastructure
   for key distribution and trust verification, IMG receivers may also
   be configured to accept untrusted IMG metadata.

   There may also be need to provide access control to the content
   described by the IMG or to protect the confidentiality of an
   individual user requesting a particular subset of an IMG. Such
   privacy requirements are met by the use of encryption at IMG metadata
   level or by IMG transport.


































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


9. Contributors

   Rod Walsh
   Nokia Research Center
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   FIN-33721 Tampere
   Finland
   EMail: rod.walsh@nokia.com

   Toni Paila
   Nokia Ventures Organization
   P.O. Box 209 (Itamerenkatu 11-13)
   FIN-00181 Helsinki
   Finland
   EMail: toni.paila@nokia.com




































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCD 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Schulzrinne, H. and Y. Nomura, "Protocol Requirements for
        Internet Program Guides",
        draft-nomura-mmusic-pguide-requirements-00 (work in progress),
        February 2002.

   [3]  Schulzrinne, H. and Y. Nomura, "A Framework for Internet Program
        Guides", draft-nomura-mmusic-pguide-framework-00 (work in
        progress), October 2002.






































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


Informative References

   [4]  Luoma, J.-P., "MUPPET: Internet Media Guide Unidirectional
        Point-to-Multipoint Transport Protocol",
        draft-luoma-mmusic-img-muppet-00 (work in progress), December
        2002.

   [5]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [6]  Ott, J., Bormann, C. and D. Kutscher, "Session Description and
        Capability Negotiation", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdpng-05 (work in
        progress), July 2002.


Author's Address

   Juha-Pekka Luoma
   Nokia Research Center
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33721
   Finland

   EMail: juha-pekka.luoma@nokia.com



























Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to thank Yuji Nomura, Henning Schulzrinne, Rami
   Lehtonen, Jani Peltotalo and Sami Peltotalo for providing comments on
   IMG metadata design.














































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 February 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Luoma                   Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 27]

