Network Working Group                Nabil Bitar  
                                     Verizon 
Internet Draft                       Raymond Zhang              
                                     BT Infonet  
Intended Status: Informational       Kenji Kumaki               
                                     KDDI Corporation 
Expires: October 2008                 
                                         
                                      
                                      
                                     May 2008 
 
        Inter-AS Requirements for the Path Computation Element  
                  Communication Protocol (PCECP)  
                                      
               draft-ietf-pce-interas-pcecp-reqs-05.txt  
                                 
Status of this Memo  
  
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author 
   represents that any applicable patent or other IPR 
   claims of which he or she is aware have been or will 
   be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes aware 
   will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 
   79.  
     
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its 
   working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
     
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six   
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
     
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
     
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
     
   This Internet-Draft will expire in September 2008.  
        
Copyright Notice  
     
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).  
    
    
Abstract 
    
 
Bitar, Zhang and Kumaki.Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP         [Page 1] 

Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic Engineered (MPLS TE) Label 
   Switched Paths (LSPs) may be established wholly within an Autonomous 
   System (AS) or may cross AS boundaries. 
    
   The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a component that is capable of 
   computing constrained paths for (G)MPLS TE LSPs. The PCE 
   Communication Protocol(PCECP) is defined to allow communication 
   between Path Computation Clients (PCCs) and PCEs, and between PCEs. 
   The PCECP is used to request constrained paths and to supply 
   computed paths in response. Generic requirements for the PCECP are 
   set out in "Path Computation Element(PCE) Communication Protocol 
   Generic Requirements", RFC 4657. This document extends those 
   requirements to cover the use of PCECP in support of inter-AS MPLS 
   TE. 
    
Conventions Used in This Document  
        
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.  
    
   Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................3 
   2. Terminology.....................................................4 
   3. Reference Model.................................................4 
 3.1 Scope of Deployment Model........................................5 
   4. Detailed PCECP Requirements for Inter-AS Computation............6 
 4.1 PCE Communication Protocol Requirements..........................6 
  4.1.1 Requirements for Path Computation Requests....................6 
  4.1.2 Requirements for Path Computation Responses...................7 
 4.2 Scalability and Performance Considerations.......................8 
 4.3 Management Considerations........................................8 
 4.4 Confidentiality..................................................9 
 4.5 Policy Controls Affecting Inter-AS PCECP........................10 
  4.5.1 Inter-AS PCE Peering Policy Controls.........................10 
  4.5.2 Inter-AS PCE Re-interpretation Policies......................11 
   5. Security Considerations........................................11 
 5.1 Use and Distribution of Keys....................................12 
 5.2 Application of Policy...........................................12 
 5.3 Confidentiality.................................................13 
 5.4 Falsification of Information....................................13 
   6. IANA Considerations............................................13 
   7. Acknowledgments................................................13 
   8. Authors' Addresses.............................................13 
   9. Normative References...........................................14 
   10. Informative References........................................14 
    
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 2] 
                                                                     
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

1.   Introduction 
 
   [RFC4216] defines the scenarios motivating the deployment of inter-
   AS Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic Engineering (MPLS TE) and 
   specifies the requirements for inter-AS MPLS TE when the ASes are 
   under the administration of one Service Provider (SP) or the 
   administration of different SPs. 
 
   Three signaling options are defined for setting up an inter-AS TE 
   LSP: 
       1) contiguous TE LSP as documented in [RFC5151]; 
       2) stitched inter-AS TE LSP discussed in [RFC5150]; 
       3) nested TE LSP as in [RFC4206]. 
 
   [RFC5152] defines mechanisms for the computation of inter-domain TE 
   Label Switched Paths (LSPs) using network elements along the 
   signaling paths to compute per-domain constrained path segments. The 
   mechanisms in [RFC5152] do not guarantee an optimum constrained path 
   across multiple ASes where an optimum path for an TE LSP is one that 
   has the smallest cost, according to a normalized TE metric (based 
   upon a TE metric or Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP) metric adopted 
   in each transit AS) among all possible paths that satisfy the LSP TE 
   constraints.  
 
   The Path Computation Element (PCE) [RFC4655] is a component that is 
   capable of computing paths for MPLS TE and Generalized Multiprotcol 
   Label Switching Protocol ((G)MPLS TE) LSPs. The requirements for a 
   PCE have come from SP demands to compute optimum constrained paths 
   across multiple areas and/or domains, and to be able to separate the 
   path computation elements from the forwarding elements. 
 
   The PCE Communication Protocol (PCECP) is defined to allow 
   communication between Path Computation Clients (PCCs) and PCEs, and 
   between PCEs. The PCECP is used to request (G)MPLS TE paths and to 
   supply computed paths in response. Generic requirements for the 
   PCECP are discussed in [RFC4657]. This document provides a set of 
   PCECP requirements that are specific to inter-AS (G)MPLS TE path 
   computation. 
 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 3] 
                                                                      
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
2.   Terminology 
 
   This document adopts the definitions and acronyms defined in Section 
   3 of [RFC4216] and Section 2 of [RFC4655]. In addition, we use the 
   following terminology:  
 
   PCECP: PCE Communication Protocol  
 
   Inter-AS (G)MPLS TE: MPLS or Generalized MPLS Traffic Engineering 
    
   Inter-AS (G)MPLS TE path: An MPLS TE or Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)  
   path that traverses two or more ASes. 
 
   Intra-AS (G)MPLS TE path: An MPLS TE or GMPLS path that is confined 
   to a single AS. It may traverse one or more IGP areas. 
 
   Intra-AS PCE: A PCE responsible for computing (G)MPLS TE paths 
   remaining within a single AS. 
 
   Inter-AS PCE: A PCE responsible for computing inter-AS (G)MPLS paths 
   or path segments, possibly by cooperating with intra-AS PCEs.  
 
3.   Reference Model 
    
   Figure 1 depicts the reference model for PCEs in an inter-AS 
   application. We refer to two types of PCE functions in this 
   document: inter-AS PCEs and intra-AS PCEs. Inter-AS PCEs perform the 
   procedures needed for inter-AS (G)MPLS TE path computation while 
   intra-AS PCEs perform the functions needed for intra-AS (G)MPLS TE 
   path computation. 
    
   Let's follow a scenario that illustrates the interaction among PCCs, 
   inter-AS PCEs and intra-AS PCEs as shown Figure 1. R1 in AS1 wants 
   to setup a (G)MPLS TE path, call it LSP1, with certain constraints 
   to R7 in AS3. R1 determines, using mechanisms out of the scope of 
   this document, that R7 is an inter-AS route and that it needs to 
   contact its Inter-AS PCE1 to compute the path. R1, as a PCC, sends a 
   PCECP path computation request to PCE1. PCE1 determines that R7 is 
   reachable via AS2 and that PCE2 is the PCE to ask for path 
   computation across AS2. PCE1 sends a PCECP path computation request 
   to PCE2. Inter-AS PCE2, in turn, sends a PCECP path computation 
   request to Intra-AS PCE R4 to compute a path within AS2 (in certain 
   cases, the same router such as R3 can assume both inter-AS and 
   intra-AS path computation functions). R4 may for instance return a 
   PCECP path computation response to PCE2 with ASBR3 as the entry 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 4] 
                                                                     
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
 
   point to AS2 from AS1 and ASBR7 as the exit point to AS3. PCE2 then 
   sends a PCECP path computation request to PCE3 to compute the path 
   segment across AS3, starting at ASBR7 and terminating at R7. PCE3 
   returns a PCECP path computation response to PCE2 with the path 
   segment ASBR7-R7. PCE2 then return path ASBR3-ASBR5-ASBR7-R7 to PCE1 
   which, in turn, returns path ASBR1-ASBR3-ASBR5-ASBR7-R7 to PCC R1. 
    
   As described in the above scenario, in general, a PCC may contact an 
   inter-AS PCE to request the computation of an inter-AS path, and 
   that PCE may supply the path itself, or may solicit the services of 
   other PCEs which may, themselves be inter-AS PCEs, or may be intra-
   AS PCEs with the responsibility for computing path segments within 
   just one AS. 
    
   This document describes the PCE Communication Protocol requirements 
   for inter-AS path computation. That is, for PCCs to communicate path 
   computation requests for inter-AS (G)MPLS TE path to a PCE, and for 
   the PCE to respond. It also includes the requirements for PCEs to 
   communicate inter-AS path computation requests and responses.  
 
             Inter-AS        Inter-AS              Inter-AS   
        PCC <->PCE1<--------->PCE2<--------------->PCE3   
         ::     ::             ::                   ::   
         R1---ASBR1====ASBR3---R3---ASBR5====ASBR7---R5---R7   
         |      |        |            |        |           |       
         |      |        |            |        |           |   
         R2---ASBR2====ASBR4---R4---ASBR6====ASBR8---R6---R8   
                               ::   
                             Intra-AS   
                               PCE   
         <==AS1=>        <====AS2======>       <=====AS3===>   
         
      Figure 1 Inter and Intra-AS PCE Reference Model   
     
3.1.     Scope of Deployment Model 
  
   All attempts to predict future deployment scopes within the Internet 
   have proven fruitless. Nevertheless, it may be helpful to provide 
   some discussion of the scope of the inter-AS deployment model as 
   envisioned at the time of writing. 
  
   It is expected that most, if not all, inter-AS PCECP-based 
   communications will be between PCEs operating in the cooperative PCE 
   model described in [RFC4655]. Clearly, in this model, the requesting 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 5] 

Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
   
   PCE acts as a PCC for the purpose of issuing a path computation 
   request, but nevertheless, the requesting node fills the wider role 
   of a PCE in its own AS. It is currently considered unlikely that a 
   PCC (for example, a normal Label Switching Router) will make a path 
   computation request to a PCE outside its own AS. This means that the 
   PCECP relationships between ASes are limited to at most n-squared 
   where n is the number of peering PCEs in the various ASes 
   (considered to be no greater than 100 in [RFC4657]). In practice, 
   however, it is likely that only a few PCEs in one AS will be 
   designated for PCECP communications with a PCE in an adjacent AS, 
   and each of these will only have a few PCEs in the adjacent AS to 
   choose from. A deployment model might place the PCEs as co-resident 
   with the ASBRs, resulting in a manageable scaling of the PCE-PCE 
   relationships. Scaling considerations (Section 4.2), manageability 
   considerations (Section 4.3), and security considerations (Section 
   5) should be examined in the light of these deployment expectations. 
 
 
    
4. Detailed PCECP Requirements for Inter-AS Computation 
 
   This section discusses detailed PCECP requirements for inter-AS 
   (G)MPLS TE LSPs. Depending on the deployment environment, some or 
   all of the requirements described here may be utilized. 
   Specifically, some requirements are more applicable to inter-
   provider inter-AS (G)MPLS TE perations than to intra-provider 
   operations. 
 
4.1. PCE Communication Protocol Requirements 
 
   Requirements specific to inter-AS PCECP path computation requests 
   and responses are discussed in the following sections. 
 
4.1.1.       Requirements for Path Computation Requests 
 
   The following are inter-AS specific requirements for PCECP requests 
   for path computation: 
    
   1. [RFC4657] states the requirement for a priority level to be 
   associated with each path computation request. This document does 
   not change that requirement. However, PCECP should include a 
   mechanism that enables an inter-AS PCE to inform the requesting 
   inter-AS PCE of a change in the request priority level that may have 
   resulted from the application of a local policy.  

 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 6] 
                                                                        
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
   
   2. A path computation request by an inter-AS PCE or a PCC to another 
   inter-AS PCE MUST be able to specify the sequence of ASes and/or 
   ASBRs across the network by providing ASBRs and/or ASes as hops in 
   the desired path of the TE LSP to the destination. For instance, an 
   inter-AS PCE MUST be able to specify to the inter-AS PCE serving the 
   neighboring AS a preferred ASBR for exiting to that AS and reach the 
   destination. That is, where multiple ASBRs exist, the requester MUST 
   be able to indicate a preference for one of them. The PCE must be 
   able to indicate whether the specified ASBR or AS as mandatory or 
   non-mandatory to be on the (G)MPLS TE path.  
            
   3. PCECP MUST allow a requester to provide a list of ASes and/or 
   ASBRs to be excluded from the computed path. 
    
   4. A PCECP path computation request from one inter-AS PCE to another 
   MUST include the AS number of the requesting AS to enable the 
   correct application of local policy at the second inter-AS PCE. 
    
   5. A path computation request from a PCC to an inter-AS PCE or an 
   inter-AS PCE to another MUST be able to specify the need for 
   protection against node, link, or SRLG failure using 1:1 detours or 
   facility backup. It MUST be possible to request protection across 
   all ASes or across specific ASes. 
    
 
   6. PCECP MUST support the disjoint path requirements as specified in 
   [RFC4657]. In addition, it MUST allow the specification of AS-
   diversity for the computation of a set of two or more paths.  
    
   7. A PCECP path computation request message MUST be able to identify 
   the scope of diversified path computation to be end-to-end (i.e., 
   between the endpoints of the (G)MPLS TE tunnel) or to be limited to 
   a specific AS.  
 
4.1.2.       Requirements for Path Computation Responses 
      
   The following are inter-AS specific requirements for PCECP responses 
   for path computation:  
  
   1. A PCECP path computation response from one inter-AS PCE to 
   another MUST be able to include both ASBRs and ASes in the computed 
   path while preserving path segment and topology confidentiality.   
 
   2. A PCECP path computation response from one inter-AS PCE to the 
   requesting inter-AS PCE MUST be able to carry an identifier for a 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 7] 
                                                                       
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   path segment it computes to preserve path segment and topology 
   confidentiality. The objective of the identifier is to be included 
   in the TE LSP signaling, whose mechanism is out of scope of this
   document, to be used for path expansion during LSP signaling. 
 
   3. If a constraint for a desired ASBR (see Section 4.1.1, 
   requirement 2) cannot be satisfied by a PCE, PCECP SHOULD allow the 
   PCE to notify the requester of that fact as an error in a path 
   computation response. 
 
   4. A PCECP path computation from an inter-AS PCE to a requesting 
   inter-AS PCE or a PCC MUST be able to carry a cumulative inter-AS 
   path cost. Path cost normalization across ASes is out of scope of 
   this document. 
 
   5. A PCECP path computation response from an inter-AS PCE to a PCC 
   SHOULD be able to carry the intra-AS cost of the path segment 
   within the PCC AS. 
    
   6. A PCECP path computation response MUST be able to identify 
   diversified paths for the same (G)MPLS TE LSP. End-to-end (i.e., 
   between the two endpoints of the (G)MPLS TE tunnel) disjoint paths 
   are paths that do not share nodes, links or SRLGs except for the LSP 
   head-end and tail-end. In cases where diversified path segments are 
   desired within one or more ASes, the disjoint path segments may share 
   only the ASBRs of the first AS and the ASBR of the last AS across 
   these ASes.  
 
4.2.     Scalability and Performance Considerations 
      
   PCECP design for use in the inter-AS case SHOULD consider the 
   following criteria: 
 
    - PCE message processing load. 
    - Scalability as a function of the following parameters:  
      - number of PCCs within the scope of an inter-AS PCE   
      - number of intra-AS PCEs within the scope of an inter-AS PCE  
      - number of peering inter-AS PCEs per inter-AS PCE 
    - Added complexity caused by inter-AS features. 
 
4.3.     Management Considerations 
 
  [RFC4657] specifies generic requirements for PCECP management. This 
  document addresses new requirements that apply to inter-AS operations. 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 8] 

Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
     
   The PCECP MIB module MUST provide objects to control the behavior of 
   PCECP in inter-AS applications.  They include the ASes within the 
   scope of an inter-AS PCE, Inter-AS PCEs in neighboring ASes to which 
   the requesting PCE will or will not communicate, confidentiality and 
   policies. 
         
   The built-in diagnostic tools MUST enable failure detection and 
   status checking of PCC/PCE-PCE PCECP. Diagnostic tools include 
   statistics collection on the historical behavior of PCECP as 
   specified in [RFC4657], but additionally it MUST be possible to 
   analyze this statistics on a neighboring AS basis (i.e., across the 
   inter-AS PCEs that belong to a neighboring AS).  
 
   The MIB module MUST support trap functions when thresholds are 
   crossed or when important events occur as stated in [RFC4657]. These 
   thresholds SHOULD be specifiable per neighbor AS as well as per peer 
   inter-AS PCE, and traps should be accordingly generated.  
 
   Basic liveliness detection for PCC/PCE-PCE PCECP is described in 
   [RFC4657]. The  PCECP MIB module SHOULD allow control of liveliness 
   check behavior by providing a liveliness message frequency MIB 
   object and this frequency object SHOULD be specified per inter-AS 
   PCE peer. In addition, there SHOULD be a MIB object that specifies 
   the dead-interval as a multiplier of the liveliness message 
   frequency so that if no liveliness message is received within that 
   time from an inter-AS PCE, the inter-AS PCE is declared unreachable. 
 
4.4.     Confidentiality 
 
   Confidentiality mainly applies to inter-provider (inter-AS) PCE 
   communication. It is about protecting the information exchanged 
   between PCEs and about protecting the topology information within an 
   SP's network. Confidentiality rules may also apply among ASes owned  
   by a single SP. Each SP will in most cases designate some PCEs for 
   inter-AS (G)MPLS TE path computation within its own administrative 
   domain and some other PCEs for inter-provider inter-AS (G)MPLS TE 
   path computation. Among the inter-provider-scoped inter-AS PCEs in 
   each SP domain, there may also be a subset of the PCEs specifically 
   enabled for path computation across a specific set of ASes of 
   different peer SPs. 
 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 9] 
 
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
   
   PCECP MUST allow an SP to hide from other SPs the set of hops within 
   its own ASes that are traversed by an inter-AS inter-provider TE LSP 
   (c.f., Section 5.2.1 of [RFC4216]). In a multi-SP administrative 
   domain environment, SPs may want to hide their network topologies 
   for security or commercial reasons. Thus, for each inter-AS TE LSP 
   path segment an inter-AS PCE computes, it may return to the 
   requesting inter-AS PCE an inter-AS TE LSP path segment from its own 
   ASes without detailing the explicit intra-AS hops. As stated 
   earlier, PCECP responses SHOULD be able to carry path-segment 
   identifiers that replace the details of that path segment. The 
   potential use of that identifier for path expansion, for instance, 
   during LSP signaling is out of scope of this document. 
 
4.5.     Policy Controls Affecting Inter-AS PCECP 
 
   Section 5.2.2 of [RFC4216] discusses the policy control requirements 
   for inter-AS RSVP-TE signaling at the AS boundaries for the 
   enforcement of interconnect agreements, attribute/parameter 
   translation and security hardening. 
 
   This section discusses those policy control requirements that are 
   similar to what are discussed in section 5.2.2 of [RFC4216] for 
   PCECP. Please note that SPs may still require policy controls during 
   signaling of TE LSPs to enforce their bilateral or multi-lateral 
   agreements at AS boundaries, but signaling is out of scope for this 
   document. 
 
4.5.1.       Inter-AS PCE Peering Policy Controls 
 
   An inter-AS PCE sends path computation requests to its neighboring 
   inter-AS PCEs, and an inter-AS PCE that receives such a request 
   enforces policies applicable to the sender of the request. These 
   policies may include rewriting some of the parameters, or rejecting 
   requests based on parameter values. Such policies may be applied for 
   PCEs belonging to different SPs or to PCEs responsible for ASes 
   within a single SP administrative domain. Parameters that might be 
   subject to policy include bandwidth, setup/holding priority, Fast 
   Reroute request, Differentiated Services Traffic Engineering (DS-TE) 
   Class Type (CT), and others as specified in section 5.2.2.1 of 
   [RFC4216]. 
        
   For path computation requests that are not compliant with locally 
   configured policies, PCECP SHOULD enable a PCE to send an error 
   message to the requesting PCC or PCE indicating that the request has 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 10] 
                                                                     
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   been rejected because a specific parameter did not satisfy the local 
   policy. 
 
4.5.2.      Inter-AS PCE Re-interpretation Policies 
 
   Each SP may have different definitions in its use of, for example, 
   DS-TE TE classes. An inter-AS PCE receiving a path computation 
   request needs to interpret the parameters and constraints and adapt 
   them to the local environment. Specifically, a request constructed 
   by a PCC or PCE in one AS may have parameters and constraints that 
   should be interpreted differently or translated by the receiving PCE 
   that is in a different AS. A list of signaling parameters subject 
   to policy re-interpretation at AS borders can be found in section 
   5.2.2.2 of [RFC4216], and the list for path computation request 
   parameters and constraints is the same. In addition, the transit SPs 
   along the inter-AS TE path may be GMPLS transport providers which 
   may require re-interpretation of MPLS specific PCECP path computation 
   request objects to enable path computation over a GMPLS network or 
   vice versa. 
 
5.   Security Considerations 
    
   The PCECP is a communications protocol for use between potentially 
   remote entities (PCCs and PCEs) over an IP network. Security 
   concerns arise in order to protect the PCC and PCE, and the 
   information they exchange. [RFC4758] specifies requirements on the 
   PCECP to protect against spoofing, snooping, and DoS attacks. That 
   document is concerned with general protocol requirements applicable 
   to the basic use of the PCECP. This document is specific to the 
   application of the PCE architecture in an inter-AS environment, and 
   so it is appropriate to highlight the security considerations that 
   apply in that environment. 
    
   Security requirements that exist within a single administrative 
   domain become critical in the multi-AS case when the control of IP 
   traffic and access to the network may leave the authority of a 
   single administration. 
  
5.1.     Use and Distribution of Keys 
 
   How the participants in a PCECP session discover each other and the 
   need for the session is out of scope of this document. It may be 
   through configuration or automatic discovery. However, when a PCECP 
   session is established, the PCECP speakers MUST have mechanisms to 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 11] 
  
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   authenticate each other's identities and validate the data the 
   exchange.  They also SHOULD have mechanisms protect the data that 
   they exchange via encryption. Such mechanisms usually require the 
   use of keys, and so the PCECP MUST describe techniques for the 
   exchange and use of security keys. Where inter-AS PCE discovery is 
   used, and PCECP security is required, automated key distribution 
   mechanisms MUST also be used. Since such key exchange must 
   (necessarily) operate over an AS boundary, proper consideration needs 
   to be given to how inter-AS key exchanges may be carried out and how 
   the key exchange, itself, may be secured. Key distribution mechanisms 
   MUST be defined with consideration of [RFC4107]. Where a PCECP 
   session is configured between a pair of inter-AS PCEs, a security key
   may be manually set for that session.  
  
5.2.     Application of Policy 
 
   Policy forms an important part of the operation of PCEs in an 
   inter-AS environment as described in Section 4.5, especially when 
   ASes are administrated by different SPs. A wider discussion of the 
   application of policy to the PCE architecture can be found in 
   [PCE-POLICY].  
 
   Policy may also form part of the security model for the PCECP and may 
   be particularly applicable to inter-AS path computation requests. A 
   fundamental element of the application of policy at a PCE is the 
   identity of the requesting PCC/PCE. This makes the use of 
   authentication described in Section 5.1 particularly important.  
   Where policy information is exchanged as part of the computation 
   request and/or response, the policy object is transparent to the 
   PCECP being delivered un-inspected and unmodified to the policy 
   component of a PCE or PCC. Therefore, the policy components are 
   responsible for protecting (for example, encrypting) the policy 
   information and using additional identification and authentication 
   if a higher level of validation is required than is provided by the 
   base protocol elements of the PCECP.  
 
5.3.     Confidentiality 
 
   The PCECP MUST provide a mechanism to preserve the confidentiality of 
   path segments computed by a PCE in one AS and provided in a 
   computation response to another AS.  
  
   Furthermore, a PCE SHOULD be provided with a mechanism to mask its 
   identity such that its presence in the path computation chain in a 
   cooperative PCE model (such as described in [BRPC]) cannot be  
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 12] 
                                                                       
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   derived from the computed path. This will help to protect the PCE 
   from targeted attacks. Clearly, such confidentiality does not extend 
   to the PCECP peer (i.e., a PCC or another PCE) that invokes the PCE 
   with a path computation request. 
  
5.4.    Falsification of Information 
 
   In the PCE architecture, when PCEs cooperate, one PCE may return a 
   path computation result that is composed of multiple path segments 
   each computed by a different PCE. In the inter-AS case, each PCE may 
   belong to a different administrative domain, and the source PCC might 
   not know about the downstream PCEs, nor fully trust them. Although it 
   is possible and RECOMMENDED to establish a chain of trust between 
   PCEs, this might not always be possible. In this case, it becomes 
   necessary to guard against a PCE changing the information provided by 
   another downstream PCE. Some mechanism MUST be available in the 
   PCECP, and echoed in the corresponding signaling, that allows an AS 
   to verify that the signaled path conforms to the path segment 
   computed by the local PCE and returned on the path computation 
   request.  
 
6.   IANA Considerations  
 
   This document makes no requests for IANA action. 
 
7.   Acknowledgments  
 
   We would like to thank Adrian Farrel, Jean-Philippe Vasseur, and Jean 
   Louis Le Roux for their useful comments and suggestions. Pasi Eronen 
   and Sandy Murphy provided valuable early Security Directorate 
   reviews. Adrian Farrel re-wrote the Security Considerations section. 
 
8.   Authors' Addresses 
 
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   117 West Street 
   Waltham, MA 02451 
   Email: nabil.n.bitar@verizon.com 
         
   Kenji Kumaki 
   KDDI Corporation 
   Garden Air Tower 
   Iidabashi, Chiyoda-ku, 
   Tokyo 102-8460, JAPAN 
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 13] 
                                                                          
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 

   Phone: +81-3-6678-3103 
   Email: ke-kumaki@kddi.com 
         
   Raymond Zhang 
   BT  
   2160 E. Grand Ave. 
   El Segundo, CA 90245 USA 
   Email: Raymond_zhang@bt.com 
 
9.   Normative References 
 
   [RFC4107] Bellovin, S., and Housley, R., "Guidelines for 
   Cryptographic Key Management", BCP 107, RFC 4107, June 2005. 

   [RFC4216] Zhang. R.,  and Vasseur, JP., "MPLS Inter-AS Traffic    
   Engineering Requirements", RFC 4216, November 2005. 
 
   [RFC4655] Farrel, A.. Vasseur, JP., and Ash, J., "A Path Computation 
   Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4755, August 2006.  
 
   [RFC4657] Ash, J., Le Roux, JL., et al., "PCE Communication Protocol 
   Generic Requirements", RFC 4657, September 2006. 
   
 
10.    Informative References   
 
   [BRPC] Vasseur, JP., et. al, "A Backward Recursive PCE-based 
   Computation (BRPC) Procedure To Compute Shortest Constrained 
   Inter-domain Traffic Engineering Label Switched paths", 
   draft-ietf-pce-brpc-09.txt, work in progress.

   [RFC4206] Kompella, K., and Rekhter, Y., "Label switched Paths(LSP)  
   Hierarchy with Generalized MPLS TE", RFC4206, October 2005.   

   [RFC4758] Mystroem, M., "Cryptographic Token Key Initialization 
   Protocol (CT-KIP) Version 1.0 Revision 1", RFC 4758, November 2006.

   [RFC5150] Ayyangar, A., Kompella, K., Vasseur, JP., and Farrel, A., 
   "Label Switched Path Stitching with Generalized MPLS Traffic 
   Engineering (GMPLS TE)", RFC 5150, February 2008. 

   [RFC5151] Farrel, A., Ayyangar, A., and Vasseur, JP., "Inter domain 
   MPLS and GMPLS Traffic Engineering Resource Reservation Protocol- 
   Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) extensions", RFC 5151, February 2008.   
 
   [RFC5152] Vasseur, JP., Ayyangar, A.,  and Zhang, R., "A Per-domain 
   path computation method for Establishing Inter-domain Traffic 
   Engineering (TE) Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5152, February 
   2008.  
   
   

    
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 14] 
                                                                      
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
 
  [PCE-POLICY]  Bryskin, I., Berger, L. and Ash, J., "Policy-Enabled 
  Path Computation Framework", draft-ietf-pce-policy-enabled-path-
  comp-03, October 2007, work in progress. 
 
 
Intellectual Property Statement  
     
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
        
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
        
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.  
     
Disclaimer of Validity  
     
   This document and the information contained herein are provided   
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE  
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE   
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL  
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY  
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE  
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS  
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Copyright Statement  
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).  This document is subject  
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and  
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.  
     
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 15] 
                                                                    
Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-interas-pecp-reqs-05   April 2008 
   
    Acknowledgement  
     
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the  
   Internet Society.  
 
Bitar, Zhang, and Kumaki   Inter-AS Requirements for PCECP [Page 16] 
