





Network Working Group                                      B. Aboba, Ed.
INTERNET-DRAFT                                              Elwyn Davies
Category: Informational                      Internet Architecture Board
<draft-iab-net-transparent-01.txt>
7 November 2006



                  Reflections on Internet Transparency

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 1, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document provides a review of previous IAB statements on
   Internet transparency, as well a discussion of new transparency
   issues.  Far from having lessened in relevance, technical
   implications of intentionally or inadvertently impeding network
   transparency play a critical role in the Internet's ability to
   support innovation and global communication.  This document provides
   some specific illustrations of those potential impacts.





IAB                           Informational                     [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


Table of Contents

1.     Introduction ..........................................    3
2.     Additional Transparency Issues ........................    5
   2.1       Application Filtering ...........................    5
   2.2       Quality of Service ..............................    6
   2.3       Application Layer Gateways ......................    7
   2.4       IPv6 Address Restrictions .......................    8
   2.5       DNS Namespace Mangling ..........................    9
   2.6       Load Balancing and Redirection ..................   10
3.     Security Considerations ...............................   11
4.     IANA Considerations ...................................   11
5.     References ............................................   11
   5.1       Informative References ..........................   11
Acknowledgments ..............................................   13
Appendix A - IAB Members .....................................   13
Authors' Addresses ...........................................   14
Intellectual Property Statement ..............................   14
Disclaimer of Validity .......................................   15
Copyright Statement ..........................................   15































IAB                           Informational                     [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


1.  Introduction

   In the past, the IAB has published a number of documents relating to
   Internet transparency and the end-to-end principle, and other IETF
   documents have also touched on these issues as well.  These documents
   articulate the general principles on which the Internet architecture
   is based, as well as the core values which the Internet community
   seeks to protect going forward.  This document reaffirms those
   principles, describes the concept of "oblivious transport" as
   developed in the DARPA NewArch project [NewArch] and addresses a
   number of new transparency issues.

   A network that does not filter or transform the data that it carries
   may said to be "transparent" or "oblivious" to the content of
   packets.  Networks that provide oblivious transport enable the
   deployment of new services without requiring changes to the core.  It
   is this flexibility which is perhaps both the Internet's most
   essential characteristic as well as one of the most important
   contributors to its success.

   "Architectural Principles of the Internet" [RFC1958] Section 2
   describes the core tenets of the Internet architecture as follows:

      However, in very general terms, the community believes that the
      goal is connectivity, the tool is the Internet Protocol, and the
      intelligence is end to end rather than hidden in the network.

      The current exponential growth of the network seems to show that
      connectivity is its own reward, and is more valuable than any
      individual application such as mail or the World-Wide Web.  This
      connectivity requires technical cooperation between service
      providers, and flourishes in the increasingly liberal and
      competitive commercial telecommunications environment.

   "The Rise of the Middle and the Future of End-to-End: Reflections on
   the Evolution of the Internet Architecture" [RFC3724] Section 4.1.1
   describes some of the desirable consequences of this approach:

      One desirable consequence of the end-to-end principle is
      protection of innovation.  Requiring modification in the network
      in order to deploy new services is still typically more difficult
      than modifying end nodes.  The counterargument - that many end
      nodes are now essentially closed boxes which are not updatable and
      that most users don't want to update them anyway - does not apply
      to all nodes and all users.  Many end nodes are still user
      configurable and a sizable percentage of users are "early
      adopters," who are willing to put up with a certain amount of
      technological grief in order to try out a new idea.  And, even for



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


      the closed boxes and uninvolved users, downloadable code that
      abides by the end-to-end principle can provide fast service
      innovation.  Requiring someone with a new idea for a service to
      convince a bunch of ISPs or corporate network administrators to
      modify their networks is much more difficult than simply putting
      up a Web page with some downloadable software implementing the
      service.

   Yet even while the Internet has greatly expanded both in size and in
   application diversity, the degree of transparency has diminished.
   "Internet Transparency" [RFC2775] notes some of the causes for the
   loss of Internet transparency and analyzes their impact.  This
   includes discussion of Network Address Translators (NATs), firewalls,
   application level gateways (ALGs), relays, proxies, caches, split
   DNS, load balancers, etc.  [RFC2775] also analyzes potential future
   directions that could lead to the restoration of transparency.
   Section 6 summarizes the conclusions:

      Although the pure IPv6 scenario is the cleanest and simplest, it
      is not straightforward to reach it.  The various scenarios without
      use of IPv6 are all messy and ultimately seem to lead to dead ends
      of one kind or another. Partial deployment of IPv6, which is a
      required step on the road to full deployment, is also messy but
      avoids the dead ends.

   While full restoration of Internet transparency through the
   deployment of IPv6 remains a goal, the Internet's growing role in
   society, the increasing diversity of applications and the continued
   growth in security threats has altered the balance between
   transparency and security.  While transparency provides great
   flexibility, it also makes it easier to deliver unwanted as well as
   wanted traffic.

   Since many of the fundamental forces that have led to a reduction in
   the transparency of the IPv4 Internet also may play a role in the
   IPv6 Internet, the transparency of the IPv6 Internet is not pre-
   ordained, but rather represents an ideal whose maintenance will
   require significant ongoing effort.

   As noted in [NewArch], the technical cooperation which once
   characterized the development of the Internet has increasingly given
   way to a tussle between the interests of subscribers, providers and
   society at large.  Oblivious transport may be desired by developers
   seeking to deploy new services; providers may desire to block
   unwanted traffic in the core before it impacts subscribers, or to
   deliver "value added" services in the network that enable them to
   differentiate their offerings; subscribers may be sympathetic to
   either point of view, depending on their interests; society at large



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   may wish to block "offensive" material and monitor traffic that shows
   criminal intent.

   While there is no architectural "fix" that can restore oblivious
   transport while satisfying the interests of all parties, it is
   possible for providers to provide subscribers with information about
   the nature of the services being provided.  Subscribers need to be
   aware of whether they are receiving oblivious transport, and if not,
   how the service affects their traffic.

   The rest of this document examines aspects of Internet technology
   that affect network transparency.  Since the publication of the
   previously cited IAB statements, new technologies have been developed
   and views on existing technology have changed.  In some cases, these
   new technologies impact oblivious transport, and subscribers need to
   be aware of the impact on their service.

2.  Additional Transparency Issues

2.1.  Application Filtering

   Since one of the virtues of the Internet architecture is the ease
   with which new applications can be deployed, practices which restrict
   the ability to deploy new applications have the potential to reduce
   innovation.

   One such practice is the filtering of applications in the core of the
   network.  While such filtering may be useful to address security
   issues such as denial of service attacks, greater flexibility is
   provided by allowing filtering to occur at the edges, such as within
   provider access routers (e.g. outsourced firewall services), customer
   premise equipment (e.g. access firewalls), or on hosts (e.g. host
   firewalls).  In particular, deployment of filtering at the edges
   provides customers with the flexibility to choose which applications
   they wish to block or allow, whereas filtering in the core may not
   permit hosts to communicate even when the communication would conform
   to the appropriate use policies of the administrative domains to
   which those hosts belong.

   In practice, application filtering in the core is difficult to
   implement successfully, since over time developers will tend to re-
   engineer filtered protocols so as to avoid the filters.  Thus over
   time, core filtering is likely to result in interoperability issues
   or unnecessary complexity.  These costs come without the benefit of
   effective filtering since many application protocols began to use
   HTTP as a transport protocol after application developers observed
   that firewalls allow HTTP traffic while dropping packets for unknown
   rotocols.



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   In addition to architectural concerns, filtering in the core also
   raises issues of disclosure and end user consent.  As pointed out in
   "Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivity" [RFC4084] services
   advertised as providing "Internet connectivity" differ considerably
   in their capabilities, leading to confusion.  The document defines
   terminology relating to Internet connectivity, including "Web
   connectivity", "Client connectivity only, without a public address",
   "Client only, public address", "Firewalled Internet Connectivity",
   and "Full Internet Connectivity".  With respect to "Full Internet
   Connectivity", [RFC4084] Section 2 notes:

      Filtering Web proxies, interception proxies, NAT, and other
      provider-imposed restrictions on inbound or outbound ports and
      traffic are incompatible with this type of service.  Servers ...
      are typically considered normal.  The only compatible restrictions
      are bandwidth limitations and prohibitions against network abuse
      or illegal activities.

   [RFC4084] Section 4 describes disclosure obligations that apply to
   all forms of service limitation, whether applied on outbound or
   inbound traffic:

      More generally, the provider should identify any actions of the
      service to block, restrict, or alter the destination of, the
      outbound use (i.e., the use of services not supplied by the
      provider or on the provider's network) of applications services.

   In essence, [RFC4084] calls for providers to declare the ways in
   which the service provided departs from oblivious transport.  Since
   the lack of oblivious transport within transit networks will also
   affect transparency, this also applies to providers over whose
   network the subscriber's traffic may travel.

2.2.  Quality of Service

   The deployment of Quality of Service (QoS) technology on the Internet
   has potential implications for transparency since having better or
   worse QoS for a flow can result in making the Internet more or less
   oblivous to that flow.

   Specifically, QoS classes such as "default" [RFC2474] or "lower
   effort" [RFC3662] may experience higher random loss rates than others
   such as "assured forwarding" [RFC2597].  Conversely, bandwidth-
   limited QoS classes such as "expedited forwarding" [RFC3246] may
   experience systematic packet loss if they exceed their assigned
   bandwidth.  Other QoS mechanisms such as load balancing may have
   side-effects such as re-ordering of packets, which may have serious
   impact on perceived performance.  Thus, while QoS support is highly



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   desirable in order for real time services to coexist with elastic
   services, it is not without impact on packet delivery.

   The disclosure and consent obligations referred to in [RFC4084]
   Section 4 also apply to QoS mechanisms.  Since the publication of
   [RFC4084], the varieties and types of "bandwidth limitations" have
   expanded.  In some cases, these restrictions may go beyond simple
   average or peak bandwidth limitations.

   While the implementation of QoS results in an inability to deploy new
   applications on the Internet, its effect is similar to other
   transparency barriers.  When used to restrict the ability to deploy
   new applications, QoS mechanisms are incompatible with "Full Internet
   Connectivity" as defined in [RFC4084].

   For example, if a provider used QoS mechanisms to discriminate
   against any traffic that did not match the signature of a certain set
   of services or addresses, this would have an effect similar to a
   highly restrictive firewall.   Requiring an authenticated RSVP
   reservation [RFC2747][RFC3182]  for a flow not to experience severe
   packet loss is similar in effect to implementing authenticated
   firewall traversal.

   Since arbitrary or severe bandwidth limitations can make an
   application unusable,  the introduction of application-specific
   bandwidth limitations is equivalent to application filtering from a
   user's standpoint.

2.3.  Application Layer Gateways (ALGs)

   The IAB has devoted considerable attention to Network Address
   Translators, so that there is little need to repeat that discussion
   here.  However, with the passage of time, it has become apparent that
   there are problems inherent in the deployment of Application Layer
   Gateways (ALGs) (frequently embedded within firewalls and devices
   implementing NAT).

   [RFC2775] Section 3.5 states:

      If the full range of Internet applications is to be used, NATs
      have to be coupled with application level gateways (ALGs) or
      proxies.  Furthermore, the ALG or proxy must be updated whenever a
      new address-dependent application comes along.  In practice, NAT
      functionality is built into many firewall products, and all useful
      NATs have associated ALGs, so it is difficult to disentangle their
      various impacts.

   With the passage of time and development of NAT traversal



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   technologies such as IKE NAT-T [RFC3947], Teredo [RFC4380] and STUN
   [RFC3489] it has become apparent that ALGs represent an additional
   barrier to transparency.  In addition to posing barriers to the
   deployment of new applications not yet supported by ALGs, ALGs may
   create difficulties in the deployment of existing applications as
   well as updated versions.  For example, in the development of IKE
   NAT-T, additional difficulties were presented by "IPsec Helper" ALGs
   embedded within NATs.

   It should be stressed that these difficulties are inherent in the
   architecture of ALGs, rather than merely an artifact of poor
   implementations.  No matter how well an ALG is implemented, over time
   barriers to transparency will emerge, so that the notion of a
   "transparent ALG" is a contradiction in terms.

   In particular, DNS ALGs present a host of issues, including
   incompatibilities with DNSSEC that prevent deployment of a secure
   naming infrastructure even if all the endpoints are upgraded.  For
   details, see [NATPT].

2.4.  IPv6 Address Restrictions

   [RFC2775] Section 5.1 states:

      Note that it is a basic assumption of IPv6 that no artificial
      constraints will be placed on the supply of addresses, given that
      there are so many of them.  Current practices by which some ISPs
      strongly limit the number of IPv4 addresses per client will have
      no reason to exist for IPv6.

   Any limits on the number of IPv6 addresses usable on a link provides
   an incentive for the deployment of NAT with IPv6.  The introduction
   of NAT for IPv6 would represent a barrier to transparency, and
   therefore is to be avoided if at all possible.

2.4.1.  Allocation of IPv6 Addresses by Providers

   In order to encourage deployments of IPv6 to use oblivious transport,
   it is important that IPv6 networks of all sizes be supplied with a
   prefix sufficient to enable allocation of addresses and sub-networks
   for all the hosta and links within their network.  Initial address
   allocation policy suggested allocating a /48 prefix to "small" sites
   which should handle typical requirements.  Any changes to allocation
   policy should take into account the transparency reduction that will
   result from further restriction.  For example, provider provisioning
   of a single /64 without support for prefix delegation or (worse
   still) a longer prefix, would represent a restriction on the
   availability of IPv6 addresses that could encourage the deployment of



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   IPv6 NAT.

2.4.2.  IKEv2

   Issues with the IPv6 address assignment functionality of IKEv2
   [RFC4306] are described in [IKEv2Clar]:

      IKEv2 also defines configuration payloads for IPv6.  However, they
      are based on the corresponding IPv4 payloads, and do not fully
      follow the "normal IPv6 way of doing things"...  In particular,
      IPv6 stateless autoconfiguration or router advertisement messages
      are not used; neither is neighbor discovery.

   As defined in [RFC4306], IKEv2 provides for the assignment of a
   single IPv6 address, using the INTERNAL_IP6_ADDRESS attribute.  In
   situations where this is the only attribute supported for IPv6
   address assignment, the availability of IPv6 addresses will be
   artificially restricted.

   Other IPv6 address assignment models may be possible.  The
   INTERNAL_IP6_SUBNET attribute enables the host to determine the sub-
   networks accessible directly through the secure tunnel created.  This
   option or a similar one could conceivably be used to assign one or
   more prefixes to the IKEv2 initiator that could be used for address
   creation.  However, where the desire is to obtain prefixes that can
   be delegated, this will not be sufficient.  The INTERNAL_IP6_DHCP
   attribute provides the address of a DHCPv6 server; this could
   potentially be used to enable use of DHCPv6 prefix delegation
   [RFC3633] to obtain additional prefixes for delegation.  However, in
   order for implementers to utilize these options in an interoperable
   way, we suggest that further clarifications to the IKEv2
   specification would be helpful.

2.5.  DNS Namespace Mangling

   In [RFC2826] the technical arguments for a unique root were
   presented.

   One of the premises in [RFC2826] is that a common namespace and
   common semantics applied to these names, is needed for effective
   communication between two parties.  The document argues that this
   principle can only be met when one unique root is being used and when
   the domains are maintained by single owners or maintainers.

   Because [RFC4084] targets only on IP service terms and does not talk
   about namespace issues, it does not refer to [RFC2826].  We stress
   that for proper IP service the use of a unique root for the DNS
   namespace is essential.



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


   Since the publication of [RFC2826] there have been reports of
   providers implementing recursive nameservers and/or DNS forwarders
   that replace answers that indicate that a name does not exist in the
   DNS hierarchy by a name and an address record that hosts a web
   service that is supposed to be useful for end-users.

   In a way the effect of these modifications are similar to placement
   of a wildcard in top-level domains.  Although wildcard labels in top-
   level domains lead to problems that are described elsewhere [RFC4592]
   they do not strictly violate the DNS protocol.  This is not the case
   for the above example where the modification of answers takes place
   in the middle of the path between authoritative servers and the stub
   resolvers that provide the answers to applications.

   [RFC2826] section 1.3 states:

      Both the design and implementations of the DNS protocol are
      heavily based on the assumption that there is a single owner or
      maintainer for every domain, and that any set of resources records
      associated with a domain is modified in a single-copy serializable
      fashion.

   In particular the DNSSEC protocol [RFC4035] has been designed to
   verify that DNS information has not been modified between the moment
   they have been published on an authoritative server and the moment
   the validation takes place. Since that verification can take place at
   the application level, any modification by a recursive forwarder will
   cause validation failures, disabling the improved security DNSSEC is
   intended to provide.

2.6.  Load Balancing and Redirection

   In order to provide information that is adapted to the locale from
   which a request is made or to provide a speedier service, techniques
   have been deployed which result in packets being redirected or taking
   a different path dependent on where the request originates.  For
   example, requests may be distributed among servers using "reverse
   NAT"; responses to DNS requests may be altered; HTTP "gets" may be
   re-directed; or specific packets may be diverted onto overlay
   networks.

   Provided these services are well-implemented they can provide value;
   however, it is also possible for service to be disrupted.  For
   example:

[1]  The use of "reverse NAT" to balance load among servers supporting
     IPv6 would adversely affect the transparency of the IPv6 Internet.




IAB                           Informational                    [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


[2]  DNS re-direction is typically based on the source address of the
     query,  which may not provide information on the location of the
     host originating the query.  As a result, a host configured with
     the address of a distant DNS server could find itself pointed to a
     server near the DNS server, rather a server near to the host.  HTTP
     re-direction does not encounter this issue.

[3]  If the packet filters that divert packets onto overlay networks are
     misconfigured, this can lead to packets being misdirected onto the
     overlay and delayed or lost if the far end cannot return them to
     the global Internet.

[4]  The use of anycast needs to be carefully thought out so that
     service can be maintained in the face of routing changes.

3.  Security Considerations

   Several transparency issues discussed in this document (NATs,
   tranparent proxies, DNS namespace mangling) weaken existing end-to-
   end security gurantees and interfere with the deployment of protocols
   that would strengthen end-to-end security.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

5.  References

5.1.  Informative References

[IKEv2Clar]
     Eronen, P. and P. Hoffman, "IKEv2 Clarifications and Implementation
     Guidelines", Internet draft (work in progress), draft-eronen-ipsec-
     ikev2-clarifications-09.txt, May 2006.

[NATPT]
     Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move NAT-PT to Experimental",
     Internet draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-v6ops-natpt-to-
     exprmntl-03.txt, April 2006.

[NewArch]
     Clark, D. et al.,  "New Arch: Future Generation Internet
     Architecture",
     http://www.isi.edu/newarch/iDOCS/final.finalreport.pdf

[RFC1958]
     Carpenter, B., "Architectural Principles of the Internet", RFC
     1958, June 1996.



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


[RFC2474]
     Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F. and D. Black, "Definition of the
     Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
     Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998.

[RFC2597]
     Heinanen, J., Baker, F., Weiss, W. and J. Wroclawski, "Assured
     Forwarding PHB Group", RFC 2597, June 1999.

[RFC2747]
     Baker, F., Lindell, B., and M. Talwar, "RSVP Cryptographic
     Authentication", RFC 2747, January 2000.

[RFC2775]
     Carpenter, B., "Internet Transparency", RFC 2775, February 2000.

[RFC2826]
     IAB, "IAB Technical Comment on the Unique DNS Root", RFC 2826, May
     2000.

[RFC3182]
     Yadav, S., Yavatkar, R., Pabbati, R., Ford, P., Moore, T., Herzog,
     S., and R. Hess, "Identity Representation for RSVP", RFC 3182,
     October 2001.

[RFC3246]
     Davie, B., Charny, A., Bennett, J., Benson, K., Le Boudec, J.,
     Courtney, W., Davari, S., Firoiu, V. and D. Stiliadis, "An
     Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per-Hop Behavior)", RFC 3246, March 2002.

[RFC3489]
     Rosenberg, J., Weinberger, J., Huitema, C. and R. Mahy, "STUN -
     Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) Through Network
     Address Translators (NATs)", RFC 3489, March 2003.

[RFC3633]
     Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic Host
     Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633, December 2003.

[RFC3662]
     Bless, R., Nichols, K. and K. Wehrle, "A Lower Effort Per-Domain
     Behavior (PDB) for Differentiated Services", RFC 3662, December
     2003.

[RFC3724]
     Kempf, J. and R. Austein, "The Rise of the Middle and the Future of
     End-to-End: Reflections on the Evolution of the Internet
     Architecture", RFC 3724, March 2004.



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


[RFC3947]
     Kivinen, T., Swander, B., Huttunen, A. and V. Volpe, "Negotiation
     of NAT-Traversal in the IKE", RFC 3947, January 2005.

[RFC4035]
     Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D. and S. Rose,
     "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4035,
     March 2005.

[RFC4084]
     Klensin, J., "Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivity",
     RFC 4084, May 2005.

[RFC4306]
     Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4306,
     December 2005.

[RFC4380]
     Huitema, C., "Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP", RFC 4380, February
     2006.

[RFC4592]
     Lewis, E., "The Role of Wildcards in the Domain Name System", RFC
     4592, July 2006.


Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to acknowledge Brian Carpenter, Pekka Savola,
   Spencer Dawkins, Jari Arkko and Carl Malamud for contributions to
   this document.

Appendix A - IAB Members at the time of this writing

   Bernard Aboba
   Loa Andersson
   Brian Carpenter
   Leslie Daigle
   Elwyn Davies
   Kevin Fall
   Olaf Kolkman
   Kurtis Lindqvist
   David Meyer
   David Oran
   Eric Rescorla
   Dave Thaler
   Lixia Zhang




IAB                           Informational                    [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Bernard Aboba
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA 98052

   EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com
   Phone: +1 425 706 6605
   Fax:   +1 425 936 7329

   Elwyn B. Davies
   Consultant
   Soham, Cambs
   UK

   Phone: +44 7889 488 335
   EMail: elwynd@dial.pipex.com

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.









IAB                           Informational                    [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Reflections on Internet Transparency   7 November 2006


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.































IAB                           Informational                    [Page 15]


