

Network Working Group                                  D. Papadimitriou
Internet Draft                                                 J. Jones
draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                        Alcatel
Expiration Date: May 2001
                                                          November 2000


                         Enhanced LSP Services


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document describes LSP parameters and attributes as well as the
   enhanced features they support. In this, we propose to group these
   parameters in three distinct groups: LSP Identification parameters,
   LSP Service parameters and Policy parameters. The intent of this
   proposal is to integrate within the LSP parameters the Virtual
   Private optical Network (VPoN) model, enhanced protection mechanism,
   class of priorities and the Class-of-Service (CoS) augmented model
   and signaling security levels.














Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          1

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

1. Introduction

   This classification is proposed to separate the parameters
   distributed within an optical sub-network (Identification and
   Service parameters) from the one centralized on directory service
   (Policy-related parameters). This means that the current model
   considers for scalability, convergence and performance reasons that
   keeping all the policy-related parameters would result in an
   overflow of information to be distributed throughout the optical-
   network giving rise to an increasing convergence time which could
   potentially increase the setup time of an LSP. The proposed
   classification and parameter hierarchy takes also into account the
   relationship with status and result codes.

   The remainder of the document is organized as follows:

   Sections 2 _ 4 describe the details of the attributes for
   Identification, Service and Policy groups, respectively. Section 5
   describes result and status codes. Annex 1 defines the terminology
   used in the contribution.

2. Identification parameters

   The following identification-related parameters are considered.
   These parameters belong to Type 0x01.


2.1 Termination-Point identification parameters (Sub-type 0x01)

   ONE and CNE Termination-point identification parameters apply to
   both the source and the destination of an LSP.

   - Port ID: 16-bit integer indicating and identifying the a port
     within an Optical Network Element _ ONE

   - Channel ID: 16-bit integer indicating and identifying a channel
     within the specified port ID

   - Sub-Channel ID: 16-bit integer indicating a sub-channel within the
     specified Channel ID

   - Logical-port ID: identifies a logical port; concatenation of the
     port-ID (16-bit field), the Channel-ID (16-bit field) and the Sub-
     channel-ID (16-bit field)

   - Logical-address: the address associated with a logical-port.

     Logical-address could be one of the following:
      - ITU-T E.164 ATM End System Address (AESA): 160-bit field
      - British Standards Institute ICD AESA: 160-bit field
      - ANSI DCC AESA: 160-bit field
      - Ethernet address: 48-bit field

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          2

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

      - IPv4 address: 32-bit field
      - IPv6 address: 128-bit field
      - Default-value: 56-bit field (UNSPECIFIED: 0x0...0)

     The logical-address field (maximum 21-byte field) is constituted
     by the logical-address type sub-field and the logical-address
     value sub-field:
      - the logical-address type is a 8-bit sub-field indicating the
        type of the logical-address (default-value of the logical-
        address type is 0x00).
      - the logical-address value is a variable-length field of maximum
        20 bytes indicating the value of the logical-address (maximum
        20-byte sub-field without justification).

     The default-value (type 0x00) is a 56-bit field to optionally
     indicate the User-Group ID (7-byte field) within this field.
     Consequently, the logical-address of the Client will map a virtual
     identifier corresponding to the User-Group ID to which the LSP
     belongs. By using this method, the Virtual Private optical Network
     _ VPoN concept is mainly integrated within the logical addressing
     scheme.

   - Termination-point ID: 80-bit field resulting from the
     concatenation of the unique IPv4 address (32-bit field)
     associated to the device and the logical-port ID (48-bit field)

   - Termination-point address: concatenation of the logical address
     and the termination-point ID. The CNE termination-point address is
     a maximum 248-bit field.

     For ONEs which do not associate logical address to their
     interfaces, the ONE termination-point address corresponds to the

     UNSPECIFIED value concatenated with the ONE termination-point ID.

2.2 Client identification parameters (Sub-type 0x02)

   The client identification parameters include the Contract Identifier
   (Contract ID) and the User-Group Identifier (User-Group ID).

   - Contract ID: 32-bit integer (provided by the client) which
     uniquely identifies a client (i.e. a group of client CNE belonging
     to the same administrative authority) against the optical network
     domain.

     The contract ID could be compared to a client identifier which
     uniquely determines the client identity against an optical network
     domain. This parameter should not have any complex semantic nor
     meaning.

   - User Group ID: 7-bytes field structure based on the VPN
     identifiers [VPN-ID]

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          3

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000


     The source and destination ONE are responsible for authentication
     of User-Groups and for call acceptance policies. In the absence of
     a pre-determined policy, the default behavior is for the
     destination CNE to accept the LSP create request if the
     destination CNE is part of the signaled and authenticated User-
     Group.

     Since a boundary ONE can potentially be connected to multiple
     client CNEs, or a given client CNE can potentially request LSP for
     different groups of users, this ID defines the possibility to set-
     up Virtual Private optical Networks. The corresponding models are
     described as follows:

   The VPoN - Virtual Private optical Network models considered here
   are based on the following concept:
    - the contract-ID defines the identification of a optical network
      client (for instance, an ISP)
    - the user-group-ID defines the identification of a group defined
      within this optical network client (for instance an ISP client)

   The first model considers the Contract-ID as a potential VPoN
   identifier the second one considers only the User-Group ID as a
   potential VPoN identifier.

2.3 LSP identification parameters (Sub-type 0x00)

   The LSP Identifier (LSP ID) is the unique identifier of the LSP
   assigned by the optical network. The LSP ID is coded as a 64-bit
   field obtained from the concatenation of two fields uniquely
   identifying the LSP within an optical network:
    - IPv4 address of the source ONE consider as an unique IP address
      inside a given optical network
    - 32-bit integer assigned by the source ONE. This integer is
      locally unique within a given ONE. (Source Termination point ID
      can be used for this purpose)

   LSP ID is assigned by the source ONE in response to an LSP
   create request. Within the LSP create message (sent by the client
   CNE), the UNSPECIFIED value is assigned to the LSP ID.

   LSP ID reserved values are as follows:
    - UNSPECIFIED value: 0x0...0 referring to a not-specified LSP ID
    - ALL value: 0xF...F referring to all the LSP IDs

3. Service parameters

   Concerning the LSP service, the following parameters are considered.
   These parameters belong to Type 0x02.

3.1 LSP service parameters (Sub-type 0x00)


Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          4

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000


   LSP service parameters concerning Framing-Bandwidth and SDH/Sonet
   are different from those proposed in [GMPLS]. Other parameters
   considered within this sub-section, offers the possibility to
   implement the enhanced services described above:

   - Framing-Bandwidth:

     This integer specifies the format and the associated bandwidth of
     the signal transported across the UNI and represents the framing
     and bandwidth of the service requested through the optical
     network.

     This parameter is a 16-bit integer constituted by a framing type
     (4-bit sub-field) and an associated bandwidth (12-bit sub-field)

     Framing-type (4-bit sub-field) possible values are:
      - Clear channels : type 0x0
      - Sonet          : type 0x1
      - SDH            : type 0x2
      - PDH            : type 0x3
      - WAN Ethernet   : type 0x4
      - LAN Ethernet   : type 0x5
      - Digital Wrapper: type 0x6

     Bandwidth (12-bit sub-field) possible values are:
      - Clear Channels: possible values are OC-<N> where the N values
        are coded where N = 0x001 (OC-1) to N=0xC00 (OC-3072)
      - Sonet: possible values are STS-<N> where the N values are coded
        where N = 0x001 (OC-1) to N=0xC00 (OC-3072)
      - SDH: possible values are STM-<N> where the N values are coded
        where N = 0x001 (OC-3) to N=0x300 (OC-3072)
      - PDH: possible values are DS-<N> - E-<N> - J-<N>
        where DS = 0x1 - E = 0x2 - J = 0x3 and N = 0x01 to 0x04
        So, DS-0 = 0x101 and PDH DS-0 = 0x3101 etc.
      - WAN Ethernet: possible value 10 Gbps: 0x3E8
      - LAN Ethernet: possible values are coded in 10 Mbps units
        So, 10 Mbps = 0x001 - 100 Mbps = 0x00A
            1 Gbps = 0x064 - 10 Gbps = 0x3E8
      - Digital Wrapper: possible values are coded in 2.5 Gbps units
        So, 2.5 Gbps = 0x001 - 10 Gbps = 0x004 - 40 Gbps = 0x028

      Note: Digital Wrapper refers to Standard Digital Wrapper layer as
            proposed by the ITU-T G.709 v0.83 proposal [ITU-T G.709].

   - SDH/Sonet Parameter:

     This 8-bit integer parameter applies only to SDH/Sonet framing.
     The SDH/Sonet Parameter includes the Transparency levels (4 MS
     Bits) and the Concatenation types (4 LS Bits):

     Transparency: Possible values are coded on 4-bit integer:

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          5

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

      - Default-value                         = 0x0
      - PLR-C (Physical Layer Regeneration)   = 0x1
      - STE-C (Section Terminating Equipment) = 0x2
      - LTE-C (Line Terminating Equipment)    = 0x3

     In PLR-Circuits (type 0x0), all SDH/Sonet overhead bytes are left.
     unchanged when transported between clients over the optical.
     network. STE-Circuits (type 0x1) preserves all SDH/Sonet line.
     overhead bytes between clients but the section overhead bytes are
     not required to be preserved. LTE-Circuits (type 0x3) preserves
     the SDH/Sonet payload but the section and line overhead bytes are
     required to be preserved.

     Concatenation: Possible values are coded on 4-bit integer:
      - Default-value (no concatenation)      = 0x0
      - Virtual Concatenation                 = 0x1
      - Continuous Concatenation              = 0x2

   - Optical Parameter:

     This parameter is related to all-optical network. Since SDH/Sonet
     framing is currently the key consideration, this parameter should
     be not included within the LSP service requests (even optionally).

     This 16-bit parameter is divided in two parts; both defines the
     maximum admitted value for an optical signal-related parameter:
     - Bit Error Rate: 8-bit integer defining the exponent of the
       maximum BER admitted for a given optical signal (default value:
       0x00)
     - Jitter: 8-bit integer defining the maximum jitter admitted for a
       given optical signal (default value: 0x00)

   - Directionality:

     The directionality parameter is an 8-bit integer indicating the
     directionality of the LSP. If this optional parameter is omitted,
     the LSP is assumed to be bi-directional.

     Possible values: - uni-directional   = 0x01
                      - bi-directional    = 0x11 (default value)
                      - multi-directional = 0xmn (multicast)

   - Priority-Preemption:

     The priority-preemption optional parameter is a 16-bit integer
     including the priority (12-bit integer) and preemption level (4-
     bit integer) of an LSP:

     - Priority: 12-bit integer indicating the priority of the LSP
        - Default value: from 0x<C>EF (higher) to 0x<C>10 (lower)
        - Priorities from 0x<C>F0 to 0x<C>FF are reserved
        - Priorities from 0x<C>0F to 0x<C>00 are reserved

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          6

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000


       Where <C> (4 MS bits) defines the priority-class: C ranges from
       1 to E Class 1 is considered as the default class and Class 0
       and Class F are Reserved priority-classes. The priority value (8
       LS bits) within a given priority-class ranges from 0xEF (higher
       priority) to 0x10 (lower priority).

       The CoS augmented model [DIFF-ARCH] is based on the following
       principle: at the boundary CNE, if we consider Packet-Switch
       Capable (PSC) interfaces, the DiffServ Codepoint (DSCP) [DIFF-
       DSF] defining the Per Hop Behaviour (PHB) [DIFF-PHB], are mapped
       to the LSP priority class. For this purpose, we propose the
       following rules:
        - Class 1 corresponds to Best-Effort service
        - Class 2 to D corresponds to Assured Forwarding (AF) services
           . Class AF1 ranges from 2 to 4
           . Class AF2 ranges from 5 to 7
           . Class AF3 ranges from 8 to A
           . Class AF4 ranges from B to D
        - Class E corresponds to Expedited Forwarding (EF) service

       These DiffServ classes are related within the optical network to
       the service-level defined in section 3:
        - Class 1 defines a best-effort service
        - Class 2 to 7 defines a bronze service
        - Class 8 to D defines a silver service
        - Class E defines a gold service

       Within our definition of LSP, the analogy between the drop
       precedence in DiffServ and the priority class could also be
       related to the preemption setting at the UNI during the LSP
       creation. In this case, the priority value setting is performed
       through the following rules:
        - Class 1 defines a priority ranging from 0x110 to 0x1EF
        - Class 2 to 7 defines a priority ranging from 0x210 to 0x7EF
        - Class 8 to D defines a priority ranging from 0x810 to 0xDEF
        - Class E defines a priority ranging from 0xE10 to 0xEEF

     - Preemption: 4-bit integer indicating the preemptability of an
       LSP.

       This parameter specifies whether a given LSP can be preempted by
       an LSP of higher priority if the resource used by the lower-
       priority LSP need to be used during the setup and/or the
       recovery of this higher priority LSP.

       The possible values for the preemption (4 bit-field) are:
        - Setup and Recovery preemptability: 0x0 (Class 1)
        - Recovery preemptability          : 0x1 (Class 2 to 7)
        - Setup preemptability             : 0x2 (Class 8 to D)
        - No_preemptability                : 0x3 (Class E)


Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          7

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

     Two VpoN models have been defined, the priority-preemption levels
     considered here are related to these models.

     If we consider the Contract-ID as a potential identifier, then we
     have the following options concerning the preemption levels:
      - preemption within a given user-group (i.e within VpoN belonging
        to the same optical network client)
      - preemption within a given contract-ID (i.e between VpoN
        belonging to the same optical network client)
      - preemption between contract-Ids (i.e between optical network
        clients)

     If we do not consider the Contract-ID as a potential identifier,
     then we have the following options concerning the preemption
     levels:
      - preemption within a given user-group (i.e within VpoN belonging
        to the same optical network client)
      - preemption between user-groups (i.e between VpoN belonging to
        the separate optical network client)

   - Bundles: TBD

   - Maximum Signaling Delay: This 4-byte parameter fixes a limit to
     the maximum acceptable propagation delay (units in milliseconds)
     for the network to process the client requests. The Maximum
     Signaling Delay parameter is optional.

     Default value: infinite

3.2 LSP protection parameters (Sub-type 0x01)

   Protection parameter indicates the protection level desired for the
   LSP inside to the optical network (internal protection) or at the
   UNI (source- and destination-side protection levels) which the
   protection level requested between both side of the client-to-
   network connection.

   This optional parameter indicates the protection type (4-bit
   integer) requested by the client device from:
    - the optical network: internal network protection (type 0x1)
    - the source drop-side: source-side protection (type 0x2)
    - the destination drop-side: destination-side protection (type 0x3)
    - no protection (default-value: 0x0)

   For each of these protection types, the protection levels (8-bit
   integer) defined are the following:

    - Internal Protection (or Network Protection):
       . Unprotected              - type 0x00 (default value)
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection - type 0x10
       . Shared Protection M:N    - type 0x20


Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          8

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection - type 0x30

   - Source-Side Protection (protection between CNE and ONE on source
     side):
       . Unprotected              - type 0x00 (default value)
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection - type 0x10
       . Shared Protection M:N    - type 0x20
       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection - type 0x30

   - Destination-Side Protection (protection of between CNE and ONE on
     destination side):
       . Unprotected              - type 0x00 (default value)
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection - type 0x10
       . Shared Protection M:N    - type 0x20
       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection - type 0x30

   Internal-network- and Side- protection the last 4-bit sub-field
   indicates the protection-scheme of the LSP: inherent (0x30) or non-
   intrusive (0x31), quality-class values are TBD.

   Related to these protection types and levels, a reversion strategy
   (4-bit integer) could be defined:
    - a revertive strategy (type 0x0) means that an LSP gets restored
      to its original route after a failure has been recovered or
      repaired
    - a non-revertive strategy (type 0x1) means that an LSP does not
      get restored to its original route after a failure has been
      recovered or repaired

3.3 LSP routing parameters (Sub-type 0x02)

   The routing diversity of an LSP is defined as the list of N LSPs ID
   from which a given LSP (so a given LSP ID) must be physically
   diverse from.

   Based on the hierarchy specified in the OIF2000.019 Contribution,
   the Diversity of an LSP takes into account the following types:
      - Shared Risk Link Group: Resource type: 0x00 (default value)
      - Fiber segment         : Resource type: 0x01
      - Fiber sub-segment     : Resource type: 0x02
      - Fiber link            : Resource type: 0x03
      - Optical device        : Resource type: 0x04

   Resource IDs are defines as follows:
      - Fiber segment         : List of fiber sub-segments
      - Fiber sub-segment     : List of fiber links
      - Fiber link            : <ONE IPv4, Port ID; ONE IPv4, PortID>
      - Optical device        : ONE IPv4 Address
      - Shared Risk Link Group: 0x00 (default value)

   Diversity is considered here for both unidirectional and bi-
   directional LSPs. This means that even if two-half LSP as put

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                          9

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

   together to form a bi-directional LSP diversity applies to both
   halves.

   So the diversity parameter could be implemented as variable-size
   list:
     - Exclude: LSP ID 1 (64-bit) - Resource type - Resource ID
     - ...
     - Exclude: LSP ID N (64-bit) - Resource type - Resource ID

   Note that the SLRG of an LSP is the SRLGs union of the links covered
   by the LSP. SRLG encoding should be further discussed: a first
   approach would be an ordered or unordered list of the SRLG values to
   which the LSP belongs to.

3.4 Identification and Service Parameters - Summary

   The following table summarizes the Identification and Service
   parameters:

   --------------------------------------------------------------------
   Identification Parameters    Size          Default value   Status
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
   Termination-point ID (ONE)   80 bits       0x0...0         Mandatory
    or Logical Address (CNE)    max 248 bits
   Contract ID                  32 bits                       Mandatory
   User-Group ID                56 bits                       Mandatory
   LSP ID                       64 bits       0x0...0         Mandatory
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
   LSP Service Parameters       Size          Default value   Status
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
   Framing-Bandwidth            16 bits                       Mandatory
   SDH/Sonet Parameter          8 bits        0x00       Mandatory(TDM)
   Optical Parameter            16 bits       0x0000         Future use
   Directionality               8 bits        0x11             Optional
   Priority-Preemption          16 bits       0x1EF0           Optional
   Max Signaling Delay          32 bits       0xF...F          Optional
   Internal Protection          16 bits       0x0000           Optional
   Side Protection              16 bits       0x0000           Optional
   Diversity                    Variable                       Optional
   --------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Policy parameters (Type: 0x03)

   Policy-related parameters are related to directory services provided
   to the
   client CNE through the UNI services. These parameters include the
   following items:
   - Service-Level parameters
   - Schedule parameters
   - Billing parameters
   - Optional parameters


Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         10

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

   These parameters are referred as type 0x03 parameters. By receiving
   such kind of parameters the source boundary ONE needs to forward the
   content of these request through the NMI interface (interface
   between the ONE and a management server) to a centralized directory
   service.

4.1 Service-level parameters (Sub-type: 0x01)

   Service level (i.e. service-level specification) parameter is
   implemented as a 16-bit integer which refer to parameters detailed
   in the previous sub-section (service-related parameters). This
   parameter indicates the class-of-service offered by the optical
   network carrier.

   The first 256 values (0 _ 255) are reserved for future OIF inter-
   operability agreements. The remaining values are carrier specific.

   The service-level parameter could include the following attributes:
    - Priority and Preemption
    - Propagation Delay
    - Protection parameters
    - Routing parameters
    - Signaling security levels

   For instance, value 0x1xxx might indicate through a request to a
   directory service, a best-effort service:
    - unprotected LSP
    - default priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - no signaling authentication

   Value ranging from 0x2xxx to 0x7xxx to might indicate through a
   request to a directory service, a bronze service:
    - M:N protected LSP
    - low-priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - signaling authentication (no signaling encryption)

   Value ranging from 0x8xxx to 0xDxxx to might indicate through a
   request to a directory service, a silver service:
    - M:N protected LSP
    - medium-priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - signaling authentication (no signaling encryption)

   Value 0xExxx might indicate through a request to a directory
   service, a gold service:
    - 1:1 protected LSP
    - high-priority

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         11

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

    - finite propagation delay
    - global routing diversity
    - signaling authentication and encryption

   Consequently, this means that the client knows the meaning of the
   service-level prior to the corresponding LSP service request. Within
   the LSP request, explicit parameter values take precedence over
   service-level.

   4.2 Schedule parameters (Sub-type: 0x02)

   Scheduling refers to the possibility to create, delete or modify LSP
   through a given time-of-day, day-to-day, day-to-week, etc.
   scheduling plan.

   For a given plan, the scheduling functions could be start, stop and
   repeat.

   The attributes of the scheduling function could be:
    - the start/stop time at which the function has to be
      executed/stopped
    - the start/stop date at which the function has to be
      executed/stopped
    - the recurrence interval between two repeated execution of the
      function
    - the number of recurrence intervals

   The default values of the schedule parameter regarding the LSP
   requested service:
    - the start time is the current time (start now)
    - the start date is the current date (start now)
    - the recurrence interval is infinite since the LSP request has to
      be executed only once
    - the number of recurrence intervals equals zero

4.3 Billing parameters (Sub-type: 0x03)

   The billing parameter refers to the billing contract identifier onto
   which the requested services will be charged. A given contract ID
   could have more than one billing contract identifier.

   An optical network client (a Contract ID) may have several clients
   (i.e. User-Groups) and assign to each of them a dedicated billing
   identifier.

   This parameter is implemented as a 16-bit integer. The first 256
   values (0 _ 255) are reserved for future inter-operability
   agreements. The remaining values are carrier specific.

4.4 Optional parameters (Sub-type: 0x04)



Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         12

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

   Optional parameters could include Vendor-specific parameters, etc.

   Details concerning these optional parameters are TBD.

   Two options seem feasible for this purpose:
    - either the client CNE knows the content of the policy-related
      parameters without any additional information coming from the
      optical network
    - or the client CNE initiates an LSP status request with
      appropriate extensions to request the policy-related parameters
      values to the optical network. So the client learns dynamically
      the service-level offered by the optical network through a
      directory service before initiate an LSP create request to the
      ONE. We refer to this as directory services at the UNI.

5. Result and Status codes

   This section describes the Result codes (section 5.1) and Status
   codes (section 5.2).

5.1 Result codes

   Result codes are mandatory fields included in response to LSP
   services (this does not preclude the inclusion of other explicit
   parameter value as response to an LSP service request).

   Result codes are 16-bit integers: the first sub-field defines the RS
   byte field and the last sub-field indicates the related cause of the
   RS byte value.

   - Result defines the R value (4 MSB bits of the first byte): None
     (R=0) Failure (R=1) or Success (R=2)

   - Requested LP-Service defines the S value (4 LSB bits of the first
     byte): create (S=1), delete (S=2), modify (S=3), or status (S=4)

   So the RS field defines the result of a service request. The RS
   field corresponding to 04 is only used within the Status request
   message.

   The last byte defines the cause of a given result of an LSP service
   request. The RS field is concatenated to the following values:
    - Identification
       . Source Termination-Point address: 0x01
       . Source port ID: 0x02
       . Source channel-ID: 0x03
       . Source sub-channel-ID: 0x04
       . Source user-group ID: 0x05
       . Destination Termination-Point address: 0x06
       . Destination port ID: 0x07
       . Destination channel-ID: 0x08


Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         13

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

       . Destination sub-channel-ID: 0x09
       . Destination user-group ID: 0x0A
       . Contract ID: 0x0B
       . LSP ID: 0x0C
    - LSP Service
       . Framing-bandwidth: 0x11
       . SDH/Sonet: 0x12
       . Optical: 0x13
       . Directionality: 0x14
       . Priority-preemption: 0x15
       . Propagation delay: 0x16
       . Network Protection: 0x17
       . Source-side protection: 0x18
       . Destination-side protection: 0x19
    - Policy-related: TBD

5.2 Status codes

   Status codes are used to indicated the current, or the change status
   of an LSP. Status codes are 16-bit integers.

   - The encoding of the status code is the same as Result codes except
     that RS byte is replaced by
      - Active (0x31) and Inactive (0x32) for LSP
      - Reachable (0x41) and Unreachable (0x42) for Identification
        parameters
      - Modified (0x51) and Restored (0x52) for LSP Services
      - Query all (0x61) and Query (0x62) for Status request queries

   For instance, an Unreachable (or reachable) status code could refer
   to a destination port ID which becomes unreachable (or reachable).
   In the scope of this proposal, this does not always mean that the
   LSP attached to this port are inactive since it is potentially
   possible to loss the control of a port without any impact on the
   already established LSPs. However, this implies that a new LSP can
   not be established to this specific destination port.

6. Security Considerations

   By including within the service-level parameter the signaling
   security level, the proposed document, as detailed in section 4,
   takes into account the security of the client signaling request
   in a build-in manner.

7. References

   1. [ADDREG-OUNI] D.Papadimitriou et al., `draft-papadimitriou-ouni-
      addrreg-00.txt', Work in progress.

   2. [DS-DSF] S.Nichols et al, `Definition of the Differentiated
      Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers', RFC
      2474, December 1998.

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         14

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000


   3. [DS-ARCH] S.Balke et al, `An Architecture for Differentiated
      Services', RFC 2475, December 1998.

   4. [GMPLS] P.Ashwood-Smith et al, `Generalized MPLS - Signaling
      Functional Description', Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-
      generalized-signaling-00.txt, April 2001.

   5. [MPLS-OUNI] B.Rajagopalan et al, `Signaling Requirements at
      the Optical UNI', Internet Draft, draft-bala-mpls-optical-uni-
      signaling-00.txt, April 2001.

   6. [OIF2000.125.2] B.Rajagopalan et al, `User Network Interface
      (UNI) 1.0 Proposal', OIF Contribution, October 2000.

   7. [OIF2000.061.5] `User to Network Interface (UNI) Service
      Definition and Lightpath Attributes', November 2000.

   8. [OIF2000.188] R.Barry, `Lightpath Attributes Proposal', OIF
      Contribution, August 2000.

   9. [VPN-ID] B.Fox and B.Gleeson, `VPN Identifiers', RFC 2685.

8. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Bernard Sales, Emmanuel Desmet, Hans
   De Neve, Fabrice Poppe and Gert Grammel for their constructive
   comments.

9. Author's Addresses

   Dimitri Papadimitriou
   Alcatel
   F. Wellesplein 3, B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: 32 3 240 8491
   Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Jim Jones
   Alcatel USA
   3400 W. Plano Pkwy., Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: 1 972-519-2744
   Email: Jim.D.Jones1@usa.alcatel.com











Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         15

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000

Appendix 1: Terminology

   The following terms are used in this document. These definitions
   take into account the terminology already defined by the IETF for
   some of the concepts defined here and some are adapted from the OIF
   Forum terminology.

   - Optical Network: a collection of optical sub-networks constituted
   by optical network elements

   - Optical Network Element (ONE): a network element belonging to the
   optical network. An optical network device could be an Optical
   Cross-Connect (OXC), Optical ADM (OADM), etc.

   - Boundary ONE: an optical network element (ONE) belonging to the
   optical network and including an UNI-N interface.

   - Internal ONE: an optical network element internal to the optical
   network (also referred as a termination incapable device) which does
   not include a UNI-N interface.

   - Client Network Element (CNE): a network element belonging to the
   client network. A client network element could be a SONET/SDH ADM, a
   SONET/SDH Cross-connect, an ATM Switch, an Ethernet switch, an IP
   router, etc.

   - Label Switched Path (LSP): point-to-point optical layer
   connectivity with specified attributes (mandatory and optional)
   established between two ONE termination points in the optical
   network. LSPs are considered as bi-directional (and in a first phase
   as symmetric). An LSP could be a Fiber Switched path, Lambda
   Switched path or TDM Switched path (Circuit).

   - UNI Client (UNI-C): signaling and routing interface between a
   Boundary CNE and a boundary ONE belonging to an optical network.

   - UNI Network (UNI-N): signaling and routing interface between a
   Boundary ONE and a boundary CNE belonging to a client network.

   - UNI Services: the services defined at the UNI are the following:
     - Neighbor discovery service
     - Service discovery service
     - LSP signalling services (create/delete/modify/status)

   - NMI interface: the interface between the ONE controller and the
   centralized management server.

   Concerning the relationship with this terminology and others [ITU-
   T], we consider within this document that the term Client is
   equivalent to User, Optical network to Service provider network,
   Controller to Signaling agent, Trusted to Private and Untrusted to
   Public.

Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         16

draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-00.txt                 November 2000



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into.




































Papadimitriou et al.       Expires May 2001                         17
