



ICNRG                                                         J. Seedorf
Internet-Draft                                                       NEC
Intended status: Informational                             June 25, 2014
Expires: December 27, 2014


 Binding Self-certifying Names to Real-World Identities with a Web-of-
                                 Trust
                draft-seedorf-icn-wot-selfcertifying-00

Abstract

   Self-certifying names are one way of binding a given public key to a
   certain name in Information Centric Networking.  However, an
   additional binding of a self-certifying name to a Real-World identity
   is needed in most cases, so that a recipient of some information
   cannot only verify that the publisher was in possession of the
   correct corressponding private key for the requested name, but that
   in addition the name itself is the intended one.  This draft
   specifies how such a binding of Real-World identities with self-
   certifying ICN names can be done, taking existing IETF specifications
   into account.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   ICN WOT                       June 2014


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  High-Level Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Standardisation Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Self-certifying names provide the useful property that any entity in
   a distributed system can verify the binding between a corresponding
   public key and the self-certifying name without relying on a trusted
   third party [Aura2003].  Self-certifying names thus provide a
   decentralized form of data origin authentication.  This feature makes
   self-certifying names a prime candidate for addressing the security
   requirements in Information Centric Networking (ICN) (which are
   inherently different from IP networks): a source can digitally sign
   data associated with a self-certifying name, and any intermediate
   entity (e.g.  ICN-router/Cache) or receiving entity (i.e. issuer of a
   request for the name) can verify the signature, without the need to
   verify the identity of the host that caches the object, nor relying
   on a trusted third party, or a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
   However, as noted in [Ghodsi2011] and elsewhere, self-certifying
   names lack a binding with a corresponding real-world identity (RWI):
   the concept enables to verify that whoever signed some data was in
   possession of the private key associated with the self-certifying
   name, but it does not provide any means to verify what real-world
   identity corresponds to the public key, i.e. who actually signed the
   data [Ghodsi2011] [Nom2014].

   In principle, this binding between a public key and an RWI could be
   provided by a PKI, or alternatively by a Web-of-Trust (WoT)
   [Ghodsi2011].  Several ICN approaches use a PKI [Survey] . However,
   until recently, there have not been concrete proposals for a WoT-
   based approach for binding a public key (or a self-certifying name)
   with an RWI in content-oriented architectures.  A concrete approach



Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   ICN WOT                       June 2014


   on how this can be done has been proposed in [Nom2014].  This
   document has the objective of providing the corresponding necessary
   standards specification to enable this approach (or similar ones) in
   principle in an interoperable way.

2.  High-Level Design

   On a high level, binding of self-certifying names and a Web-of-Trust
   can be achieved in the following way (see [Nom2014] for a detailed
   example of such an approach): The WoT key-ID is equivalent to the
   self-certifying name part used in the naming scheme.  This ties the
   self-certifying name with the ID of the corresponding public key in
   the WoT.

   For instance, in the existing PGP Web-of-Trust, the V4 key ID is the
   lower 64 bits of the fingerprint of the public key, where the
   fingerprint is essentially the 160-bit SHA-1 hash of the public key
   [RFC2440].  So if a self-certifying name would be based on the same
   lower 64-bits of the fingerprint of a given public key, this public
   key would be tied to the self-certifying name and at the same time be
   tied to the real-world identity used in the WoT, e.g. an email-
   address or the real (i.e. non-self-certifying) name of a given ICN
   publisher.

   Thus, if a user requests the content for a self-certifying name in a
   given ICN architecture, he/she would retrieve the content which
   contains a digital signature and the corresponding public key for the
   self-certifying name.  The user can then verify that the content
   retrieved indeed belongs to the name by first hashing the public key
   and confirm that the hash (or part of it) matches the requested name,
   and second using the public key to verify the signature over the
   content.  This is in principle the general way of using self-
   certifying names for data origin authentication in distributed
   systems.  If, in addition, (part of) the self-certifying name is
   equivalent to a WoT key-ID, the user can use any WoT infrastructure
   (e.g.  PGP keyservers) to retrieve certificates for the key ID that
   contain/confirm the binding between the corresponding (to the WoT key
   ID) public key with a real-world identity, such as an email address.
   This binding provides the requesting user with assurance that the
   self-certifying name indeed is owned by the intended publisher, i.e.
   is the correct, intended name from the requestor's perpective.

   The current PGP specification [RFC2440] considers only a bitlength of
   64-bit for forming the key-ID, which is not very collision-resistant
   (collision-resistance among different key-IDs was not a design goal
   for PGP [RFC2440]).  For securely binding a self-certifying name to a
   WoT key-ID, collision-resistance is a design goal, because otherwise
   attckaers could potentially forge a binding of their public key with



Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   ICN WOT                       June 2014


   a given self-certifying name.  Thus, either a longer bitlength of the
   hash of the public key (or its fingerprint) must be used, or hash
   extension techniques [Aura] must be used, which effectively make
   collision attacks harder for constant bitlengths at the price of the
   time needed to create a public/private key pair.  Future versions of
   this document will take these design considerations into account.

3.  Standardisation Considerations

   Future versions of this document will outline a concrete protocol
   specification for binding self-certifying names to a Web-of-Trust as
   outlined on a high level in the previous Section.  Below some initial
   standardisation considerations are highlighted.  Also, future
   versions of this document will look in more detail into existing IETF
   specifications, e.g. regarding ICN naming ([RFC6920]) and Web-of-
   Trust ([RFC2440]), and inspect to what extend such existing
   specifications can be used directly or in a modified form.

   An initial list of details that need to be specified is the
   following:

   o  (List of) Asymmetric cryptography algorithm(s) and corresponding
      bit-length(s)

   o  (List of) Hash algorithm(s) and corresponding bit-length(s)

   o  Rules that define what part of the hash is used for forming the
      self-certifying part of the name

   o  Rules for forming a self-certifying name based on a public key

   o  Semantics of a signature in the Web-of-Trust

   o  Defintion of the web-of-trust key-ID and how it relates to the
      self-certifying name

   o  Defintion of how many bits are used in case of hash extension
      techniques [Aura]

4.  Conclusion

   One option for binding self-certifying names to real-world identities
   is using a Web-of-Trust.  This document aims at a concrete
   specification for providing such a binding, taking existing IETF
   specification into account.  Future versions of this document will
   provide a more detailed specification.





Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   ICN WOT                       June 2014


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2440]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., and R. Thayer,
              "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 2440, November 1998.

   [RFC6920]  Farrell, S., Kutscher, D., Dannewitz, C., Ohlman, B.,
              Keranen, A., and P. Hallam-Baker, "Naming Things with
              Hashes", RFC 6920, April 2013.

5.2.  Informative References

   [Aura]     Aura, T. and M. Roe, "Strengthening Short Hash Values",
              http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
              summary?doi=10.1.1.145.7681, .

   [Aura2003]
              Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              6th International Conference on Information Security
              (ISC), 2003, .

   [Ghodsi2011]
              Ghodsi, A., Koponen, T., Rajahalme, J., Sarolahti, P., and
              S. Shenker, "Naming in Content-oriented Architectures",
              ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Information-centric Networking,
              2011, .

   [I-D.seedorf-icn-disaster]
              Arumaithurai, M., Seedorf, J., Tagami, A., Ramakrishnan,
              K., and N. Blefari-Melazzi, "Using ICN in disaster
              scenarios", draft-seedorf-icn-disaster-01 (work in
              progress), October 2013.

   [Nom2014]  Seedorf, J., Kutscher, D., and F. Schneider,
              "Decentralised Binding of Self-Certifying Names to Real-
              World Identities for Assessment of Third-Party Messages in
              Fragmented Mobile Networks", 2nd Workshop on Name Oriented
              Mobility (NOM), 2014, .

   [Survey]   Xylomenos, G., Ververidis, C., Siris, V., Fotiou, N.,
              Tsilopoulos, C., Vasilakos, X., Katsaros, K., and G.
              Polyzos, "A Survey of Information-Centric Networking
              Research", IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, Vol.
              16, No. 2, pp 1024-1049, 2014, .






Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   ICN WOT                       June 2014


Appendix A.  Acknowledgment

   This document has been supported by the GreenICN project (GreenICN:
   Architecture and Applications of Green Information Centric Networking
   ), a research project supported jointly by the European Commission
   under its 7th Framework Program (contract no. 608518) and the
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   (NICT) in Japan (contract no. 167).  The views and conclusions
   contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
   interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or
   endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the GreenICN project,
   the European Commission, or NICT.

Author's Address

   Jan Seedorf
   NEC
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342 221
   Fax:   +49 6221 4342 155
   Email: seedorf@neclab.eu



























Seedorf                 Expires December 27, 2014               [Page 6]
