


Network Working Group                                  J. Arkko (Editor)
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                             March 5, 2007
Expires: September 6, 2007


           Guidance on Area Director Sponsoring of Documents
                  draft-iesg-sponsoring-guidelines-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This note discusses the process related to "individual submissions",
   publication of RFCs by finding a sponsoring Area Director to take it
   through IETF and Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) review.
   This note covers both the the processing in the IESG as well as
   guidance on when such sponsoring is appropriate.






Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Processing Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Choosing Documents to Sponsor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Summary of Changes to Existing Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Secretariat Response to Submissions . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix C.  PROTO Write-Up  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17
































Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


1.  Introduction

   "Individual submissions" are documents intended to become RFCs
   through the IETF, without being submitted by a Working Group (WG).
   The publication of these documents requires the authors to find
   sponsoring Area Director (AD) to take it through IETF and Internet
   Engineering Steering Group (IESG) review.  Accordingly, this
   publication method is sometimes called the "AD Sponsored" method.

   The note is concerned with the IESG processing by the AD Sponsored
   method.  This note also provides guidance for choosing between
   individual submissions and independent submissions through the RFC
   Editor.

   This note describes procedures and working methods.  It does not
   change any underlying rules such as those in RFC 2026 [RFC2026] or
   the operation of the RFC Editor as defined in [I-D.iab-rfc-editor].
   The note also does not change the procedures related to independent
   submissions or other RFC streams [I-D.iab-rfc-editor]
   [I-D.klensin-rfc-independent].


2.  Requirements language

   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "OPTIONAL",
   "RECOMMENDED", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as
   described in [RFC2119].


3.  Submission

   Individual submissions enter the process through an agreement with an
   AD.  Such agreements are usually the result of the AD tracking the
   work earlier, or discussions between the authors and the AD.  And
   sometimes the AD agrees with a WG that a particular document should
   be progressed as an individual submission.

   Similar to the process for WG submissions, the authors may find a
   willing external Shepherd [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding].
   The task of the Shepherd is to manage the discussions relating to the
   document's process through the system.  The Shepherd will also
   provide a write-up similar to Document Shepherd Write-ups for WG
   documents.  Appendix C explains how to interpret the normal write-up
   template for individual submissions.  If no Shepherd can be
   identified, the tasks of the Shepherd fall on the AD.  In that case
   the authors should, however, provide the write up so that the AD has
   the necessary background information about the proposal.  When the AD
   has the write-up he or she can insert the document into the data



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   tracker and set its parameters correctly (e.g., the area, intended
   status and ballot information).

   If for some reason the authors cannot identify the most relevant Area
   Director, they should contact to the General Area Director first.
   This replaces the previous practice of writing to the IESG as a
   whole.

   Messages sent to iesg-secretary@ietf.org prompt the secretariat to
   send a response that suggests the authors should follow the
   appropriate submission procedure for their desired method, such as
   finding an AD to sponsor an individual submission.  The response can
   also suggest that the authors should also consider the normal IETF
   publication path through an existing working group, or consider
   proposing a BoF at a future IETF meeting.  An example note is shown
   in Appendix B.

   Finally, authors who consider making either an individual submission
   through the IETF or an independent submission via the RFC Editor
   should be aware that some documents either have to be from the IETF
   or would benefit from being from the IETF.  For instance, the
   document may request an IANA allocation from a space that has a
   Standards Action IANA rule (see RFC 2434 [RFC2434]).  Such actions
   can not come from independent submissions.  For a discussion of when
   a document can not be processed as an independent submission, see RFC
   3932 [RFC3932].

   One possibility for such documents is to process them as AD Sponsored
   submissions.  Other alternatives include finding or creating a
   suitable WG to process the document or abandoning the document
   altogether.  The authors are responsible for the decision to proceed
   with a particular approach among the set of allowed options.  The
   authors are also responsible for the effort of proposing a Birds-of-
   a-Feather (BoF) session, convincing the IESG or one of the ADs that
   the document needs to be sponsored, etc.


4.  Processing Rules

   AD Sponsored documents to Standards Track require review in the IETF,
   IETF Last Call, and IESG approval.  AD Sponsored documents to
   Experimental/Informational require some form of review in the IETF
   and IESG approval.  While RFC 2026 does not require the latter type
   of documents to go through an IETF Last Call, this note suggests that
   it is always performed.  It is needed to ensure adequate review and
   transparency in a situation where the pending publication of the
   document may not be known by any Working Group or the IETF community
   at large.



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   As RFC 2026 states, when a proposed standards action comes from
   outside Working Groups, the IETF Last Call period is at least four
   weeks.  If the IESG believes that the community interest would be
   served by allowing more time for comment, it may decide on a longer
   Last-Call period or to explicitly lengthen a current Last-Call
   period.

   The exact nature of the review within the IETF is not specified, but
   it is expected that documents be posted for review in the relevant WG
   mailing lists.  Often no relevant mailing list exists, in which case
   area-specific or IETF main discussion list can be used.  Individual
   reviewers, review teams, and review boards for specific topics can
   also be used.  If no sufficient review has been obtained, the AD
   should solicit it explicitly.

   Note that discussing topics outside the charter of a WG can cause
   loss of focus in a WG, if a WG list is chosen for discussion.  This
   should be considered when seeking review and when deciding to adopt
   documents for sponsoring.  On the other hand, work closely related to
   a WG but strictly outside its charter should always be brought to the
   WG's attention during review.

   Sponsored submissions are treated in the same manner with other
   submissions in the actual IESG evaluation process.  Existing discuss,
   appeal, recusing, etc. rules apply also to sponsored submissions.


5.  Choosing Documents to Sponsor

   This section provides some guidelines for the use of the AD
   Sponsoring method.  Such guidelines are useful when authors contact
   the AD and suggest that their document be sponsored.  The rules are
   also useful in controlling the load on the IESG, and to ensure
   fairness.  AD Sponsored documents are the only way to publish
   Standards Track documents outside WGs.  IETF documents may also have
   a higher priority at the RFC Editor processing queue than independent
   submissions.

   When considering the choice between a sponsored document and an RFC
   Editor submission, the RFC 3932 rules play a role [RFC3932].  If it
   is likely that the document would generate a 3 (harmful to IETF
   work), 4 (violates IETF procedures) or 5 (extension requires IETF
   review) response based on RFC 3932 it is not appropriate for an
   independent submission.  Sometimes such documents are suitable
   candidates for being sponsored, however.  It would be useful to add,
   say, IANA rules or IPv6 considerations to an old specification that
   did not have them and for which no WG can be found.  Such additions
   to standards track RFCs need to be on the standards track themselves,



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   preventing the use of independent submissions.

   In general, the decision to sponsor a document involves AD
   discretion.  It is necessary for the AD to be willing to spend effort
   on the document.  The following considerations should be applied:

   Document Track

      Documents that need to be on the Standards Track can only be
      published via WGs or the AD Sponsored method.

      Documents that fall under this class should either be handled by
      the IETF in some manner or be dropped.  This ultimate decision
      depends on, among other things, on the value of the document's
      contribution and whether it fits within the mission of the IETF.

      The AD should also consider whether the normal IETF WG/BoF process
      should be employed instead.  Some situations where this is
      impractical have been noted in Section 6.

   IANA Rules

      Documents that request "IETF Consensus" or "Standards Action" IANA
      allocations also need to be WG submissions or AD Sponsored
      documents.

      On the other, documents intended to satisfy "Specification
      required" could be processed as independent submissions.

   Benefit from IETF Review

      All AD sponsored documents go through IETF Last Call, and also
      receive additional review from the sponsoring AD, the IESG, and
      may also be reviewed by solicited experts and WGs.

      Does the document need such IETF-wide review, or is RFC Editor's
      Independent Submission Review (ISR) sufficient?  For instance, the
      AD can decide that while a particular document could be an
      independent submission, the added review would be useful and would
      benefit the community.

      As an example, the AD may expect that a particular protocol will
      be widely deployed, and that providing additional IETF review
      makes the protocol more likely to be useful for the community and
      less likely to cause problems.






Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   Availability of Reviewer Resources

      Are there persons that can help with the review of the document
      during, for instance, the IETF Last Call?  Is there a risk that
      such persons become distracted from their chartered work at the
      IETF because of the extra reviews being requested?

   Fairness

      ADs should be fair in choosing the documents that they decide to
      sponsor.  For instance, they should not give priority in accepting
      or processing documents on company or personal criteria; the
      content of the document and its relevance to the Internet
      community should be the guiding factor.

      Where an AD is one of the authors or significant contributors in a
      document, he or she can not be the sponsoring AD.

   Relevance

      The above process issues need to be considered together with the
      relevance the document has for the Internet community.  Does it
      solve an important problem?  Does it describe an issue that
      affects a significant number of users in the Internet?  Does it
      create an interface or convention where widespread
      interoperability would be necessary?

      For instance, a document that describes a serious vulnerability or
      an architectural issue in protocols in the AD's area is a good
      candidate for being sponsored.  Clarifications and small updates
      of protocols in the AD's area are also good candidates when no
      suitable working working group exists, and the scale of the change
      does not warrant the creation of one.

      A document specifying a particular vendor's proprietary protocol
      is typically more suitable as an independent submission than being
      sponsored by an AD.  A document specifying an alternate approach
      to an existing Standards Track solution is typically not a likely
      candidate either.  But this is a judgment call.  For instance, if
      there is general agreement in a WG for publishing a "road not
      followed" document for the record, but the WG itself considers it
      out of scope, AD sponsoring might be appropriate.

   Quality

      As with relevance, the quality of the document and the expected
      outcome of the IETF review process affect the decision.  In
      general, the AD should only sponsor documents that he or she



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


      believes in; the decision to sponsor should only be taken after at
      least as detailed review as the AD performs for regular WG
      submissions.

      As with BoFs, it is possible that the IETF community is divided or
      unable to agree on a proposal, even if the proposal itself is of
      high quality and relevant.  The AD should consider the likelihood
      of achieving consensus in IETF review, if relevant for the type of
      document in question.

   History

      Sometimes the IETF, IESG, and the WG has more information about
      the history of the document than the RFC Editor.  This is the case
      with the "road not followed" documents mentioned above as well as
      with other documents recently seriously considered in the IETF.
      If the publication of these documents is appropriate, they are
      likely more suitable as individual submissions than as independent
      submissions.

   ADs can always decline to sponsor a given document.

   It may take a while to find the right AD.  Sometimes the contacted AD
   may suggest that the document fits better in another AD's area of
   expertise.  Or the author may realize that a more suitable AD exists.
   Legitimate search for the right AD should not be confused with
   authors going through several ADs trying to find one that will
   sponsor their document.  For BOF requests, this practice has been
   termed "AD shopping."

   To identify cases of AD shopping, it is recommended that ADs send a
   brief note to the IESG when they have turned down a sponsoring
   request, accompanied by an indication if this was due to unsuitable
   topic for the AD or some other reason.  This allows the other ADs to
   recognize that they are being asked for the same document again.
   This should not necessarily cause the second AD to automatically turn
   down the request.  However, it is recommended that he or she query
   the ADs that have turned down sponsorship in the past and incorporate
   this information into their own decision.


6.  Discussion

   AD Sponsored submissions represent a significant workload to the
   IESG.  Reasons for the popularity of these submissions include the
   interest of the ADs to progress work in their fields, the difference
   in time-to-RFC-publication IETF documents enjoy over independent
   submissions, the ability to avoid the IESG notes that independent



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   submissions get, and the wider review IETF documents get.

   Improvements in the efficiency of the RFC Editor processing are
   likely to increase the popularity of the independent submissions,
   which represent a smaller load for the IESG.  Similarly, ongoing work
   [I-D.klensin-rfc-independent] may change the tone of the IESG notes.
   However, the speed of the independent submissions channel depends to
   a large extent on its review stage, and it has generally been easier
   to find reviewers for IETF documents.

   In any case, the IESG can handle some amount of sponsored documents.
   The system is self-regulating in the sense that if the IESG becomes
   too busy, the ADs are less likely to adopt sponsored documents; there
   is no requirement for them to sponsor any submissions.

   The interesting question is why there was no WG to deal with the
   issue in the proposal, if it is so important and useful.  One reason
   for this can be that our BoF process tends works better for large
   efforts than small.  The process also favors focused efforts which
   may make it hard to report issues that cross multiple WGs or areas.
   Running a BoF and creating a WG takes time and requires a significant
   number of persons to be involved in the effort.  Some of the
   situations where this can be problematic include:

   o  Corrections and small updates of existing RFCs when the WG that
      created the original RFCs no longer exists.

   o  Draft Standard revisions of Proposed Standard RFCs when the WG no
      longer exists.

   o  IANA considerations updates for old protocol specifications to
      bring them up to today's requirements.  Many old protocol
      specifications had no IANA considerations, for instance.

   o  Architectural issues that cross multiple WGs or areas, but are not
      being handled currently by the IAB.

   o  Registration of values and formats in frameworks, such as media
      type registrations.

   Some areas employ area-specific WGs that can be used to process some
   of these.  For instance, TSVWG in the Transport area produces
   documents as a real WG, resulting in less need for AD sponsoring.
   Other areas such as Internet and Security have area-specific
   discussion forums that do not act like WGs.  The Routing area employs
   both models with their RTGAREA group for discussion and RTGWG for WG-
   like operation for "catchall" documents.  In the Operations and
   Management Area the MIB Doctors team discusses procedural and



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   technical issues, reviews documents, and sometimes issues documents
   related to the MIB quality review process.


7.  Summary of Changes to Existing Procedures

   The "talk to the appropriate AD" and "submit via RFC Editor"
   approaches are promoted over submitting documents via the
   secretariat.  This allows the ADs to discuss the appropriate
   submission method with the authors, and does not require the
   secretariat to think about policy issues such as whether a document
   is worthwhile for being sponsored.

   Submissions sent to iesg@ietf.org are not considered.

   New text is adopted for the secretariat's response to submissions.

   It should also be noted that Section 4.2.3 of RFC 2026 states "Unless
   they are the result of IETF Working Group action, documents intended
   to be published with Experimental or Informational status should be
   submitted directly to the RFC Editor."  This has not been operational
   practice for some time, however.  A number of Informational and
   Experimental documents have been submitted as AD Sponsored documents.
   The rationale behind this is the wider review that can be achieved,
   but this is one area where current procedures have deviated from RFC
   2026.  However, RFC 2026 is not technically violated, since in these
   cases the IESG serves as the submitter to the RFC Editor in place of
   the author.


8.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations beyond those normally involved
   in the IETF processing of proposals for new RFCs.


9.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.




Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding]
              Levkowetz, H., "Document Shepherding From Working Group
              Last Call to IESG Approval",
              draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding-07 (work in
              progress), June 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3967]  Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
              Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower
              Level", BCP 97, RFC 3967, December 2004.

   [I-D.iab-rfc-editor]
              Daigle, L., "The RFC Series and RFC Editor",
              draft-iab-rfc-editor-01 (work in progress), July 2006.

   [I-D.klensin-rfc-independent]
              Klensin, J., "Independent Submissions to the RFC Editor",
              draft-klensin-rfc-independent-02 (work in progress),
              May 2006.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This note has been prepared as a result of discussions in the IESG.
   The members of the IESG at the time this was written were:

      Bill Fenner

      Brian Carpenter

      Cullen Jennings

      Dan Romascanu

      David Kessens





Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


      Jari Arkko

      Jon Peterson

      Lars Eggert

      Lisa Dusseault

      Magnus Westerlund

      Mark Townsley

      Ross Callon

      Russ Housley

      Sam Hartman

      Ted Hardie

   In addition, the editor would like to thank Leslie Daigle, John
   Klensin, and Pekka Savola for input.


Appendix B.  Secretariat Response to Submissions

   Individual submission requests sent to iesg-secretary@ietf.org prompt
   the secretariat to send a response suggesting an alternative
   submission process.  Example response note is shown below.






















Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


      "We cannot process your request. Please make an independent
       submission through the RFC Editor, or find an IETF Area Director
       to sponsor your draft as an individual submission to the
       IETF. Also, please consider the normal IETF publication path
       through an existing working group, or consider proposing a BoF at
       a future IETF meeting.

       Please see RFC 3932 for guidance on which documents may be
       suitable as independent submission through the RFC Editor. If you
       choose this option, please send your publication request to
       <rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org>

       If you wish to seek Area Director sponsorship for an
       individual submission, the best solution is to contact the
       most relevant Area Director directly, with an explanation of
       why the draft is appropriate for IETF publication. The Area
       Director is also the best source of advice about whether an
       existing WG, or a BoF, may be applicable. The Area Directors
       and WGs are listed at:

         http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-dir.html

       If for some reason you cannot identify the most relevant Area
       Director, please talk to the General Area Director first.

       The IETF Secretariat"


Appendix C.  PROTO Write-Up

   A write-up should accompany any request for sponsoring.  This
   write-up should follow the the Document Shepherd Write-up template
   given in Section 3.1 of [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding].
   However, as there is no working group, questions that relate to the
   the working group need to be interpreted in the context of the
   interested community instead.  It is assumed that an interested
   community exists in all cases, and that individual submissions are
   not prepared in complete isolation.

   In addition, under item 1.k the authors should indicate if the
   document been considered in any existing or past WG, and if yes,
   describe why the work was not adopted as a work item there.

   The initial template of the edited write-up is included below for
   ease of copying pasting the questions elsewhere.  But changes are
   expected over time.  Any future changes to
   [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding] need to be applied, for
   instance.  The latest version of this template is available from the



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


   IESG section of the IETF web site.

   (1.a)  Who is the Document Shepherd for this document?  Has the
      Document Shepherd personally reviewed this version of the document
      and, in particular, does he or she believe this version is ready
      for forwarding to the IESG for publication?

   (1.b)  Has the document had adequate review both from key members of
      the interested community and others?  Does the Document Shepherd
      have any concerns about the depth or breadth of the reviews that
      have been performed?

   (1.c)  Does the Document Shepherd have concerns that the document
      needs more review from a particular or broader perspective, e.g.,
      security, operational complexity, someone familiar with AAA,
      internationalization or XML?

   (1.d)  Does the Document Shepherd have any specific concerns or
      issues with this document that the Responsible Area Director
      and/or the IESG should be aware of?  For example, perhaps he or
      she is uncomfortable with certain parts of the document, or has
      concerns whether there really is a need for it.  In any event, if
      the interested community has discussed those issues and has
      indicated that it still wishes to advance the document, detail
      those concerns here.

   (1.e)  How solid is the consensus of the interested community behind
      this document?  Does it represent the strong concurrence of a few
      individuals, with others being silent, or does the interested
      community as a whole understand and agree with it?

   (1.f)  Has anyone threatened an appeal or otherwise indicated extreme
      discontent?  If so, please summarize the areas of conflict in
      separate email messages to the Responsible Area Director.  (It
      should be in a separate email because this questionnaire is

   (1.g)  Has the Document Shepherd personally verified that the
      document satisfies all ID nits?  (See
      http://www.ietf.org/ID-Checklist.html and
      http://tools.ietf.org/tools/idnits/).  Boilerplate checks are not
      enough; this check needs to be thorough.  Has the document met all
      formal review criteria it needs to, such as the MIB Doctor, media
      type and URI type reviews?

   (1.h)  Has the document split its references into normative and
      informative?  Are there normative references to documents that are
      not ready for advancement or are otherwise in an unclear state?
      If such normative references exist, what is the strategy for their



Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


      completion?  Are there normative references that are downward
      references, as described in [RFC3967]?  If so, list these downward
      references to support the Area Director in the Last Call procedure
      for them [RFC3967].

   (1.i)  Has the Document Shepherd verified that the document IANA
      consideration section exists and is consistent with the body of
      the document?  If the document specifies protocol extensions, are
      reservations requested in appropriate IANA registries?  Are the
      IANA registries clearly identified?  If the document creates a new
      registry, does it define the proposed initial contents of the
      registry and an allocation procedure for future registrations?
      Does it suggested a reasonable name for the new registry?  See
      [I-D.narten-iana-considerations-rfc2434bis].  If the document
      describes an Expert Review process has Shepherd conferred with the
      Responsible Area Director so that the IESG can appoint the needed
      Expert during the IESG Evaluation?

   (1.j)  Has the Document Shepherd verified that sections of the
      document that are written in a formal language, such as XML code,
      BNF rules, MIB definitions, etc., validate correctly in an
      automated checker?

   (1.k)  The IESG approval announcement includes a Document
      Announcement Write-Up.  Please provide such a Document
      Announcement Writeup?  Recent examples can be found in the
      "Action" announcements for approved documents.  The approval
      announcement contains the following sections:

      Technical Summary

         Relevant content can frequently be found in the abstract and/or
         introduction of the document.  If not, this may be an
         indication that there are deficiencies in the abstract or
         introduction.

      Working Group Summary

         Was there anything in the discussion in the interested
         community that is worth noting?  For example, was there
         controversy about particular points or were there decisions
         where the consensus was particularly rough?  Was the document
         considered in any WG, and if so, why was it not adopted as a
         work item there?







Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


      Document Quality

         Are there existing implementations of the protocol?  Have a
         significant number of vendors indicated their plan to implement
         the specification?  Are there any reviewers that merit special
         mention as having done a thorough review, e.g., one that
         resulted in important changes or a conclusion that the document
         had no substantive issues?  If there was a MIB Doctor, Media
         Type or other expert review, what was its course (briefly)?  In
         the case of a Media Type review, on what date was the request
         posted?

      Personnel

         Who is the Document Shepherd for this document?  Who is the
         Responsible Area Director?

   The write-up is entered into the ID Tracker in the "Comment" field.


Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com























Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines              March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Arkko (Editor)          Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 17]

