

MMUSIC Working Group                                       F. Andreasen
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems
Document: draft-andreasen-mmusic-sdp-simcap-01.txt           March 2001
Category: Informational


                   SDP Simple Capability Negotiation


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



1. Abstract

   This document defines a set of Session Description Protocol (SDP)
   attributes that allow SDP to provide a minimal and backwards
   compatible capability negotiation mechanism. The mechanism can be
   used as a simple and limited solution to the general capability
   negotiation problem being addressed by ongoing work on the next
   generation of SDP, also known as SDPng.


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


3. Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [3] describes multimedia
   sessions for the purposes of session announcement, session
   invitation, and other forms of multimedia session initiation. SDP
   was not intended to provide capability negotiation, however as the
   need for this has become increasingly important, work has begun on a

Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation        March 2001


   "next generation SDP" (SDPng) [4] that supports both session
   description and capability negotiation. SDPng is not anticipated to
   be backwards compatible with SDP and work on SDPng is currently only
   in the requirements phase. However, several other protocols, e.g.
   SIP [5] and MGCP [6], use SDP, and are likely to continue doing so
   for the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, in many cases these
   protocols have an urgent need for some limited form of capability
   negotiation.

   For example, an endpoint may support G.711 audio (over RTP) as well
   as T.38 fax relay (over UDP or TCP). Unless the endpoint is willing
   to support two media streams at the same time, this can not
   currently be expressed in SDP. Another example involves support for
   multiple codecs. An endpoint indicates this by including all the
   codecs in the "m=" line in the session description. However, the
   endpoint thereby also commits to simultaneous support for each of
   those codecs. In practice, DSP memory and processing power
   limitations may not make this feasible.

   As noted in [4], the problem with SDP is, that media descriptions
   are used to describe session parameters as well as capabilities
   without a clear distinction between the two.

   In this document, we define a minimal and backwards compatible
   capability negotiation feature in SDP by defining a set of new SDP
   attributes that satisfy the requirements in [7]. It should be noted,
   that the mechanism is not intended to solve the general capability
   negotiation problem targeted by SDPng. It is merely intended as a
   simple and limited solution to the most urgent problems facing
   current users of SDP.


4. Simple Capability Negotiation Attributes

   The SDP Simple Capability Negotiation (simcap) is defined by a set
   of SDP attributes. Together, these attributes form a capability set
   which describes the media capabilities of the endpoint.

   The capability set begins with a single sequence number followed by
   one or more capability descriptions listing all media formats the
   endpoint is currently able and willing to support. A subsequent
   request to use one of these media formats is however not guaranteed
   to succeed, e.g. due to limited DSP processing power, or bandwidth
   constraints.

   The sequence number is on the form

     a=sqn: <sqn-num>

   where <sqn-num> is an integer between 0 and 255 (both included). The
   initial sequence number is 0 and increments by 1 modulo 256 with
   each new capability set from the endpoint. The sequence number may
   either be provided as a session- or media-level attribute, however

Andreasen       Informational - Expires September 2001        [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation        March 2001


   there MUST NOT be more than one occurrence of the sequence number in
   the session description.

   Each capability description in the capability set is on the form:

     a=cdsc: <cap-num> <media> <transport> <fmt list>

   where <cap-num> is an integer between 1 and 255 (both included)
   identifying the capability, and <media>,  <transport>, and <fmt
   list> are defined as in the SDP "m=" line. The capability number
   should start with 1 in the first capability description, and be
   incremented by the number of capabilities in the <fmt list> for each
   subsequent capability description.

   A capability description may include one or more capability
   parameter lines on the form:

     a=cpar: <cap-par>
     a=cparmin: <cap-par>
     a=cparmax: <cap-par>

   where <cap-par> is either bandwidth information ("b=") or an
   attribute ("a=") in its full '<type>=<value>' form (see [3]). A
   capability parameter line provides additional parameters for the
   preceding "cdsc" attribute line. Capability parameter lines MUST
   immediately follow the "cdsc" line they refer to, thus a capability
   description ends at the first non "cpar", "cparmin" or "cparmax"
   line that follows the "cdsc" attribute line.

   The "cpar" attribute should normally be used when parameter values
   are to be specified. A capability description may contain zero, one,
   or more "cpar" attribute lines describing either the same or
   different parameters. Describing the same parameter more than once
   can be used to specify alternatives.

   Where a minimum numerical value is to be specified, the "cparmin"
   attribute should be used. There may be zero, one, or more "cparmin"
   attribute lines in a capability description, however a given
   parameter MUST NOT be described by a "cparmin" attribute more than
   once.

   Where a maximum numerical value is to be specified, the "cparmax"
   attribute should be used. There may be zero, one, or more "cparmax"
   attribute lines in a capability description, however a given
   parameter MUST NOT be described by a "cparmax" attribute more than
   once.

   Ranges of numerical values can be expressed by using a "cparmin" and
   a "cparmax" attribute for a given parameter. It follows from the
   previous rules, that only a single range can be specified for a
   given parameter.



Andreasen       Informational - Expires September 2001        [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation        March 2001


   Capability descriptions may be provided at both the session- and
   media-level. A capability description provided at the session-level
   applies to all the media streams in the session description, where
   as a capability description provided at the media-level only applies
   to that particular media stream. It is RECOMMENDED that the first
   capability description follows immediately after the sequence
   number.

   Below we show an example session description using the above simple
   capability negotiation mechanism:

   v=0
   o=- 25678 753849 IN IP4 128.96.41.1
   s=-
   c=IN IP4 128.96.41.1
   t=0 0
   m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 18 96
   a=rtpmap:96 telephone-event
   a=fmtp:96 0-15,32-35
   a=sqn: 0
   a=cdsc: 1 audio RTP/AVP 0 18 96
   a=cpar: a=fmtp:96 0-16,32-35
   a=cdsc: 4 image udptl t38
   a=cdsc: 5 image tcp t38


   The sender of this session description is currently prepared to send
   and receive G.729 audio as well as telephone-events 0-15 and 32-35.
   The sender is furthermore capable of supporting:
   * media streams using PCMU encoding
   * telephone events 0-16 and 32-35
   * T.38 fax relay using udp or tcp (see [9])

   Note, that the first capability number specified is 1, where as the
   next is 4 since three media formats were included in the first
   capability description. Also note, that the rtpmap for payload type
   96 was not included in the capability description, as it was already
   specified for the media (m=) line.


6. Security Considerations

   The addition of the simple capability negotiation attributes to SDP
   is not believed to affect security.


7. References

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.




Andreasen       Informational - Expires September 2001        [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation        March 2001



   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   3  M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: session description protocol,"
      Request for Comments (Proposed Standard) 2327, Internet
      Engineering Task Force, Apr.  1998.

   4  Kutscher, Ott, Bormann, "Requirements for Session Description and
      Capability Negotiation", draft-kutscher-mmusic-sdpng-req-00.txt,
      July 14, 2000

   5  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
      session initiation protocol," Request for Comments (Proposed
      Standard) 2543, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1999.

   6  Arango, M., Dugan, A., Elliott, I., Huitema, C. and S. Pickett,
      "Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) Version 1.0", RFC 2705,
      October 1999.

   7  F. Andreasen, "SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Requirements",
      draft-andreasen-mmusic-sdp-simcap-reqts-00.txt, February 2001

   8  J. Ott, J. Kutscher, C. Bormann, "Capability description for
      group cooperation", draft-ott-mmusic-cap-00.txt, June 1999

   9  PROPOSED T.38 AMENDMENT û REC. T.38 ANNEX D, Geneva, 2-10
      February, 2000, (available from
      ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/itu_to_ietf/SG8/February00/Dra
      ft_T38_Annex_D.txt)

   10 Beser, B., "Codec Capabilities Attribute for SDP", Internet
      Draft, draft-beser-mmusic-capabilities-00.txt, March 2000.



8. Acknowledgments

   This work draws upon the ongoing work on SDPng; in particular [4].
   Furthermore, this work was inspired by [8] and the CableLabs
   PacketCable project. Related work can be found in [10] as well.



9. Author's Addresses

   Flemming Andreasen
   Cisco Systems
   499 Thornall Street, 8th floor
   Edison, NJ
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com



Andreasen       Informational - Expires September 2001        [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation        March 2001



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




















Andreasen       Informational - Expires September 2001        [Page 6]
