
Network Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                             B. Carpenter
Document: draft-carpenter-obsolete-1888-01.txt                      IBM
Expires: March 2005                                                 
                                                                       
                                                         September 2004
   
   
                          RFC 1888 is obsolete
   
Status of this Memo
   
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of RFC 3668.
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
Abstract
   
   This document recommends that RFC 1888, on OSI NSAPs and IPv6, be
   reclassified Historic as most of it has no further value, apart from
   one section which is faulty.
   
Table of Contents
   
   1. Introduction                                                   2
   2. Recommendation to reclassify RFC 1888                          2
   3. Security Considerations                                        2
   4. IANA Considerations                                            3
   5. Acknowledgements                                               3
   6. Normative References                                           3
   7. Author's Address                                               3

Carpenter              Expires - March 2005                   [Page 1]

                            RFC 1888 is obsolete          September 2004

   
   
1.   Introduction
   
   [RFC 1888] was published as an Experimental RFC in 1996, at an early
   stage in the development of IPv6, when it appeared important to
   consider usage of Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) addressing for
   IPv6. In Sections 3 through 5, it defines mappings of certain OSI
   Network Service Access Point (NSAP) addresses inside IPv6 addresses,
   and how to carry arbitrary NSAP addresses as IPv6 destination
   options. However, it also contains significant "health warnings"
   about the difficulty of routing packets in the global Internet using
   such addresses. As far as is known to the IETF, these address
   mappings have never been seriously used and are not supported by IPv6
   implementations. Furthermore, the deployment of OSI solutions is not
   sufficiently widespread that any change in this situation can be
   expected.
   
   Additionally, Section 6 of [RFC 1888] specifies a mapping of IPv6
   addresses inside OSI NSAP addresses. This mapping has recently
   aroused some interest, for example to allow IP addresses to be
   expressed in an Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) context.
   Unfortunately, Section 6 of [RFC 1888] contains two errors in its
   usage of OSI Initial Domain Part (IDP) format:
   
   * firstly by referring in the text to the Internet Code Point (ICP)
   as a single octet, whereas it is correctly a 16-bit field;
   
   * secondly by stating that "The first three octets are an IDP in
   binary format", but [NSAP] states in section A.5.2.1 that "The
   abstract syntax for the IDI is decimal digits" and specifies a
   preferred binary encoding in section A.5.3 "using a semi-octet to
   represent the value of each decimal digit ... , yielding a value in
   the range 0000-1001".
   
   
2.   Recommendation to reclassify RFC 1888

   Due to the lack of use of one of the mappings, and the errors in the
   documentation of the other one, this document recommends the IESG to
   reclassify [RFC 1888] as Historic.
   
   It is assumed that parties who wish to use a mapping of IPv6
   addresses inside OSI NSAP addresses will correct, augment, and
   resubmit Section 6 of [RFC 1888] as a separate document.
   
3.   Security Considerations
   
   This recommendation has no known impact on the security of the
   Internet.

Carpenter              Expires - March 2005                   [Page 2]

                            RFC 1888 is obsolete          September 2004

   
4.   IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to mark the IPv6 address prefix 0000 001, reserved
   for NSAP Allocation in [RFC 3513], as simply Reserved.
   
   IANA is requested to hold the registry for ICD codes implied by
   Section 6 of [RFC 1888] in abeyance until a replacement for that
   Section is approved for publication.
   
5.   Acknowledgements
   
   Scott Brim and Arun Pandey made useful comments on this document.
   
6.   Normative References

   [RFC 1888] J. Bound, B. Carpenter, D. Harrington, J. Houldsworth, A.
   Lloyd, "OSI NSAPs and IPv6", RFC 1888, August 1996.
   
   [RFC 3513] R. Hinden, S. Deering, "Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
   Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April 2003.
   
   [NSAP] International Organization for Standardization, "Information
   technology -- Open Systems Interconnection -- Network service
   definition", ISO/IEC 8348:2002, 2002.
   
   
7.   Author's Address
   
      Brian E. Carpenter
      IBM Zurich Research Laboratory
      Saeumerstrasse 4 / Postfach
      8803 Rueschlikon
      Switzerland
      Email: brc@zurich.ibm.com
   
Intellectual Property Statement
   
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.
   
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of

Carpenter              Expires - March 2005                   [Page 3]

                            RFC 1888 is obsolete          September 2004


   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
   
Disclaimer of Validity
   
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
   
Copyright Statement
   
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.
   
Acknowledgment
   
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.










Carpenter              Expires - March 2005                   [Page 4]

   

