

Network Working Group                                    S. Michel (ed.)
Internet-Draft                                          M. AuYeung (ed.)
Expires: January 10, 2002                                      Aerospace
                                                           July 12, 2001


                    IP Over CCSDS Link Layer (ccsds)
                      draft-michel-ccsds-00.txt 

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This Internet Draft proposes a charter for an "Internet Protocol over
   CCSDS-based link layers" working group.  The Consultative Committee
   for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) represents an international body of
   organizations dedicated to standardizing the various aspects of
   space-based communication.  In the past, CCSDS efforts have been
   largely independent of the IETF in the realm of using the Internet
   protocol (IP) over space segment network architectures.  There is a
   need to define and normalize the interface between IP and CCSDS-based
   space segment networks given the large number of space systems which
   have adopted the CCSDS architecture and the use of these systems in
   future interplanetary networks.  The working group's goals will be
   narrowly scoped to the definition of IP over the CCSDS-based link



Michel (ed.) & AuYeung (ed.)    Expires January 10, 2002        [Page 1]

Internet Area                 IP-over-CCSDS                    July 2001


   layer.  The intent is that a CCSDS-based segment appears as just
   another medium over which IP datagrams transit.

1. Motivation

   The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) represents
   an international body of organizations dedicated to the various
   aspects of space-based communication and the space segment community.
   CCSDS generates a number of standards for space-based systems ranging
   from RF coding standards, space vehicle telemetry and telecommand
   standards, to reliable file transfer standards between a vehicle and
   an end user.  This work has historically been independent of other
   network community standards bodies.  This has resulted in duplicated
   effort at the interface between CCSDS-based space segment and IP
   networks.  Work currently undertaken by the IRTF Interplanetary
   Network Research Group (IPNRG) has underscored a need to consolidate
   efforts and normalize this interface.

2. Description

   The IP Over CCSDS Link Layer (ccsds) Working Group is chartered to
   produce Internet Standards for interoperability of the Internet
   protocol over underlying CCSDS link layer protocols.  The CCSDS link
   layer protocols and associated architecture is defined in a family of
   CCSDS Recommendations, such as [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].  The intent
   is to provide support for a wide variety of CCSDS link layer
   configurations, while maintaining the architectural philosophy of the
   Internet protocol.  The focus of this work is limited to the
   interface between IP and the CCSDS link layer and does not intend to
   modify protocols in upper layers.  This working group will work in
   conjunction with the CCSDS organization and the IRTF IPN research
   group, and welcomes input from the broader internetworking technical
   community.

   The initial milestone documents for this working group are:
   o  CCSDS link layer subnetwork architecture and scenarios
   o  CCSDS link layer description and support for IP datagram
      transmission
   o  Path MTU definition and discovery for CCSDS link layer subnetworks
   o  ICMP [6] protocol extensions relevant to CCSDS link layer
   o  CCSDS link layer definition of an ARP [7] equivalent mapping
      service
   o  SNMP MIB definitions for CCSDS link layer monitoring

References

   [1]  CCSDS, , "Packet Telemetry", 102.0-B-5 , Blue Book , Issue 5 ,
        November 2000.



Michel (ed.) & AuYeung (ed.)    Expires January 10, 2002        [Page 2]

Internet Area                 IP-over-CCSDS                    July 2001


   [2]  CCSDS, , "Telecommand Part 2 -- Data Routing Service.", 202.0-B-
        3 , Blue Book , Issue 3 , June 2001.

   [3]  CCSDS, , "Telecommand Part 3 -- Data Management Service.",
        203.0-B-2 , Blue Book , Issue 2 , June 2001.

   [4]  CCSDS, , "Advanced Orbiting Systems, Networks and Data Links:
        Architectural Specification", 701.0-B-3 , Blue Book , Issue 3 ,
        June 2001.

   [5]  CCSDS, , "Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol", 211.0-R-2 , Red Book
        , Issue 2 , January 2000.

   [6]  Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", STD 5 , RFC 792
        , September 1981.

   [7]  Plummer, D., "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol -or-
        Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet Address
        for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", STD 37 , RFC 826 ,
        November 1982.


Authors' Addresses

   B. Scott Michel
   The Aerospace Corporation
   P.O. Box 92957
   M1-102
   Los Angeles, CA  90009-2957
   USA

   Phone: +1 310 336 5034
   EMail: scottm@aero.org


   Michael AuYeung
   The Aerospace Corporation
   P.O. Box 92957
   M1-102
   Los Angeles, CA  90009-2957
   USA

   Phone: +1 310 336 1856
   EMail: mauyeung@aero.org







Michel (ed.) & AuYeung (ed.)    Expires January 10, 2002        [Page 3]

Internet Area                 IP-over-CCSDS                    July 2001


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Michel (ed.) & AuYeung (ed.)    Expires January 10, 2002        [Page 4]

