

Network Working Group                                   C. Jennings, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: February 7, 2007                                 August 6, 2006


                  Draft Charter for SIP Working Group
                     draft-jennings-sip-charter-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 7, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document is not intended to every become an RFC.  It is an
   experiment in seeing if the current document submission tool and
   Internet Draft tracker tools can be used by the IESG in processing
   charter updates.








Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Charter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Chair(s):  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Real-time Applications and Infrastructure Area
           Director(s): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.3.  Real-time Applications and Infrastructure Area Advisor:  .  3
     2.4.  Technical Advisor(s):  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.5.  Mailing Lists: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.6.  Description of Working Group:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.7.  Goals and Milestones:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10

































Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


1.  Introduction

   The IESG reviews updates to WG charters.  It would be convenient to
   have tools to not loose any changes, make sure everyone reviewed the
   same document, easily see the changes from one version to the next,
   and have a history of changes.  There are many ways that this could
   be done but this document is an experiment to see how well the
   existing tools that the IESG uses to process Internet Drafts can be
   used to process a Charter update.

   This document is only a draft and does not represent the charter.
   The current charter for this WG can be found at [Charter].  This
   document is not a request to get feedback on the charter text
   contained in it.

   The following section contains the text of the current charter.


2.  Charter

2.1.  Chair(s):

   Dean Willis <dean.willis@softarmor.com>

   Keith Drage <drage@lucent.com>

2.2.  Real-time Applications and Infrastructure Area Director(s):

   Jon Peterson <jon.peterson@neustar.biz>

   Cullen Jennings <fluffy@cisco.com>

2.3.  Real-time Applications and Infrastructure Area Advisor:

   Cullen Jennings <fluffy@cisco.com>

2.4.  Technical Advisor(s):

   Dan Romascanu <dromasca@avaya.com>

2.5.  Mailing Lists:

   General Discussion: sip@ietf.org

   To Subscribe: sip-request@ietf.org

   In Body: subscribe




Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


   Archive: http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/sip/index.html

2.6.  Description of Working Group:

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) working group is chartered to
   maintain and continue the development of SIP, currently specified as
   proposed standard RFC 3261, and its family of extensions.

   SIP is a text-based protocol, similar to HTTP and SMTP, for
   initiating interactive communication sessions between users.  Such
   sessions include voice, video, chat, interactive games, and virtual
   reality.  The main tasks of the group involve bringing SIP from
   proposed to draft standard and specifying and developing proposed
   extensions that arise out of strong requirements.  The SIP working
   group will concentrate on the specification of SIP and its
   extensions, and will not explore the use of SIP for specific
   environments or applications.  It will, however respond to general-
   purpose requirements for changes to SIP provided by other working
   groups, including the SIPPING working group, when those requirements
   are within the scope and charter of SIP.  The process and
   requirements for such extensions are documented in RFC 3427, "Change
   Process for the Session Initiation Protocol".

   Throughout its work, the group will strive to maintain the basic
   model and architecture defined by SIP.  In particular:

   1.  Services and features are provided end-to-end whenever possible.

   2.  Standards-track extensions and new features must be generally
       applicable, and not applicable only to a specific set of session
       types.

   3.  Simplicity is key.

   4.  Reuse of existing Internet protocols and architectures and
       integrating with other Internet applications is crucial.

   The primary source of change requirements to be considered by the SIP
   Working Group is the SIPPING working group, which analyzes the
   requirements for application of SIP to several different tasks,
   including the tasks of standards-development organizations that are
   developing systems based on SIP and that may require changes or
   extensions thereto.  Additional requirements are produced by the
   other IETF working groups that are using SIP, including the SIMPLE WG
   (which is using SIP for messaging and presence) and the XCON working
   group (which is using SIP for centralized conferencing).

   In addition to extending SIP as required to address these externally-



Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


   derived requirements, the deliverables of the group include assuring
   capable security and privacy mechanisms within SIP and increasing the
   stability of the SIP specification.  Specific deliverables toward
   these goals include:

   1.  Mechanisms for secure expression of identity in requests and
       responses.

   2.  Mechanism to securely request services delivery by non-terminal
       elements ("end-to-middle").

   3.  Guidelines for use of existing security mechanisms such as TLS,
       IPsec, and certificates.

   4.  Guidelines for the use of descriptive techniques such as SAML
       (Security Association Markup Language) with SIP.

   5.  Draft standard versions of SIP and critical supporting
       specifications.

   Other deliverables may be agreed upon as extensions are understood to
   be necessary.  Prospective deliverables will be discussed with the
   Area Director before inclusion on agendas, and new proposed work must
   be approved via a charter update.

2.7.  Goals and Milestones:

   Done     Server Features Negotiation submitted to IESG

   Done     Complete IESG requested fixes to provrel and servfeat

   Done     Revised proposed standard version of SIP (2543bis) submitted
            to IESG

   Done     SIP Events specification to IESG

   Done     The UPDATE Method submitted for Proposed Standard

   Done     SIP extensions for media authorization (call-auth) submitted
            as Informational

   Done     Preconditions extensions (manyfolks) spec to IESG

   Done     SIP Privacy specification to IESG







Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


   Done     SIP Privacy and Security Requirements to IESG

   Done     The MESSAGE Method submitted for Proposed Standard

   Done     The Replaces Header submitted for Proposed Standard

   Done     Refer spec to IESG Done SIP NAT extension submitted to IESG

   Done     SIP over SCTP specification and applicability statement

   Done     Mechanism for Content Indirection in SIP submitted to IESG
            for Proposed Standard

   Done     The SIP Referred-By Header submitted to IESG for Proposed
            Standard

   Done     Session Timer spec, revised to IESG

   Done     Caller preferences specification submitted to IESG

   Done     Submit SIP Identity documents to IESG for Proposed Standard

   Done     The SIP Join Header submitted to IESG for Proposed Standard

   Done     Replaces header to IESG (PS)

   Done     Upgrade S/MIME requirement for AES in 3261 to IESG (PS)

   Done     Application Interaction to IESG (BCP)

   Done     Presence Publication to IESG (PS)

   Done     Resource Priority signaling mechanism to IESG (PS)

   Done     Guidelines for Authors of SIP extensions submitted as
            Informational

   Done     Enhancements for Authenticated Identity Management to IESG
            (BCP)

   Done     MIB spec to IESG Done Request History mechanism to IESG (PS)

   Oct 2005 Mechanism for obtaining globally routable unique URIs (GRUU)
            to IESG (PS)







Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


   Done     Mechanism for REFER without implicit SUBSCRIBE to IESG (PS)

   Nov 2005 Connection reuse mechanism to IESG (PS)

   Done     Mechanism for Target-Dialog to IESG (PS)

   Jan 2006 Submit Answering/Alerting Modes to the IESG for Proposed
            Standard

   Done     Mechanism for feature parameters with REFER To IESG (PS)

   Feb 2006 Mechanism and guidelines for outbound connections to IESG
            (PS)

   Feb 2006 Guidelines for Using Certificates with SIP to IESG (BCP)

   Mar 2006 Location Conveyance with SIP to IESG (PS)

   Apr 2006 Mechanism for End-to-Middle Requests to IESG (PS)

   Apr 2006 Mechanism for Response Identity to IESG (PS)

   Jul 2006 Using SAML for SIP (PS)

   Jul 2006 Revise Charter, including developing a task for a roadmap
            that will identify the


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document is not intended to ever become an RFC.  This document
   makes no request of IANA.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document is not intended to ever become an RFC.  It has no
   security considerations.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The Chairs and previous Area Directors of the SIP working group along
   with many others contributors wrote all of this text.







Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


6.  Normative References

   [Charter]  "http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/sip-charter.html".
















































Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


Author's Address

   Cullen Jennings (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   Mailstop SJC-21/2
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 421-9990
   Email: fluffy@cisco.com








































Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 SIP Charter                   August 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Jennings                Expires February 7, 2007               [Page 10]

