

   CCAMP Working Group                              E. Mannie (Ebone)
   Informational Draft                     D. Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Expiration Date: May 2002
                                                        November 2001



                GMPLS Interworking between Sonet and SDH

       draft-papadim-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt




Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
   its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may
   also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   To view the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in an Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directory, see http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document is a companion to the GMPLS extensions to control
   SONET/SDH networks as defined in [GMPLS-SONET-SDH], [GMPLS-SONET-
   SDH-EXT] and [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-RTG]. They define the SONET and SDH
   technology specific information needed when using GMPLS signaling.
   This informational memo details the GMPLS signalling and some
   routing specific considerations to control the interworking
   between SONET and SDH networks. It results from this, that
   interworking issues from the control plane viewpoint are well
   covered by the current definition of the Sonet/SDH extensions to
   the GMPLS protocol suite.

1. Introduction

   Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) [GMPLS-ARCH] extends MPLS from supporting
   packet (Packet Switching Capable - PSC) interfaces and switching
   to include support of four new classes of interfaces and
   switching: Layer 2 Switch Capable (L2SC), Time-Division Multiplex
   (TDM), Lambda Switch Capable (LSC) and Fiber-Switch Capable (FSC).



Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               1

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001

   A functional description of the extensions to MPLS signaling
   needed to support these new classes of interfaces and switching is
   provided in [GMPLS-SIG]. [GMPLS-RSVP] describes RSVP-TE specific
   formats and mechanisms needed to support all four classes of
   interfaces, and CR-LDP extensions can be found in [GMPLS-LDP].

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] and [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-EXT] present details that
   are specific to SONET/SDH. Per [GMPLS-SIG], SONET/SDH specific
   parameters are carried through the signaling protocol in traffic
   parameter specific objects.

   This informational memo describes GMPLS signaling and some routing
   considerations to control interworking between SONET and SDH.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2. SONET/SDH Interworking

   This section describes how SDH and SONET can interwork at the
   transport plane level. SONET networks are based on STS-1 frames
   while SDH networks are based on STM-1 frames. An STS-1 frame is
   composed by a transport overhead (corresponding to the SDH RS and MS
   overhead) and a SPE  (corresponding to the SDH VC-3 plus two columns
   of fixed stuff). There is no equivalent for an STS-1 frame in the
   SDH standard, but an STS-1 frame would correspond to an SDH frame
   build with a single AU-3.

   Three major different ways of providing the interworking
   capabilities are presented hereafter:

   1. Interworking between VC-4    and STS-1 SPE
   2. Interworking between VC-4-Nc and STS-(3*N)c SPE (SONET)
   3. Interworking between VC-4    and STS-1 SPE lower order signals

   Interworking between SDH and SONET may be needed for different
   reasons. For instance, it may happen between North American and
   European operators in order to provide connectivity between them. In
   these cases, interworking occurs between a SONET routing domain and
   an SDH routing domain, and requires an inter-domain routing protocol
   for capability exchange between these domains (it is, therefore, not
   in the scope of this document to specify the corresponding
   extensions).

   However, interworking may also be useful for a single operator
   providing both SDH and SONET services in the same routing domain. In
   this case, the routing domain may or may not be divided into areas.
   We assume that a SDH/SONET gateway can be an intra-area node or an
   area border node.

   First consider the case where the domain is divided into areas. For
   instance, if one OSPF area is SONET based, and the backbone area is
   SDH based, different area border nodes between these two areas could

Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               2

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001

   advertise different interworking capabilities. For a source node to
   be able to compute a source route, it is important that it be able
   to compute a source route through a border node providing the
   adequate interworking capabilities.

   Next consider the case where there are no areas, and a flat OSPF or
   IS-IS routing domain is used, mixing both SDH and SONET types of
   network. No inter-area exchange of information needs to take place.
   This is the simplest case where interworking considerations can be
   applied without any additional routing considerations from the one
   covered in [GMPLS-SDH-SONET-RTG].

   A node capable of acting as a SDH/SONET gateway should advertise its
   particular interworking capabilities to every other node belonging
   to the same routing domain.

   In the scope of this memo, a SDH/SONET gateway node includes at
   least one Sonet and one SDH interface. It is capable to terminate
   both the Section/RS Overhead and Line/MS Overhead on Sonet/SDH
   interface, respectively. Pointer processing follows the rules
   defined in ITU-T G.707 and ANSI T1.105.

   The SDH/SONET interworking scenarios supported in this specification
   cover:
   - Interworking between VC-4    and STS-1 SPE
   - Interworking between VC-4-Nc and STS-(3*N)c SPE
   - Interworking between VC-4    and STS-1 SPE lower order signals

   Note: section 3.2 covers interworking between VC-4-Xc and STS-3c-Xc
         Contiguous concatenation issues

2.1 Interworking between VC-4 and STS-1 SPE

   In one direction, from STS-1 to STM-1 (interface level), this
   interworking is accomplished by extracting the SPE of an STS-1,
   transforming the SPE into a VC-3 via pointer processing and the
   removal of two columns of fixed stuff bytes, and processing the VC-3
   via the TU-3/TUG-3/VC-4/AUG route as shown below. In the other
   direction, from STM-1 to STS-1, exactly the opposite occurs.

                                                                ->STM-1
                                                               |
                                                               |x1
                                                               |
                                             ->VC4-->AU4-->AUG-
                                            |
                                            |x3
                                            |
    STS-1-                     ->TU3-->TUG3-
          |                   |
          |                   |x1
          |                   |
           -SPE--transf-->VC3-


Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               3

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001

               Figure: STS-1 to STM-1 mapping through TU-3.

   Using this capability, for instance, three independent DS-3 signals,
   each transported by a SONET STS-1 signal, can be multiplexed and
   transported in one single STM-1 signal.

   Alternatively, the VC-3 could be transported via the AU-3/AU-3 route
   as described below. Again three independent DS-3 signals transported
   over SONET can be transported over SDH.

                                                  ->AUG->STM-1
                                                 |
                                                 |x3
                                                 |
              STS-1-                     -->AU3--
                    |                   |
                    |                   |x1
                    |                   |
                     -SPE--transf-->VC3-

             Figure: STS-1 to STM-1 mapping through VC-3/AU-3.

   Note that if a single DS-3 has to be transported end-to-end, it can
   imply on the SDH side that a whole VC-4 needs to be equipped to the
   end, even if the two other VC-3 components are not used. Ideally,
   the routing algorithm should know the details of both the SDH and
   the SONET clouds in order to find the path that minimizes the number
   of SDH VC-3s that will not be used (i.e. to minimize internal
   fragmentation of VC-4s due to the interworking).

   SDH networks support both VC-3 and VC-4, however SDH mainly uses VC-
   4s. Therefore a SONET signal must be mainly demultiplexed,
   transformed and remultiplexed within an SDH AUG via the TU-3/TUG-
   3/VC-4/AU-4 route.

2.2 Interworking between VC-4-Nc and STS-(3*N)c SPE

   Interworking between VC-4 and STS-3c SPE is simpler to implement
   since the two frames have the same structure. In practice, a VC-4-Nc
   will be mapped to an STS-(3*N)c and vice versa.

   The standard SONET concatenation only allows STS-Nc multiplexing
   where N is a multiple of 3. This helps with SDH interworking.
   Likewise, interworking between VC-4-Nc and STS-(3*N)c is relatively
   simple to implement. Note however than certain interworking issues
   still remain due to overhead processing differences.

2.3 Interworking between VC-4 and STS-1 SPE Lower Order Signals

   Interworking is also possible between the SDH TUG-2, TU-11, TU-12 or
   TU-2 and respectively the SONET VT Group, VT1.5, VT2 and VT6. Since
   the corresponding sub-signals have the same structure, this
   interworking should be straightforward. Note however that a SONET
   VT-3 (SPE) has no equivalent in the SDH world.

Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               4

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001


3. Generalized MPLS Signalling

   This document specifies the GMPLS interworking between an SDH cloud
   and a SONET cloud through the use of gateways. A gateway is an node
   that has to transform the transport plane, do some light translation
   in the signaling and that may have to adapt some link state
   advertisements.

   IP addresses are considered here as unique in the whole network. We
   assume hereafter that the same GMPLS profile is implemented on both
   sides of each gateway and that GMPLS is used end-to-end.
   Consequently, only a few technology specific fields need to be
   translated in the GMPLS signaling when using such a gateway.

   Note that there is no translation required for the labels since they
   are purely local per interface. Consequently there is no label
   interworking issue.

3.1 Signaling Aspects

   To open an SDH or SONET circuit a signaling message is sent from the
   source to the destination in an RSVP-TE Path or CR-LDP Label Request
   message. This signaling message transports a Generalized Label
   Request Object/TLV and a SONET/SDH Traffic Parameters Object/TLV.

   The LSP Encoding Type included within the Generalized Label Request
   indicates either SDH or SONET in our case. A gateway has to
   translate this field from value SDH ITU-T G.707 (5) to value Sonet
   ANSI T1.105 (6) and vice versa.

   The SONET/SDH Traffic parameters contains multiple fields, some of
   them may not be used. One of these fields is the Signal Type which
   indicates the base type of signal being considered. The Signal Type
   values are defined identically for both SDH and SONET to simplify
   interworking issues.

   For a basic request including an elementary Signal Type on which no
   concatenation and no transparency is applied, no Signal Type
   transformation is needed. Moreover, the Multiplier field doesn't
   require any modification.

   There is however one restriction, this document doesn't cover SONET
   VT-3 interworking since it has no equivalent in SDH. Concatenation
   and transparency are discussed in the next sub-sections.

3.2 Contiguous Concatenation

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] and [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-EXT] define the following
   optional flags for the Requested Contiguous Concatenation (RCC)
   field:

          Flag 1 (bit 1): Standard Contiguous Concatenation
          Flag 2 (bit 2): Arbitrary Contiguous Concatenation

Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               5

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001


   If contiguous concatenation is requested in the Traffic Parameter
   Object/TLV, this memo allows only the interworking between a VC-4-
   Xc and an STS-3c-Xc using the Standard Contiguous Concatenation.
   In this case, the Signal Type, RCC and NCC fields do not have to
   be modified. The transport plane transformation is done as
   explained in section 2.2.

   All other cases of contiguous concatenations, in particular the
   arbitrary one, are for further study.

3.3 Transparency

   The Transparency field (defined as a vector of flag) indicates
   within precisely which fields in these SONET/SDH overheads must be
   delivered unmodified at the other end of the LSP. An ingress node
   requesting transparency will pass these overhead fields that must be
   delivered to the egress node without any change. From the ingress
   and egress nodes point-of-views, these fields must be seen as
   unmodified.

   Transparency is not applied at the interfaces with the initiating
   and terminating nodes, but is only applied between intermediate
   nodes. Notice that Transparency is only applicable when frame types
   of signal are used.

   They are some difference in the overheads between SONET and SDH.
   Detailed explanations concerning the mapping between the two is not
   in the scope of this specification. The effect of these differences
   on the Transparency field is left for further study.

3.4 Virtual Concatenation

   This section will include in a further release the Virtual
   Concatenation interworking issues. In particular when the ingress
   (egress) node include an SDH VC capable interface and the egress
   (ingress, respectively) a Sonet VC capable interface.

4. Interworking Rules

   This section summarizes the interworking rules:

   - LSP Encoding Type: value change from LSP Encoding Type value 5 to
     6 (when flowing from SDH to Sonet) and from value 6 to 5 (when
     flowing from Sonet to SDH)

   - Switching Type: no value change since a single TDM value is
     defined for both Sonet and SDH switching

   - Signal Type: no value change since SDH Signal Types values are
     mapped to their Sonet equivalent

   - Transparency: in principle no particular rule however, hardware
     specific implementation may generate some restrictions in

Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               6

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001

     particular when using J0 and MS/Line K1/K2 transparency fields

   - Contiguous Concatenation: no specific issue to consider since the
     gateway terminates the overhead providing the needed functions to
     enable contiguous concatenation interoperability

   - Virtual Concatenation: FFS

5. Security Considerations

   This draft introduces no new security considerations to [GMPLS-
   SONET-SDH].

6. References

   1. [GMPLS-SIG] P.Ashwood-Smith, L.Berger et al, ôGeneralized MPLS
   - Signaling Functional Descriptionö, Internet Draft, Work in
   progress, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-06.txt, October
   2001.

   2. [GMPLS-LDP] P.Ashwood-Smith, L.Berger et al, ôGeneralized MPLS
   Signaling - CR-LDP Extensionsö, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
   draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-04.txt, July 2001.

   3. [GMPLS-RSVP] P.Ashwood-Smith, L.Berger et al, ôGeneralized MPLS
   Signaling - RSVP-TE Extensionsö, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
   draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-05.txt, October 2001.

   4. [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] E. Mannie (Editor) et al, ôGMPLS extensions
   for SONET and SDH controlö, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-02.txt, October 2001.

   5. [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-EXT] E. Mannie (Editor) et al, ôGMPLS
   extensions for SONET and SDH control û Extensionsö, Internet
   Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-
   extensions-00.txt, October 2001.

   6. [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-CCV] E. Mannie and D. Papadimitriou, ôGMPLS
   Signaling Extension to Control the Conversion between Contiguous
   and Virtual Concatenation for SONET and SDHö, Internet Draft, Work
   in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-
   00.txt, July 2001.

   7. [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-RTG] E. Mannie et al, ôExtensions to OSPF and
   IS-IS in support of MPLS for SDH/SONET Controlö, Internet Draft,
   Work in progress, draft-mannie-mpls-sdh-ospf-isis-01.txt, July 2001.

   8. [GMPLS-ARCH] E. Mannie (Editor) et al, ôGeneralized MPLS
   Architectureö, Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-
   gmpls-architecture-00.txt, June 2001.

   9. [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.


Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               7

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-interwork-00.txt    Nov 2001

7. Authors Addresses

   Eric Mannie
   Ebone (GTS)
   Terhulpsesteenweg 6A
   1560 Hoeilaart - Belgium
   Phone: +32 2 658-5652
   Email: eric.mannie@ebone.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou
   Alcatel
   Francis Wellesplein 1,
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491
   Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be








































Informational Draft û Expires May 2002                               8

