


MANET Autoconfiguration (AUTOCONF)                              S. Singh
Internet-Draft                                                    J. Kim
Expires: April 23, 2006                            Samsung AIT, Comm Lab
                                                              C. Perkins
                                                  Nokia Research Center,
                                       Communications Systems Laboratory
                                                              T. Clausen
                                                LIX, Ecole Polytechnique
                                                                 P. Ruiz
                                                    University of Murcia
                                                        October 24, 2005


   Ad hoc network autoconfiguration: definition and problem statement
                      draft-singh-autoconf-adp-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of



Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available.  MANET properties such as multi-hop,
   autonomous, etc requires separate autoconfiguration mechanism.  This
   document gives definition, problem statement and goals
   for ad hoc network autoconfiguration.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Problem statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Stand-alone ad hoc network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network  . .  8
     4.3.  Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Network merger and partitioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14




























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


1.  Introduction

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of
   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available.  However, it is generally expected that, if
   some MANET nodes are connected to external IP networks (e.g.
   Internet), they might act as gateways towards those networks.

   Several independent solutions have been proposed on interconnecting
   MANETs and the Internet[4][5][7].  Most of the solutions are tightly
   related to the issue of discovering Internet gateways and auto-
   configuring global addresses that are routable within the Internet.
   Usually, autoconfiguration of addresses in MANET is also required
   even when the MANET is isolated from external networks.

   Currently there is no standard definition for commonly used MANET
   autoconfiguration related terminologies such as standalone MANET,
   MANET local address, etc.  This document provides definition of these
   terminologies, in addition to problem statement and goals
   for ad hoc network autoconfiguration.






























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


2.  Terminology

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [5].

   Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) - A
      network formed dynamically in an arbitrary manner by a collection
      of mobile devices equipped with one or more wireless interfaces.
      Normally, nodes are characterized by random mobility and support
      multi-hop communication.  Multi-hop property requires that each
      node should act as a "host" as well as a "router".  Network
      topology is dynamic in nature due to the mobile nature of MANET
      nodes.

   MANET Node - A device with one or more wireless interfaces and
      associated IP address(es) which is used by the MANET routing
      protocol in use.

   MANET local address - An IP address configured on a MANET node and
      valid for communication among MANET nodes that are part of the
      same ad hoc network.  Nodes MUST NOT communicate with other nodes
      outside the MANET using this address.

   Global address - An IP address configured on a MANET node and valid
      for communication among MANET nodes as well as with the nodes
      located on the Internet.

   Internet gateway - An edge node connected to MANET as well as to the
      Internet and capable of providing global addresses and
      bidirectional connectivity to MANET nodes.  Internet gateways
      should provide topologically correct IPv6 prefixes.  Internet
      gateway mostly runs ad hoc routing protocols as well as
      infrastructure network protocols such as OSPF.

   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) - The process by which a node
      confirms the uniqueness of an address it wishes to configure or
      has already configured.  A node already equipped with an IP
      address participates in DAD in order to protect its IP address
      from being used by another node.

   Standalone ad hoc network - A network formed by a group of MANET
      nodes capable of spontaneously forming a multi-hop ad hoc network
      and has no connection (either direct of via gateways) to other IP
      networks such as the Internet.






Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   Hybrid ad hoc network - A network formed by a group of MANET nodes,
      capable of spontaneously forming a multi-hop ad hoc network, in
      which one or more of the nodes act as Internet Gateways providing
      access to other the Internet.  They can be envisioned as a
      standalone MANET with one or more Internet Gateways taking part in
      both MANET and the Internet.

   Network merger - The process by which two or more ad hoc networks
      (either standalone or hybrid), previously disjoint, get connected.
      In general, this proccess happens as a consequence of the node
      mobility.

   Network partitioning - The process by which an ad hoc network (either
      standalone or hybrid) splits into two or more disconnected ad hoc
      networks.  In general, this proccess happens as a consequence of
      the mobility of the nodes.  When this happens, some of the routes
      in MANET nodes become invalid hence some nodes may become
      unreachable.

   Network merger detection - The process by which MANET nodes detect
      "network merger.

   Network partition detection - The process by which MANET nodes detect
      network partition.



























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


3.  Assumptions

   o  Routes between nodes in the ad hoc network MUST NOT leak into the
      Internet.

   o  Network routes (those valid for an entire network prefix instead
      of just a single node) require reachability to every node which
      exists within the prefix, just as within the Internet.

   o  A gateway can be treated as a default router for the Internet.

   o  A gateway SHOULD maintain active routes for all nodes within the
      MANET which are actively engaged in communications with their
      partners in the Internet.

   o  Nodes within the Internet cannot distinguish whether or not a
      gateway offers connectivity to an ad hoc network or some other
      sort of stub network.

   o  If two gateways advertise connectivity to the same routing prefix,
      then those two gateways MUST coordinate their routing tables so
      that they exhibit equal reachability for all nodes within that
      routing prefix.

   o  Multiple gateways may offer several different routing prefixes.  A
      node may choose which gateway's routing prefix to use for
      autoconfiguration according to any convenient criterion; the
      methods for making the determination are not constrained to be
      only those specified within a MANET autoconfiguration protocol
      specification.

   o  Autoconfigured addresses are likely to have lifetimes associated
      with them, and after the lifetime expires use of the address
      should be immediately discontinued.

   o  When duplicate addresses are detected, the node which has had the
      address for the least amount of time MUST discontinue.
      Alternatively, BOTH nodes MUST discontinue using this address.













Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


4.  Problem statement

   Several specifications have been developed for address
   autoconfiguration in the traditional IP based network e.g.  RFC 2462,
   RFC 2461, RFC 3315, etc.  However, these specifications cannot be
   used as-is by the MANET nodes due to their unique properties.  Unlike
   in traditional IP networks, each MANET node, besides being traffic
   end-point, normally expected to be capable of forwarding traffic
   traffic destined for other hosts i.e each ad hoc node normally acts
   as a "router" as well as a "host".  Additionally, the notion of all
   nodes being able to access a shared communication medium fails in
   MANET; since all nodes in a MANET do not share the same physical
   link.  In MANET, a single transmission does not suffice for a
   broadcast or link-local multicast to reach all nodes.  Transmissions
   which are otherwise not supposed to be forwarded by routers, such as
   limited broadcast and link-local multicast, are forwarded by the
   nodes in order to reach all the MANET nodes.  In other words, nodes
   constituting an ad-hoc network do not share access to a single
   multicast-capable link for signaling.  The address autoconfiguration
   related protocol specifications such as RFCs 2462, 2461, etc as used
   in traditional IP networks, assume that subnet-local signals (e.g.
   link-local multicast signals) are received by each of the hosts on
   the particular subnet without being forwarded by the routers defining
   the subnet boundary.

   Ad hoc networks can either be deployed as an standalone MANET or as
   an edge network, attached to the Internet.  Indeed, IETF MANET WG has
   this point of view for developing the MANET routing protocols.

   There is a growing requirement for a standard address
   autoconfiguration solutions in the MANET environment that can be used
   by MANET nodes constituting standalone networks as well as edge
   networks.  However, the solutions should be designed with a minimal
   modification, if any, and should be compliant with the specifications
   that are widely used in the traditional IP networks.

   The autoconfiguration protocol has to carefully distinguish between
   cases when a gateway offers a routing prefix, from the case when a
   "local" prefix has to be used since no routing prefix is available
   for the purpose.  In this way, a single addressing solution is
   obtained, but just as within the Internet there are different kinds
   of addresses.  However, there may be differences which are discovered
   as more development occurs towards the specification of the address
   autoconfiguration protocol.

4.1.  Stand-alone ad hoc network

   Examples of standalone ad hoc networks are conference-room networks,



Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   battlefield networks, surveillance networKs, etc.  For these
   networks, IP address auto-configuration mechanism is needed.

   These addresses should be routable only within the particular ad hoc
   network and should be unique even in situations where two or more
   networks, initially disjoint, merge together to form a single
   network.  Network merger can occur anytime and this makes the address
   uniqueness maintenance quite challenging in such situations.

4.2.  Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network

                                            H1
                                            |
                                     +---------------+
                                     |   Internet    |
                                     +---------------+
                                       *           *
                                       *           *
                                    GW1*           *
                                     |            GW2
                                     |             |
                                  ---N1            |
                                 /    |            |
                               N4     |           N2--- N5
                                      |            |
                                      N3-----------N6

              Fig. 1: Hybrid ad hoc network connected to Internet.

   Hybrid networks can be envisioned as an standalone network connected
   to the Internet via one or more Internet Gateways.  These gateways
   are located between the two networks and are capable of providing
   globally routable addresses as well as bi-directional connectivity to
   the ad hoc nodes connected to it either directly (1-hop) or via one
   or more intermediate nodes.  These gateways may either be fixed or
   mobile, single or multiple, equipped with wired and/or wireless
   interfaces.

   Fig.1. shows an ad hoc network deployed at the edge of the Internet.

   Ad hoc nodes may use Internet gateway for global prefix allocation
   and configuration of globally routable addresses.  However, it
   introduces issues such as how MANET nodes receive and/or Internet
   gateway provides globally routable prefixes, etc.  Hence, for such
   network sufficient but limited detail about Internet gateway
   discovery and operation is required, along with an address
   autoconfiguration solution.




Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


4.3.  Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network

   Temporarily hybrid MANET scenario arises due to the situation where
   an ad hoc network may be sometimes stand-alone and sometimes
   connected to the Internet e.g. a car or subway network connected
   while parked or at station and disconnected otherwise.

   Basically, the problems in this case are similar to those introduced
   in the above two cases.  However, in this case, ad hoc nodes should
   detect the lack of reachability to the Internet and SHOULD maintain
   their allocated addresses for the lifetime which has been assigned
   during the autoconfiguration process.  For local addresses, no such
   lifetime is necessary, but could anyway be assigned as a minimal
   protection against partitioning.

4.4.  Network merger and partitioning

   By the nature of MANET, two or more ad hoc networks which are
   initially isolated, can merge together or a single ad hoc network can
   get partitioned into two or more separate networks, at any moment in
   time.  While network partitioning may not cause any problem in the
   MANET's operation, it may be needed that network partitioning is
   detected so that the resources (e.g. limited number of addressed) can
   be re-used among the nodes.

   Network merger imposes challenges to maintain the address uniqueness.
   Normally, once an address is allocated to a node, it continues using
   it and at the same time defending its own address from being
   allocated to any other node.  However, since initially isolated
   networks had allocated addresses independent with each other, there
   remains some probability of more than one node using same address.
   Worst possible scenario can occur when number of address conflicts
   after merger are as many as number of nodes.  This can happen if, for
   example, addresses were allocated within initially independent MANETs
   from the same address-range.
















Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


5.  Goals

   Goals listed below are by no means exhaustive. Additional goals may
   be found necessary as the protocol design, implementation and
   deployment takes place. Below listed goals is an effort to
   give a bigger scope and as such may or may not fall within the scope
   of the AUTOCONF WG. These goals include:

      - As mentioned in the above sections, MANETs can be either
      standalone or connected to the Internet via one or more Internet
      gateways.  MANET nodes MUST implement a mechanism to 
      configure "local address(es)" when standalone.  It MAY also configure 
      global address(es) when connected to the Internet.  Nodes MUST 
      ensure address uniqueness, explained under next bullet, before 
      configuring them to their interfaces.  It MAY be required that 
      the configured global addresses are usable even after connectivity 
      with the Internet is lost.

      - Each node MUST perform duplicate address detection test on
      addresses before configuring them to their interfaces - ensuring
      uniqueness of the tentative addresses.  If the particular address
      is being used by some other node, either or both nodes MUST not
      use the address.  In this situation an alternative address MAY be
      generated and tested for uniqueness. 

      - As mentioned in section 4.4, network Merger is quite possible in
      MANETs.  This may or may not result in multiple nodes using same
      address.  However, each node SHOULD run a mechanism to ensure the
      uniqueness of its current address-in-use.

      - Network partitioning is equally probably scenario in MANET.
      While network partitioning may not cause any problem in the
      MANET's ongoing operation, it MAY be needed that network
      partitioning is detected so that the resources such as 
      IP addresses can be re-used among the nodes.  Hence,
      MANET nodes MAY need a mechanism, either independent or
      integrated with the the main protocol, to detect network 
      partitioning.

      - Protocol should be designed to avoid as many security pitfalls
      as can be avoided.  This may involve using collaboration histories
      and out-of-band mechanisms requiring user interventions.










Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


6.  Security Considerations

   Since this document does not specify any protocol, no additional
   security vulnerabilities are created.  However, experience with other
   address autoconfiguration protocols indicates that it is difficult to
   expect a very high degree of security.  This is especially true in an
   ad hoc network using manet-local addresses, since it may be
   unfeasible to interact with any pre-existing security infrastructure.
   Nevertheless, the protocols should be designed to avoid as many
   security pitfalls as can be avoided.  This may involve using
   collaboration histories and out-of-band mechanisms requiring user
   interventions.







































Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Appendix A.  Normative References

   o  [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   o  [2] Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
      Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   o  [3] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.

   o  [4] Ryuji Wakikawa et. al.  Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad
      Hoc Networks, IETF "draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-03.txt"

   o  [5] Shubhranshu Singh, Kim, JH., Choi, YG., Kang, KL. and YS.
      Roh, "Mobile multi-gateway support for IPv6 mobile ad hoc
      networks" I-D draft-singh-manet-mmg-00.txt, June 2004.

   o  [6] Perkins, C., Malinen, J., Wakikawa, R. and E. Belding-Royer,
      "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad Hoc Networks", I-D
      draft-perkins-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001.

   o  [7] Cha, H., Park, J. and H. Kim, "Extended Support for Global
      Connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", October 2003.

   o  [8] Jeong, J., Park, J., Kim, H. and D. Kim, "Ad Hoc IP Address
      Autoconfiguration", I-D draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt,
      February 2004.

   o  [9] Paakkonen, P., Rantonen, M. and J. Latvakoski, "IPv6
      addressing in a heterogeneous MANET-network", I-D
      draft-paakkonen-addressing-htr-manet-00.txt, December 2003.

   o  [10] Jelger, C., Noel, T. and A. Frey, "Gateway and address
      autoconfiguration for IPv6 adhoc networks", I-D
      draft-jelger-manet-gateway-autoconf-v6-02.txt, April 2004.

   o  [11] Sun, Y. and E. Belding-Royer, "A study of dynamic addressing
      techniques in mobile ad hod networks", I-D Wireless communication
      and mobile computing, May 2004.

   o  [12] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.




Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Shubhranshu Singh
   Samsung AIT, Comm Lab, S. Korea

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: Shubhranshu@gmail.com


   JaeHoon Kim
   Samsung AIT, Comm Lab, S. Korea

   Phone: +82 31 280 9532
   Email: jaehoonk@samsung.com


   Charles E. Perkins
   Nokia Research Center, 
  Comm Systems Laboratory, U.S.A

   Phone: +1 650 625 2986
   Email: charliep@iprg.nokia.com


   Thomas Heide Clausen
   LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, France

   Phone: +33 6 6058 9349
   Email: T.Clausen@computer.org
   URI:   http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/Labo/Thomas.Clausen/


   Pedro M. Ruiz
   University of Murcia, Spain

   Phone: +34 968367646
   Email: pedrom@dif.um.es















Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 14]




