
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
  
                                                                     
 Network Working Group                                     S. Bryant 
 Internet Draft                                          C. Filsfils 
 Expiration Date: Apr 2005                                S. Previdi 
                                                            M. Shand 
                                                       Cisco Systems 
                                                                     
                                                            Oct 2004 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                      IP Fast Reroute using tunnels 
                                     
                    draft-bryant-ipfrr-tunnels-01.txt 
  
  
 Status of this Memo  
  
    By submitting this Internet-Draft, we certify that any applicable 
    patent or other IPR claims of which we are aware have been 
    disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which we become aware 
    will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668. 

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as        
    Internet-Drafts. 

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than a "work in 
    progress." 

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

 Abstract 
  
    This draft describes an IP fast re-route mechanism that provides 
    backup connectivity in the event of a link or router failure. In 
    the absence of single points of failure and asymmetric costs, the 
    mechanism provides complete protection against any single failure. 
    If perfect repair is not possible, the identity of all the 
    unprotected links and routers is known in advance. 




  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 1] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
 Table of Contents 
 1. Introduction......................................................4 
 2. Goals, non-goals, limitations and constraints.....................4 
   2.1. Goals.........................................................4 
   2.2. Non-Goals.....................................................5 
   2.3. Limitations...................................................5 
   2.4. Constraints...................................................5 
 3. Repair Paths......................................................6 
   3.1. Tunnels as Repair Paths.......................................6 
   3.2. Tunnel Requirements...........................................9 
     3.2.1. Setup.....................................................9 
     3.2.2. Multipoint................................................9 
     3.2.3. Directed forwarding.......................................9 
     3.2.4. Security..................................................9 
 4. Construction of Repair Paths.....................................10 
   4.1. Identifying Repair Path Targets..............................10 
   4.2. Determining Tunneled Repair Paths............................10 
     4.2.1. Computing Repair Paths...................................11 
     4.2.2. Extended F-space.........................................12 
     4.2.3. Loop-free Alternates.....................................12 
     4.2.4. Selecting Repair Paths...................................12 
   4.3. Assigning Traffic to Repair Paths............................13 
   4.4. When no Repair Path is Possible..............................13 
     4.4.1. Unreachable Target.......................................14 
     4.4.2. Asymmetric Link Costs....................................14 
     4.4.3. Interference Between Potential Node Repair Paths.........14 
   4.5. Multi-homed Prefixes.........................................17 
   4.6. LANs and pseudo-nodes........................................18 
     4.6.1. The Link between Routers S and E is a LAN................19 
       4.6.1.1. Case 1...............................................19 
       4.6.1.2. Case 2...............................................19 
       4.6.1.3. Simplified LAN repair................................20 
     4.6.2. A LAN exists at the release point........................20 
     4.6.3. A LAN between E and its neighbors........................20 
     4.6.4. The LAN is a Transit Subnet..............................21 
 5. Failure Detection and Repair Path Activation.....................21 
   5.1. Failure Detection............................................21 
   5.2. Repair Path Activation.......................................21 
   5.3. Node Failure Detection Mechanism.............................21 
 6. Loop Free Transition.............................................22 
 7. IPFRR Capability.................................................22 
 8. Enhancements to routing protocols................................23 
 9. IANA considerations..............................................23 
 10. Security Considerations.........................................23 
  

 Terminology 
  
    This draft uses the terms defined in [FRMWK]. This section defines 
    additional words, acronyms, and actions used in this draft. 




  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 2] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    Directed        The ability of the repairing router (S) to 
    forwarding      specify the next hop (G) on exit from a 
                    tunnel end-point (F) 

    Extended F-     The union of the F-space of the neighbors of 
    space           a specific router with respect to a common 
                    component. 

                    Extended F-space does not include the 
                    additional space reachable though directed 
                    forwarding. 

    F               The router in F-space to which a packet is 
                    tunneled for repair. 

    FG              A router that is in both F and G space and 
                    hence does not need directed forwarding. 

    F-space         F-space is the set of routers reachable from 
                    a specific router without any path 
                    (including equal cost path splits) 
                    transiting a specified component.  

                    For example, the F-space of S, is the set of 
                    routers that S can reach without using E 
                    (router failure case) or the S-E link 
                    failure case). 

    G               The router in G space, to which the packet 
                    is directed by router F on exit from the 
                    repair tunnel. G will always be adjacent to 
                    F, or F itself. 

    G-space         G-space is the set of routers from which a 
                    specific router can be reached without any 
                    path (including equal cost path splits) 
                    transiting a specified component. 

    Interference    The condition where the network costs are 
                    such that a repairing router cannot tunnel a 
                    packet sufficiently far from a failed node 
                    such that it is not attracted back to the 
                    failed node via another of that node's 
                    neighbors.  

     

     

     




  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 3] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  

 1.    Introduction 

    When a link or node failure occurs in a routed network, there is 
    inevitably a period of disruption to the delivery of traffic until 
    the network re-converges on the new topology. Packets for 
    destinations which were previously reached by traversing the failed 
    component may be dropped or may suffer looping. Traditionally such 
    disruptions have lasted for periods of at least several seconds, 
    and most applications have been constructed to tolerate such a 
    quality of service.   

    Recent advances in routers have reduced this interval to under a 
    second for carefully configured networks using link state IGPs. 
    However, new Internet services are emerging which may be sensitive 
    to periods of traffic loss which are orders of magnitude shorter 
    than this. 

    Addressing these issues is difficult because the distributed nature 
    of the network imposes an intrinsic limit on the minimum 
    convergence time which can be achieved. 

    However, there is an alternative approach, which is to compute 
    backup routes that allow the failure to be repaired locally by the 
    router(s) detecting the failure without the immediate need to 
    inform other routers of the failure. In this case, the disruption 
    time can be limited to the small time taken to detect the adjacent 
    failure and invoke the backup routes. This is analogous to the 
    technique employed by MPLS Fast Reroute [MPLSFRR], but the 
    mechanisms employed for the backup routes in pure IP networks are 
    necessarily very different. 

    A framework for IP Fast Reroute [IPFRR] provides a summary of the 
    proposed IPFRR solutions, and a partial solution using equal cost 
    multi-path and loop-free alternate case is described in [BASIC]. 

    This draft describes extensions to the basic repair mechanism in 
    which we propose the use of tunnels to provide additional logical 
    downstream paths. These mechanisms provide almost 100% repair 
    connectivity in practical networks. 


 2.    Goals, non-goals, limitations and constraints 


 2.1.      Goals 

    The following are the goals of IPFRR: 

         o  Protect against any link or router failure in the network. 

         o  No constraints on the network topology or link costs. 


  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 4] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
         o  Never worse than the existing routing convergence 
            mechanism. 

         o  Co-existence with non-IP fast-reroute capable routers in 
            the network. 


 2.2.      Non-Goals 

    The following are non-goals of IPFRR: 

         o  Protection of a single point of failure.  

         o  To provide protection in the presence of multiple 
            concurrent failures other than those that occur due to the 
            failure of a single router.  

         o  Shared risk group protection. 

         o  Complete fault coverage in networks that make use of 
            asymmetric costs. 


 2.3.      Limitations 

    The following limitations apply to IPFRR: 

         o  Because the mechanisms described here rely on complete 
            topological information from the link state routing 
            protocol, they will only work within a single link state 
            flooding domain. 

         o  Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) checks cannot be used in 
            conjunction with IPFRR. This is because the use of tunnels 
            may result in packets arriving over different interfaces 
            than expected. 


 2.4.      Constraints  

    The following constraints are assumed: 

         o  Following a failure, only the routers adjacent to the 
            failure have any knowledge of the failure. 

         o  There is insufficient time following a failure to compute a 
            repair strategy based on knowledge of the specific failure 
            that has occurred.  

         o  Multiple concurrent failures may not be protected. 




  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 5] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
 3.    Repair Paths 

    When a router detects an adjacent failure, it uses a set of repair 
    paths in place of the failed component, and continues to use this 
    until the completion of the routing transition. Only routers 
    adjacent to the failed component are aware of the nature of the 
    failure. Once the routing transition has been completed, the router 
    will have no further use for the repair paths since all routers in 
    the network will have revised their forwarding data and the failed 
    link will have been eliminated from this computation. 

    Repair paths are pre-computed in anticipation of later failures so 
    they can be promptly activated when a failure is detected. 

    Three types of repair path are used to achieve the repair: 

      1. Equal cost path-split.  

      2. Loop-free Alternate.  

      3. Tunnel.  

    The operation of equal cost path-split and loop-free alternate is 
    described in [BASIC]. A tunneled repair path tunnels traffic to 
    some staging point from which it will travel to its destination 
    using normal forwarding without looping back. The repair path can 
    be thought of as providing a virtual link, originating at a router 
    adjacent to a failure, and diverting traffic around the failure. 
    This is equivalent to providing a virtual loop-free alternate to 
    supplement the physical loop-free alternates.  


 3.1.      Tunnels as Repair Paths 

    The repair strategies described in this draft operate on the basis 
    that if a packet can somehow be sent to the other side of the 
    failure, it will subsequently proceed towards its destination 
    exactly as if it had traversed the failed component. See Figure 1. 

        Repair Path from S to E 
          +-----------+ 
          |           | 
          |           v 
    ---->[S]---//----[E]-----> 

    Figure 1 Simple Link Repair 
  
    Creating a repair path from S to E may require a packet to traverse 
    an unnatural route. If a suitable natural path starts at a neighbor 
    (i.e. it is a loop-free alternate), then S can force the packet 
    directly there. If this is not the case, then S may create one by 
    using a tunnel to carry the packet to a point in the network where 
    there is a real loop-free alternate. Note that the tunnel does not 
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 6] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    have to go from S to E. The tunnel can terminate at any router in 
    the network, provided that S can be sure that the packet will 
    proceed correctly to its destination from that router. 

    A repair path computed for a link failure may not however work 
    satisfactorily when the neighboring router has, itself, failed. 
    This is illustrated in Figure 2. 

         Repair path from S to E 
         +-------------------------+ 
         |                         | 
         |            <------------+ 
    --->[S]---//----[E]----//-----[S1]--> 
         +---------->              | 
         |                         | 
         +-------------------------+ 
          Repair Path from S1 to E 

    Figure 2 Looping Link Repair when Router Fails 
  
    Consider the case of a router E with just two neighbors S and S1. 
    When router E fails, both S and S1 will observe the failure of 
    their local link to E, but will have no immediate knowledge that E 
    itself has failed. If they were both to attempt to repair traffic 
    around their local link, they would invoke mutual repairs which 
    would loop.  

    Since it is not easy for a router to immediately distinguish 
    between a link failure and the failure of its neighbor, repair 
    paths are calculated in anticipation of adjacent router failure. 
    Thus, for each of its protected links, router S (Figure 3)      
    pre-computes a set of tunneled repair paths, one for each of the 
    neighbors (S1, S2 and S3) of its neighbor E on the S-E link. The 
    set of destinations that are normally assigned to link S-E will be 
    assigned to a repair path based on the neighbor of E through which 
    router E would have forwarded traffic to them.  
















  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 7] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
             Repair S-S1 
           +----------->[S1] 
           |             | 
           |             | 
           |             | 
    ----->[S]----//-----[E]---------[S2] 
           ||            |           ^ 
           ||            |           | 
           ||Repair S-S3 |           | 
           |+---------->[S3]         | 
           |                         | 
           +-------------------------+ 
              Repair S-S2 

    Figure 3: Repair paths in anticipation of a router failure 
     

    The set of repair paths in Figure 3 will function correctly in the 
    case of link and router failure. However, in some network 
    topologies they may not provide a means for traffic to reach router 
    E itself. This is important in cases where E is a single point of 
    failure and E is still functional (i.e. the failure was actually a 
    failure of the S-E link). Hence, in addition to computing repair 
    paths for the neighbors of its neighbor on a protected link, a 
    router also calculates a repair path for the neighbor itself. This 
    is illustrated in Figure 4.  

              Repair S-E     
           +----------------+ 
           |                | 
           | Repair S-S1    | 
           |+---------->[S1]| 
           ||            |  / 
           ||            | / 
           ||            |/ 
    ----->[S]----//-----[E]---------[S2] 
           ||            |           ^ 
           ||            |           | 
           ||Repair S-S3 |           | 
           |+---------->[S3]         | 
           |                         | 
           +-------------------------+ 
              Repair S-S2 

    Figure 4 The full set of S-E repair paths. 
     

    In the event of a failure, the only traffic that is assigned to the 
    link repair path (the S-E repair) is that traffic which has no 
    other path to its destination except via E. As we have already 
    seen, there is a danger that traffic assigned to this link repair 
    path may loop if E has failed, therefore, when the repair paths are 
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 8] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    invoked, a loop detection mechanism is used which promptly detects 
    the loop and, upon detection, withdraws the link (S-E) repair path 
    from service.  


 3.2.      Tunnel Requirements 

    There are a number of IP in IP tunnel mechanisms that may be used 
    to fulfill the requirements of this design. Suitable candidates 
    include IP-in-IP [RFC1853], GRE [RFC1701] and L2TPv3 [L2TPv3]. The 
    selection of the specific tunneling mechanism (and any necessary 
    enhancements) used to provide a repair path is outside the scope of 
    this document. However the following sections describe the 
    requirements for the tunneling mechanism. 


 3.2.1.        Setup.  

    When a failure is detected, it is necessary to immediately redirect 
    traffic to the repair paths. Consequently, the tunnels used must be 
    provisioned beforehand in anticipation of the failure. IP fast   
    re-route will determine which tunnels it requires. It must 
    therefore be possible to establish tunnels automatically, without 
    management action, and without the need to manually establish 
    context at the tunnel endpoint. 


 3.2.2.        Multipoint 

    To reduce the number of tunnel endpoints in the network the tunnels 
    should be multi-point tunnels capable of receiving repair traffic 
    from any IPFRR router in the network. 


 3.2.3.        Directed forwarding. 

    Directed forwarding must be supported such that the router at the 
    tunnel endpoint (F) can be directed by the router at the tunnel 
    source (S) to forward the packet directly to a specific neighbor. 
    Specification of the directed forwarding mechanism is outside the 
    scope of this document. Directed forwarding might be provided using 
    an enhancement to the IP tunneling encapsulation, or it might be 
    provided through the use of a single MPLS label stack entry 
    [RFC3032] interposed between the IP tunnel header and the packet 
    being repaired. 


 3.2.4.        Security 

    A lightweight security mechanism should be supported to prevent the 
    abuse of the repair tunnels by an attacker. This is discussed in 
    more detail in Section 10. 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                    [Page 9] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
 4.    Construction of Repair Paths 


 4.1.      Identifying Repair Path Targets 

    To establish protection for a link or node it is necessary to 
    determine which neighbors of the neighboring node should be targets 
    of repair paths. Normally all neighbors will be used as repair path 
    targets. However, in some topologies, not all neighbors will be 
    needed as targets because, prior to the failure, no traffic was 
    being forwarded through them by the repairing router.  This can be 
    determined by examining the normal shortest path tree (SPT) 
    computed by the repairing router. 

    In addition, the neighboring router E will also be the target of a 
    repair path for any destinations for which E is a single point of 
    failure. 


 4.2.      Determining Tunneled Repair Paths 

    The objective of each tunneled repair path is to deliver traffic to 
    a target router when a link is observed to have failed. However, it 
    is seldom possible to use the target router itself as the tunnel 
    endpoint because other routers on the repair path, that have not 
    learned of the failure, will forward traffic addressed to it using 
    their least cost path which may be via the failed link. This is 
    illustrated in Figure 5 in which all link costs are one in both 
    directions. Router S's intended repair path for traffic to D when 
    link S-E fails is the path W-X-Y-Z-S1. However, if router S makes 
    S1 be the tunnel endpoint and forwards the packet to router W, 
    router W will immediately return it to S because its least cost 
    path to S1 is S-E-S1 (cost 3 versus cost 4) and has no knowledge of 
    the failure of link S-E. 

               [S]--//--[E]-----[S1] 
                |                 | 
                |                 | 
               [W]---[X]---[Y]---[Z] 

    Figure 5. Repair path to target router S1. 
  
    Thus the tunnel endpoint needs to be somewhere on the repair path 
    such that packets addressed to the tunnel end point will not loop 
    back towards router S. In addition, the release point needs to be 
    somewhere such that when packets are released from the tunnel they 
    will flow towards the target router (or their actual destination) 
    without being attracted back to the failed link. By inspection, in 
    Figure 5, suitable tunnel endpoints are routers X, Y, and Z.  

    Note that it is not essential that traffic assigned to a repair 
    path actually traverse the target router for which the repair path 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 10] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    was created. If, for example, in Figure 5, if a packet's 
    destination were normally reached via the path S-E-S1-Z-?-?-?, once 
    it was released at any of the possible tunnel endpoints, it would 
    arrive at its destination by the best available route without 
    traversing S1. 

    In general, the properties that are required of tunnel endpoints 
    are: 

         o  the end point must be reachable from the tunnel source 
            without traversing the failed link; and 

         o  when released, tunneled packets will proceed towards their 
            destination without being attracted back over the failed 
            link or node. 

    Provided both of these conditions are met, packets forwarded on the 
    repair path will not loop. 

    In some topologies it will not be possible to find a tunnel 
    endpoint that exhibits both the required properties. For example, 
    in Figure 5, if the cost of link X-Y were increased from one to 
    four in both directions, there is no longer a viable endpoint 
    within the fragment of the topology shown.  

    To solve this problem we introduce the concept of directed 
    forwarding from the tunnel endpoint. Directed forwarding allows the 
    originator of a tunneled packet to instruct that, when it is 
    decapsulated at the end of the tunnel, it be forwarded via a 
    specific adjacency, and not be subjected to the normal forwarding 
    decision process. This effectively allows the tunnel to be extended 
    by one hop. So, for example, in Figure 5 with the cost of link X-Y 
    set to four, it would be possible to select X as the tunnel 
    endpoint with the directive that X always forward the packets it 
    decapsulates via the adjacency to Y. Thus, router X is reached 
    from S using normal forwarding, and directed forwarding is then 
    used to force packets to router Y, from where S1 can be reached 
    using normal forwarding. 

    Provided link costs are symmetrical, it can be proved that it is 
    always possible to compute a tunneled repair path (possibly using 
    directed forwarding) around a link failure, and that the tunnel 
    endpoint (F) and the release point (G) will be coincident, or may 
    be separated by at most one hop. 


 4.2.1.        Computing Repair Paths 

    For a router S, determining tunneled repair paths around a 
    neighboring router E, the set of potential tunnel end points 
    includes all the routers that can be reached from S using normal 
    forwarding without traversing the failed link S-E. This is termed 
    the "F-space" of S with respect to the failure of E. Any router 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 11] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    that is on an equal cost path split via the failed link is excluded 
    from this set.  

    The resulting set defines all the possible tunnel end points that 
    could be used in repair paths originating at router S for the 
    failure of link S-E. This set can be obtained by computing an SPT 
    rooted at S and excising the sub-tree reached via the S-E link.  

    The set of possible release points can be determined by computing 
    the set of routers that can reach the repair path target without 
    traversing the failed link. This is termed the "G-space" of the 
    target with respect to the failure. The G-space can be obtained by 
    computing a reverse shortest path tree (rSPT) rooted at the repair 
    path target, with the sub-tree which traverses the failed link (or 
    node) excised. The rSPT uses the cost towards the root rather than 
    from it and yields the best paths towards the root from other nodes 
    in the network. 

    The intersection of the target's G-space with S's F-space includes 
    all the possible release points for any repair path not employing 
    directed forwarding. Where there is no intersection, but there 
    exist a pair of routers, F in S's F-space and G in the target's   
    G-space, router F can be used as the tunnel endpoint with directed 
    forwarding to the release point G. 


 4.2.2.        Extended F-space 

    The description in section 4.2.1 calculated router S's F-space 
    rooted at S itself. However, since router S will only use a repair 
    path when it has detected the failure of the link S-E, the initial 
    hop of the repair path need not be subject to S's normal forwarding 
    decision process. Thus we introduce the concept of extended F-
    space. Router S's extended F-space is the union of the F-spaces of 
    each of S's neighbors. The use of extended F-space may allow router 
    S to repair to targets that were otherwise unreachable. 


 4.2.3.        Loop-free Alternates 

    When a loop-free alternate exists, no tunneling is required. 


 4.2.4.        Selecting Repair Paths 

    The mechanisms described above will identify all the possible 
    release points that can be used to reach each particular target. 
    (The circumstances when no release points exist are described in 
    section 4.4.) In a well-connected network there are likely to be 
    multiple possible release points for each target, and all will work 
    correctly. For simplicity, one release point per target is chosen. 
    All will deliver the packets correctly so, arguably, it does not 
    matter which is chosen. However, one release point may be preferred 
    over the others on the basis of path cost or some other criteria. 
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 12] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    It is an implementation matter as to how the release point is 
    selected. 


 4.3.      Assigning Traffic to Repair Paths 

    Once the repair path for each target has been selected, it is 
    necessary to determine which of the destinations normally reached 
    via the protected link should be assigned to which of the repair 
    paths when the link fails.  

    This is achieved by recording which neighbor of E would be used to 
    reach each destination reachable over S-E when running the original 
    SPF. Traffic assignment is then simply a matter of assigning the 
    traffic which E would have forwarded via each neighbor to the 
    repair path which has that neighbor as its target. 

    Although the repair paths are calculated based on traffic addressed 
    to specific targets, it can be proved that the traffic assignment 
    algorithm guarantees that the repair path can be used for any 
    traffic assigned to it.  

    Where E would normally split the traffic to a particular 
    destination via two or more of its neighbors, it is an 
    implementation decision whether the repaired traffic should be 
    split across the corresponding set of repair paths.  

    The repair path to E itself is normally used just for traffic 
    destined for E and any prefixes advertised by E. However, under 
    some circumstances, it may be impossible to compute a repair path 
    to one or more of E's neighbors, for example, because E is a single 
    point of failure. In this case traffic for the destinations served 
    by the otherwise irreparable targets is assigned to the repair path 
    with E as its target, in the optimistic assumption that router E is 
    still functioning. If router E is indeed still functioning, this 
    will ensure delivery of the traffic. If, however, router E has 
    failed, the traffic on this repair path will loop as previously 
    shown in section 3.1. The way this is detected, and the course of 
    action when it is detected, is described in section 5.3. 


 4.4.      When no Repair Path is Possible 

    Under some circumstances, it will not be possible to identify a 
    repair path to one or more of the targets. This can occur for the 
    following reasons: 

         o  The neighboring router that is presumed to have failed 
            constitutes a single point of failure in the network. 

         o  Severely asymmetric link costs may cause an otherwise 
            viable physical repair path to be unusable. 


  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 13] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
         o  Interference may occur between the repair paths of 
            individual targets. 

    In practice, these cases are unlikely to be encountered frequently. 
    Networks that will benefit from the mechanisms described here will 
    usually exhibit considerable redundancy and are normally operated 
    with largely symmetric link costs. Note that a router's inability 
    to compute a full set of repair paths for one of its links does not 
    necessarily affect its ability to do so for its other links.  

    Example topologies illustrating each of the three cases above are 
    described in the following subsections.  


 4.4.1.        Unreachable Target 

    If the failure of a neighboring router makes one or more of its 
    neighbors genuinely unreachable, clearly it will not be possible to 
    establish a repair path to such targets. Such single points of 
    failure are not expected to be encountered frequently in properly 
    designed networks, and will probably occur only when the network 
    has previously suffered other failures that have reduced its 
    connectivity. 


 4.4.2.        Asymmetric Link Costs 

    When link costs have been set asymmetrically, it is possible that a 
    repair path cannot be constructed even using directed forwarding. 

    Although it is trivial to construct a network fragment with this 
    property, this should not be regarded as a major problem. Firstly, 
    asymmetric link costs are seldom used deliberately. And, secondly, 
    even when an asymmetric link cost prevents one potential repair 
    path being used, there will normally be other ones available.  


 4.4.3.        Interference Between Potential Node Repair Paths 

    Under some circumstances the existence of one neighbor may 
    interfere with a potential repair path to another. Consider the 
    topology shown in Figure 6, in which all links have a symmetrical 
    cost of one, with the exception of that between H and I, which has 
    a cost of 3. In this example, the fact that router J is a neighbor 
    of E prevents the discovery of a repair path from router S to 
    router S1 despite the existence of an apparently suitable path. 








  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 14] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
                    [S]---//---[E]-------[S1] 
                     |          |         | 
                     |          |         | 
                    [H]-3-[I]--[J]--[K]--[L] 

    Figure 6. Interference between repair paths 
  
    A repair path from router S to J can use J itself as the release 
    point by employing directed forwarding from I. However, it is not 
    possible to identify a suitable release point for a repair path to 
    router S1 within the topology shown since there is nowhere that 
    router S can reach that will subsequently forward traffic to 
    router S1 except via the forbidden link E-S1 (J's least cost path 
    to S1 is J-E-S1). This is because the extended F-space of router S 
    is separated by more than one hop from the G-space of router S1.  

    Since the topology shown in Figure 6 will typically form part of a 
    much larger topology, a different, and possibly more circuitous 
    repair path from S to S1, that does not go via J, may be 
    discovered. This is illustrated in Figure 7. In this enhanced 
    topology, a repair path to S1 using Y as the release point can be 
    used. 

     

      [S]---//---[B]-------[S1] 
       |          |         | 
       |          |         | 
      [H]-3-[I]--[J]--[K]--[L] 
             |         | 
             |         | 
            [X]--[Y]--[Z] 

    Figure 7. Resolving interference in a larger network 
     

    Note that, in Figure 6, if the traffic for S1 were assigned to the 
    repair path for J, it would correctly reach S1 because J would 
    assign it to its repair path to S1. That is, packets from S to S1 
    would travel via two successive tunnels. Consequently, this is 
    referred to as a "secondary repair path". However, it is not always 
    the case that interference can be handled in this fashion and it is 
    possible to create looping repair paths. 

    One possibility of looping repair paths is illustrated in Figure 8. 
    All links have a symmetrical cost of one with the exception of H-I, 
    which is cost 3 in both directions, and K-L and L-S1 which are cost 
    5 in the indicated direction and cost 1 in the other. 

     


  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 15] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
        [S]---//---[E]--------[S1] 
         |          |          |^ 
         |          |          |5 
        [H]-3-[I]--[J]--[K]---[L] 
                           5>  

    Figure 8 Looping secondary repair paths 
  
    In this topology, S can establish a repair path to J, but cannot 
    establish a repair path to S1 because of interference. Router S 
    might assign traffic intended for S1 onto its repair path to J 
    expecting it to undergo a secondary repair towards S1. However, 
    because of the asymmetrical link costs, J is unable to establish a 
    repair path to S1. It is only able to establish a repair path to S. 
    If J, like S, elected to forward repaired traffic to S1 using its 
    (only) repair path to S, similarly expecting a secondary repair to 
    get it to its destination, traffic for S1 would loop between S 
    and J. Thus when interference occurs, the possibility of a 
    secondary repair path cannot be relied upon to ensure that traffic 
    reaches its destination. 

    In order to determine the viability of secondary repair paths, it 
    is necessary for each router to take into account the repair paths 
    which the other neighbors of router E can achieve. These can be 
    computed locally by running the repair path computation algorithms 
    rooted at each of those neighbors. It is only necessary to compute 
    the repair paths from the routers to which router S can establish 
    repair paths, with targets of those routers to which repair paths 
    have not yet been established. 

    It is then possible to determine whether all routers can now be 
    reached by invoking secondary (or if necessary tertiary, etc.) 
    repair paths, and if so, to which primary repair path traffic for 
    each target should be assigned.  

    There is another, more subtle, possibility of loops arising when 
    secondary repair paths are used. This is illustrated in Figure 9, 
    where all links are cost 1 with the exception of L-K which has a 
    cost 5 in that direction and cost 1 in the direction K-L. 

                [S]---//---[E]--------[S1] 
                 |          |          | 
                 |          |          | 
                [L]         |         [D] 
                5|          |          | 
                v|          |          | 
                [K]---[J]--[I]---[H]--[E] 

    Figure 9 Example of an apparently non-looping secondary repair path 
    which results in a loop. 
  

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 16] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    Router S has a primary repair path to I (with a release point 
    of K), and I has a primary repair path to S1 (with a release point 
    of E). It would appear that these form a non-looping secondary 
    repair path from S to S1. As usual, the primary repair path from S 
    to I has been computed on the basis of destinations normally 
    reachable through E-I. However, when making use of the secondary 
    repair path, the traffic inserted in the repair path from S to I 
    will be destined not for one of the routers normally reachable via 
    E-I, but for S1. Hence this repair path is not necessary valid for 
    such traffic and in this example it will have a 50% probability of 
    being forwarded back along the path K-L-S-E-S1, and hence looping. 

    This problem can in general be avoided by choosing a release point 
    for the initial primary repair with the property that traffic for 
    the secondary target (S1) is guaranteed to traverse the primary 
    target (I). This can be achieved by computing the rSTF rooted at 
    the secondary target (S1) and examining the sub-tree which 
    traverses the primary target. It can be proved that in the absence 
    of asymmetric link costs, such a release point will always exist. 
    Where asymmetric link costs prevent this, the traffic can be 
    encapsulated to the intermediate router (I), which may require the 
    use of double encapsulation. On reaching router I, the traffic for 
    S1 is decapsulated and then forwarded in I's primary repair path to 
    S1 (via router E, in the example). 


 4.5.      Multi-homed Prefixes 

    Up to this point, it has been assumed that any particular prefix is 
    "attached" to exactly one router in the network, and consequently 
    only the routers in the network need be considered when 
    constructing repair paths, etc. However, in many cases the same 
    prefix will be attached to two or more routers. Common cases are:  

         o  The subnet present on a link is advertised from both ends 
            of the link. 

         o  Prefixes are propagated from one routing domain to another 
            by multiple routers. 

         o  Prefixes are advertised from multiple routers to provide 
            resilience in the event of the failure of one of the 
            routers. 

    In general, this causes no particular problems, and the shortest 
    route to each prefix (and hence which of the routers to which it is 
    attached should be used to reach it) is resolved by the normal SPF 
    process. However, in the particular case where one of the instances 
    of a prefix is attached to router E, or to a router for which 
    router E is a single point of failure, the situation is more 
    complicated. 



  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 17] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
                P 
                | 
                | 
    [S]---//---[E]--------[S1] 
     |                     |                       p 
     |                     |                       | 
    [W]-----[X]----[Y]----[Z]-[I]-[J]-[K]-[L]-[M]-[N] 

    Figure 10 A multi-homed prefix p 
     

    Consider a prefix p, which is attached to router E and some other 
    router N as illustrated in Figure 10. Before the failure of the 
    link S-E, p is reachable from S via S-E. After the failure it 
    cannot be assumed that E is still reachable. If traffic to p is 
    assigned to a link repair path to E (as it would be if p were 
    attached only to E), and router E has failed, then it would loop 
    and subsequently be dropped. Traffic for p cannot simply be 
    assigned to whatever repair path would be used for traffic to N, 
    because other routers, which are not yet aware of any failure, may 
    direct the traffic back towards E, since the instance of p attached 
    to E is closer. 

    A solution is to treat p itself as a neighbor of E, and compute a 
    repair path with p as a target. However, although correct, this 
    solution may be infeasible where there are a very large number of 
    such prefixes, which would result in an unacceptably large 
    computational overhead. 

    Some simplification is possible where there exist a large number of 
    multi-homed prefixes which all share the same connectivity and 
    metrics. These may be treated as a single router and a single 
    repair path computed for the entire set of prefixes.  

    An alternative solution is to tunnel the traffic for a multi-homed 
    prefix to the router N where it is also attached (see Figure 10). 
    If this involves a repair path that was already tunneled, then this 
    requires double encapsulation. 


 4.6.      LANs and pseudo-nodes 

    In link state protocols a LAN is represented by a construct known 
    as a pseudo-node in IS-IS and a network LSA in OSPF.  

    In order to deal correctly with this representation of LANs, the 
    algorithms described in this draft require certain modifications. 
    There are four cases which require consideration. These are 
    described in the following subsections. 




  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 18] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
 4.6.1.        The Link between Routers S and E is a LAN 

    In this case, the link which is being protected is a LAN, and the 
    router E which has potentially failed is reachable over the LAN. 
    This is illustrated in Figure 11. 

               [S] 
                | 
      ===================== 
      |    |       |      | 
     [E]  [X]     [Y]    [Z] 

    Figure 11 The link between routers S and E is a LAN 
  
    There are two possible failure modes in this case. 


 4.6.1.1.          Case 1 

    Router E or its interface to the LAN may have failed independently 
    of the rest of the LAN. In this case the remaining routers on the 
    LAN (routers X, Y and Z) will remain reachable from router S. These 
    routers do not appear as direct neighbors of router E in the link 
    state database and are not treated as neighbors of router E for the 
    purposes of this specification because no traffic from router S 
    would be directed through router E to any of these routers. 
    However, each of these neighboring routers will have router E as a 
    neighbor and they will initiate their own repair paths in the event 
    of the failure of router E or its LAN interface. 

    Repair paths are computed with the non-LAN neighbors of E as 
    targets, and also E itself (the "link-failure" repair path). Note 
    that since the remaining neighbors of S on the LAN are assumed to 
    be still reachable when the link to E has failed, these repair 
    paths may traverse the LAN. 

    A separate set of repair paths is required in anticipation of the 
    potential failure of each router on the LAN.  


 4.6.1.2.          Case 2  

    Router S's interface to the LAN may have failed (or the entire LAN 
    may have failed). In either event, simultaneous failures will be 
    observed from router S to all the remaining routers on the LAN 
    (routers E, X, Y and Z). In this case, the pseudo-node itself can 
    be treated as the "adjacent" router (i.e. the router normally 
    referred to as "router E"), and repairs constructed using the 
    normal mechanisms with all the neighbors of the pseudo-node 
    (routers E, X, Y and Z) as repair path targets. If one or more of 
    the routers had failed in addition to the LAN connectivity, 
    treating it as a repair path target would not be viable, but this 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 19] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    would be a case of multiple simultaneous failures which is out of 
    scope of this specification. 

    The entire sub-tree over S's LAN interface is the failed component 
    and is excised from the SPT when computing S's extended F-space. 
    For the G-spaces of the targets, the sub-tree over the LAN 
    interface of the target is excised. 


 4.6.1.3.          Simplified LAN repair  

    A simpler alternative strategy is to always consider the LAN and 
    all routers attached to it as failing as a single unit. In this 
    case, a single set of repair paths is computed with targets being 
    the entire set of non-LAN neighbors of all the routers on the LAN, 
    together with "link-repair" paths with all the routers on the LAN 
    as targets. Any failure of one or more LAN adjacencies results in 
    these repair paths being invoked for all neighbors on the LAN. 
    These repair paths must not traverse the LAN, and so must be 
    computed by excising the entire sub-tree reachable over S's LAN 
    interface from S's SPT (i.e. the entire LAN is the failed 
    component). The G-spaces are computed as normal, with the LAN 
    neighbors or their interface to the LAN being excised as 
    appropriate. This is simpler than the approach proposed above, but 
    will fail to make use of possible repair paths (or even path 
    splits) over the LAN. In particular, if the only viable repair 
    paths involve the LAN, it will prevent any repair being possible. 


 4.6.2.        A LAN exists at the release point 

    When computing the viable release points, it may be that one or 
    more of the leaf nodes are actually pseudo-nodes. In this case, the 
    release point is deemed to be any of the parent nodes on the LAN by 
    which the pseudo-node had been reached, and when computing the 
    extended set of release points (reachable by directed forwarding), 
    all the remaining routers on the LAN may be included.  


 4.6.3.        A LAN between E and its neighbors 

    If there is a LAN between router E and one or more of E's neighbors 
    (other than router S), then rather than treating each of those 
    neighbors as a separate target to which a repair path must be 
    computed, the pseudo-node itself can be treated as a single target 
    for which a repair path can be computed. If there are other 
    neighbors of E which are directly attached to E, including those 
    which may also be attached to the LAN, they must still be treated 
    as an individual repair path target. 

    Normally a repair path with the pseudo-node as its target will have 
    a release point before the pseudo-node. However it is possible that 
    the release point would be computed as the pseudo-node itself. This 
    will occur if the rSPT rooted at the pseudo-node includes no 
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 20] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    routers other than itself. In this case a single repair with the 
    pseudo-node as target is not possible, and it is necessary to 
    compute individual repair paths whose target are each of the 
    neighbors of E on the LAN. 


 4.6.4.        The LAN is a Transit Subnet. 

    This is the most common case, where a LAN is traversed by a repair 
    path, but is not in any of the special positions described above. 
    In this case no special treatment is required, and the normal SPF 
    mechanisms are applicable. 


 5.    Failure Detection and Repair Path Activation 

    The details of repair path activation are inherently 
    implementation-dependent and must be addressed by individual design 
    specifications. This section describes the implementation 
    independent aspects of the failover to the repair path. 


 5.1.      Failure Detection 

    The failure detection mechanism must provide timely detection of 
    the failure and activation of the repair paths. The failure 
    detection mechanisms may be media specific (for example loss of 
    light), or may be generic (for example BFD). Multiple detection 
    mechanisms may be used in order to improve detection latency. Note 
    that in the case of a LAN it may be necessary to monitor 
    connectivity to all of the adjacent routers on the LAN. 


 5.2.      Repair Path Activation 

    The mechanism used by the router to activate the repair path 
    following failure will be implementation specific. 

    An implementation that is capable of withdrawing the repair may 
    delay the start of network convergence in order to minimize network 
    disruption in the event that the failure was a transient. 


 5.3.      Node Failure Detection Mechanism 

    When router S detects a failure of the S-E link, it will invoke the 
    link repair path from itself to router S. This S-E link repair is 
    always invoked because even if all other traffic can be re-routed, 
    E is always a single point of failure to itself. If router E has 
    failed, the S-E link repair can result in a forwarding loop. A node 
    failure detection mechanism is therefore needed. A suitable 
    mechanism might be to run BFD [BFD] between S and E, over the S-E 
    link repair path.  
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 21] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    When the node failure detection mechanism has determined that 
    router E has failed it withdraws the S-E link repair path. The node 
    failure detection and revocation of the S-E link repair needs to be 
    expedited, in order to minimize the duration of collateral damage 
    to the network cause by packets looping around the S-E link repair 
    path. 

    If E is a single point of failure to some destinations, then 
    withdrawing the S-E link repair has no impact on network 
    connectivity, because those destinations will have been rendered 
    unreachable by the failure of router E. 

    If E is not a single point of failure, but traffic to some 
    destinations is being repaired via the S-E link because of the 
    inability to provide suitable repair paths, then there are 
    destinations that are rendered temporarily unreachable by IPFRR. 
    The IPFRR loop free convergence mechanism delays normal convergence 
    of the network. Consideration therefore has to be given to the 
    relative importance of the traffic being protected and the traffic 
    being black-holed. Depending on the outcome of that consideration, 
    the IPFRR loop-free strategy may need to be abandoned. 


 6.    Loop Free Transition 

    Once the repair paths have been activated, data will again be 
    forwarded correctly. At this stage only the routers directly 
    adjacent to the failure will be aware of the failure because no 
    routing information concerning the failure has yet been propagated 
    to other routers. The network now has to be transitioned to normal 
    operation using the available components. 

    During network transition inconsistent state may lead to the 
    formation of micro-loops. During this period, packets may be 
    prevented from reaching the repair path, may expire due to 
    transiting an excessive number of hops, may be subject to excessive 
    delay, and the resultant congestion may disrupt the passage of 
    other packets through the network. A loop free transition technique 
    which allows the network to re-converge without packet loss or 
    disruption is therefore required. 

    A number of suitable loop-free convergence techniques are described 
    in [LVCONV]. 


 7.    IPFRR Capability 

    In the previous sections it has been assumed that all routers in 
    the network are capable of acting as IPFRR routers, performing such 
    tasks as tunnel termination and directed forwarding. In practice 
    this is unlikely to be the case, partially because of the 
    heterogeneous nature of a practical network, and partially because 
    of the need to progressively deploy such capability. IPFRR 
    therefore needs to support some form of capability announcement, 
  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 22] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    and the algorithms need to take these capabilities into account 
    when calculating their path repair strategies. For example, the 
    ability of routers to function as tunnel end points and perform 
    directed forwarding will influence the choice of repair path. 
    However, routers which are simply traversed by repair paths 
    (tunneled or not) do not need to be IPFRR capable in order to 
    guarantee correct operation of the repair paths. 


 8.    Enhancements to routing protocols 

    It will be seen from the above that a number of enhancements to the 
    appropriate routing protocols are needed to support IPFRR. The 
    following possible enhancements have been identified:  

         o  The ability to advertise IPFRR capability 

         o  The ability to advertise tunnel endpoint capability 

         o  The ability to advertise directed forwarding identifiers 

         o  The ability to announce the start of a loop-free 
            transition, and to abort a loop-free transition. 

         o  The ability to signal transition completion status to 
            neighbors. 

         o  The ability to advertise that a link is protected. 

    Capability advertisement should make use of existing capability 
    mechanisms in the routing protocols. The exact set of enhancements 
    will depend on specific IPFRR design choices.  


 9.    IANA considerations 

    There are no IANA considerations that arise from this architectural 
    description of IPFRR. However there will be changes to the IGPs to 
    support IPFRR in which there will be IANA considerations.  


 10.     Security Considerations 

    Changes to the IGPs to support IPFRR do not introduce any 
    additional security risks. 

    The security implications of the increased convergence time due to 
    the loop avoidance strategy depend on the approach to multiple 
    failures. If the presence of multiple failures results in the 
    network aborting the loop free strategy, then the convergence time 
    will be similar to that of a conventional network. On the other 
    hand, an attacker in a position to disrupt part of a network might 
    use this to disrupt the repair of a critical path. 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 23] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    The tunnel endpoints need to be secured to prevent their use as a 
    facility by an attacker. Performance considerations indicate that 
    tunnels cannot be secured by IPsec [IPSEC]. A system of packet 
    address policing, both at the tunnel endpoints and at the edges of 
    the network would prevent an attacker's packet arriving at a tunnel 
    endpoint and would seem to be the best strategy. 

    When a fast re-route is in progress, there may be an unacceptable 
    increase in traffic load over the repair path. Network operators 
    need to examine the computed repair paths and ensure that they have 
    sufficient capacity. 

 Acknowledgments 
  
    The authors acknowledge the significant technical contributions 
    made to this work by their colleagues: John Harper and Kevin Miles. 

 Intellectual Property Statement 
  
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an   
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at       
    ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

 Full copyright statement 
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject 
    to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
    except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
    THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
    THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 


  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 24] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
    ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
    PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

 Normative References 
  
    There are no normative references. 

     

 Informative References 
  
    Internet-drafts are works in progress available from   
    http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/ 

 [BASIC]      Alia Atlas, Ed., et al., "Basic Specification 
              for IP Fast-Reroute: Loop-free Alternates", 
              <draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-spec-base-01.txt>, 
              October 2004, (work in progress). 

 [BFD]        Katz, D., and Ward, D., "Bidirectional 
              Forwarding Detection", <draft-katz-ward-bfd-
              01.txt>, August 2003 (work in progress). 

 [IPFRR]      Shand, M., "IP Fast-reroute Framework",          
              <draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework-02.txt>, 
              October 2004, (work in progress).  

            
 [IPSEC]      Kent, S., Atkinson, R., "Security Architecture 
              for the Internet Protocol", RFC 2401 

 [L2TPv3]     J. et al., "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol 
              (Version 3)", <draft-ietf-l2tpext-l2tp-base-
              14.txt>, June 2004, (work in progress). 

 [LFCONV]     Bryant, S., Shand, M., "A Framework for Loop-
              free Convergence", <draft-bryant-shand-lf-conv-
              frmwk-00.txt>, October 2004,(work in progress). 

 [MPLSFRR]    Pan, P. et al, "Fast Reroute Extensions to 
              RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", <draft-ietf-mpls-
              rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-05.txt> (work in 
              progress). 

 [RFC1701]    S. Hanks. et al.,RFC-1701,"Generic Routing 
              Encapsulation (GRE)". October 1994. 

 [RFC1853]    Simpson, W., RFC-1853, "IP in IP Tunneling". 
              October 1995.  

 [RFC3032]    Rosen E., et al., RFC-3032, "MPLS Label Stack 
              Encoding", January 2001. 

  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 25] 
  
 INTERNET DRAFT      IP Fast-reroute Using Tunnels              Oct 2004 
  
               

  
 Authors' Addresses 
  
    Stewart Bryant 
    Cisco Systems, 
    250, Longwater Avenue, 
    Green Park, 
    Reading, RG2 6GB, 
    United Kingdom.             Email: stbryant@cisco.com 

    Clarence Filsfils 
    Cisco Systems, 
    De Kleetlaan 6a, 
    1831 Diegem, 
    Belgium                     Email: cfilsfil@cisco.com 

    Stefano Previdi 
    Cisco Systems, 
    Via Del Serafico 200 
    00142 Roma, 
    Italy                       Email: sprevidi@cisco.com 

    Mike Shand 
    Cisco Systems, 
    250, Longwater Avenue, 
    Green Park, 
    Reading, RG2 6GB, 
    United Kingdom.             Email: mshand@cisco.com 

  






















  
 Bryant et al.              Expires Apr 2005                   [Page 26] 
  

