


Network Working Group                                         J. Holsten
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                                   L. Hunt
Expires: November 9, 2009                           Opera Software, ASA.
                                                             May 8, 2009


                         The 'about' URI scheme
                   draft-holsten-about-uri-scheme-01

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document specifies the URI (Uniform Resource Identifier) scheme
   "about".  About URIs are designed to be an internal, application-



Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           The 'about' URI scheme                 May 2009


   level identifier.  Unlike many other URI schemes, the resolution of,
   and resources represented by, about URIs are left entirely to each
   individual application.

1.  Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)

   Discussion of this draft should take place on the URI Review mailing
   list (uri-review@ietf.org).

2.  Introduction

   An about URI is designed to be used internally by applications for
   almost any desired purpose.  Such URIs have commonly been used by web
   browsers for providing access to built-in functionality, such as
   application information, preferences, settings, or "easter eggs".

   While any number of existing schemes could be used to identify such
   resources, about URIs have become the de facto standard.  Browsers
   already use the about scheme.  The about:blank (Section 4.1) URI is
   ubiquitous, and some browsers also provide other resources with the
   about scheme, including those in Section 4.2.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  URI Syntax

   The general syntax of a about URI, in ABNF [RFC5234] is:

             abouturi = "about:" segment [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

   where "segment", "query", and "fragment" are imported from [RFC3986].

   In the interests of tractability to humans, about URIs SHOULD NOT be
   minted with percent-encoded parts.  However, the about URI syntax
   does allow percent-encoded characters in the "pchar" elements defined
   in [RFC3986].

   No relative URI syntax is defined.

4.  Resolving About URIs

   In general, applications are free to resolve any about URI to any
   resource, either internal or external, or redirect to an alternative
   URI, with about:blank being the only exception.

   As about URIs are designed to be internal to each application, there



Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           The 'about' URI scheme                 May 2009


   is no expectation of any URI, except about:blank, returning the same
   resource among different applications.  However, it is worth noting
   that some conventions have arisen for providing particular
   functionality via common about URIs.

   Because about URIs identify application specific information,
   applications SHOULD NOT need to retrieve remote information for such
   a resource.

   The about:blank URI is the only about URI reserved by this
   specification.

4.1.  about:blank

   Applications resolving this URI MUST return an empty resource, with
   the media type "text/html" and the character encoding "UTF-8".

4.2.  Examples

   The following examples illustrate some known URIs supported by
   existing applications.  They are not guaranteed to be resolvable by
   every application.

   about:config  Commonly provides access to application preferences and
      settings

   about:cache  Commonly provides access to information about resources
      stored in the browsers cache.

   about:plugins  Commonly provides access to information about
      installed plugins

   about:mozilla  An easter egg supported by Mozilla showing a passage
      from the fictional Book of Mozilla

   Applications are also permitted to redirect such URIs.  For example,
   Opera redirects all about: URIs, with the exception of about:blank,
   to the equivalent URI using their internal opera: scheme. e.g. about:
   config redirects to opera:config.

   This is not an exhaustive list.  Many more are supported by numerous
   applications.  For more examples, consult Wikipedia's entry on the
   "about: URI Scheme" [wikiabout].

5.  Security Considerations

   About URIs SHOULD NOT cause the application to modify any data.
   Applications SHOULD NOT use about URIs to access or erase files or



Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           The 'about' URI scheme                 May 2009


   other sensitive information.

   About URIs MAY identify resources which show sensitive information.
   Applications SHOULD ensure appropriate restrictions are in place to
   protect such information from access or modification by untrusted
   sources.

   The HTML representation of the URI about:blank MUST use the origin
   and the effective script origin as defined by HTML5 Section 5.4
   Origin [W3C.WD-html5].  The origin of the about:blank Document is set
   when the Document is created.  If the new browsing context has a
   creator browsing context, then the origin of the about:blank Document
   is the origin of the creator Document.  Otherwise, the origin of the
   about:blank Document is a globally unique identifier assigned when
   the new browsing context is created.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This specification requests the IANA permanently register the about
   URI scheme as specified in this document and summarized in the
   following template, per [RFC4395]:

   URI scheme name:  about

   Status:  Provisional

   URI scheme syntax:  See Section 3

   URI scheme semantics:  See Section 2

   Encoding considerations:  Percent-encoding is allowed in 'segment'
      components (see Section 3)

   Intended usage:  See Section 2

   Applications and/or protocols that use this URI scheme name:  Any
      applications that use URIs as identifiers for private resources,
      such as web browsers.

   Interoperability considerations:  Applications are only required to
      support about:blank, and may choose to interpret other about URIs
      differently.

   Security considerations:  See Section 5







Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           The 'about' URI scheme                 May 2009


   Relevant publications:  None

   Contact:  Joseph Holsten (joseph@josephholsten.com)

   Author/Change controller:  Joseph Holsten

7.  Acknowledgements

   This document was made possible thanks to the input of Henri Sivonen,
   Ian Hickson and Larry Masinter.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3986]       Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter,
                   "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax",
                   STD 66, RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5234]       Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
                   Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
                   January 2008.

   [RFC2119]       Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [W3C.WD-html5]  Hickson, I. and D. Hyatt, "HTML 5", World Wide Web
                   Consortium TR html5, February 2009,
                   <http://www.w3.org/TR/html5>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4395]       Hansen, T., Hardie, T., and L. Masinter, "Guidelines
                   and Registration Procedures for New URI Schemes",
                   BCP 35, RFC 4395, February 2006.

   [wikiabout]     Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, "About: URI
                   scheme", March 2009.

Authors' Addresses

   Joseph Anthony Pasquale Holsten

   EMail: joseph@josephholsten.com
   URI:   http://josephholsten.com






Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           The 'about' URI scheme                 May 2009


   Lachlan Hunt
   Opera Software, ASA.

   EMail: lachlan.hunt@lachy.id.au
   URI:   http://lachy.id.au/














































Holsten & Hunt          Expires November 9, 2009                [Page 6]

