
Internet Engineering Task Force                          Fred Baker 
Internet Draft                                          Bill Foster 
Document: <draft-baker-slem-architecture-00.txt>         Chip Sharp 
Category: Informational                                  April 2003 
 
 
 
           Cisco Support for Lawful Intercept In IP Networks 
 
Status of this Document 
 
  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 
   
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts. 
   
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as work in progress." 
   
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
1.0. Abstract 
   
  Service providers are being asked to meet lawful intercept 
  requirements of IP networks for voice as well as data in a variety of 
  countries worldwide. Service Provider requirements vary from country 
  to country but some requirements remain common even though details 
  such as delivery formats may differ. The objective of this document 
  is to describe how a Service Provider can support lawful intercept 
  with a general solution that has a minimum set of common interfaces.  
  This document does not deal with legal requirements or obligations. 
  Any comments on this document should be sent to:  
    li-comment@external.cisco.com 
 
2.0 Conventions used in this document 
   
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 







 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 1] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

                            Table of Contents 
   
1.0. Abstract.........................................................1 
2.0 Conventions used in this document.................................1 
3. Introduction.......................................................2 
 3.1. Key Requirements................................................3 
 3.2. Document Organization...........................................3 
4.0. Reference Model..................................................4 
 4.1. Reference Model Components......................................4 
 4.2. Operational Considerations......................................5 
5.0. Interfaces.......................................................8 
 5.1. PacketCable(TM) Interfaces......................................8 
 5.2. Content Intercept Request Interface.............................9 
 5.3 Intercept Content Interface (e).................................10 
6.0. Applying the Reference Model....................................10 
 6.1. Voice over IP networks.........................................10 
   6.1.1. Interception of Voice over IP Services.....................10 
   6.1.2. Local Voice Services.......................................11 
 6.2. Data Services..................................................12 
7.0. Security Considerations.........................................12 
 7.1. Content Request Interface (c) - SNMPv3 Control.................13 
8.0. References......................................................13 
9.0. Authors' Addresses..............................................14 
10.0. Full Copyright Statement.......................................15 
   
   
   
3. Introduction 
 
  Service providers are being asked to meet lawful intercept 
  requirements of IP networks for voice as well as data in a variety of 
  countries worldwide. Service Provider requirements vary from country 
  to country but some requirements remain common even though details 
  such as delivery formats may differ. The objective of this document 
  is to describe how a Service Provider can support lawful intercept 
  with a general solution that has a minimum set of common interfaces.  
  This document does not deal with legal requirements or obligations. 
   
  For the purposes of this document, lawful intercept is the lawfully 
  authorized interception and monitoring of communications for a 
  particular subject (intercept subject). 
   
  This document describes one method for supporting lawful intercept.  
  Other methods may be available.  The requirements described in this 
  document may or may not apply to a specific country.  The 
  requirements laid out in this document do not imply any legal 
  requirements on service providers or equipment vendors although such 
  requirements might be coincident. 
   





 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 2] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

3.1. Key Requirements 
   
  The procedures described in this document address the following 
  requirements: 
                          
     * Lawful Intercept (LI) MUST be undetectable by the intercept 
       subject. 
   
     * Mechanisms MUST be in place to limit unauthorized personnel from 
       performing or knowing about lawfully authorized intercepts. 
   
     * If multiple Law Enforcement Agencies are intercepting the same 
       subject, they MUST NOT be aware of each other. 
    
     * There is often a requirement (especially for telecommunications 
       services) to provide intercept related information (IRI) 
       separately from the actual Internet Protocol (IP) traffic (or 
       content) of interest (Note: some authorizations may be 
       restricted to IRI). 
 
     * If IRI is delivered separately from content, there MUST be some 
       means to correlate the IRI and the content with each other. 
 
     * If the information being intercepted is encrypted by the service 
       provider and the service provider has access to the keys, then 
       the information MUST be decrypted before delivery to the LEA or 
       the encryption keys MUST be passed to the Law Enforcement Agency 
       to allow them to decrypt the information. 
 
     * If the information being intercepted is encrypted by the 
       intercept subject and its associate and the service provider has 
       access to the keys, then the service provider MAY deliver the 
       keys to the LEA. 
 
  This document attempts to address the majority of these requirements. 
   
3.2. Document Organization 
 
  Section 3 of this document looked at some of the key requirements. 
  Section 4 of this document looks at a reference model along with some 
  operation considerations. Section 5 provides more detailed 
  requirements on the interfaces related to content interception. 
  Section 6 looks at applying the reference model to voice over IP and 
  data intercepts and Section 7 looks at security considerations. 
   









 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 3] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

4.0. Reference Model 
 
  This section describes a generic reference model (Figure 1) for 
  lawful intercept.  
   
   
                         +--------------------+ 
                         |  LI Administration | 
                         |      Function      | 
                         +--------------------+ 
                                | 
                                | Authorization 
                                | Interface(a) 
                                | 
  +-----------+           +--------------------+ 
  |           |<---(b)----|                    |              +-----+ 
  |  IRI IAP  |--IRI(d)-->|      Mediation     |----IRI(f)--->|     | 
  |           |           |      Device        |              | LEA | 
  +-----------+           |                    |-Content(g)-->|     | 
                          +--------------------+              +-----+ 
                               |         ^ 
                     Intercept |         | Intercepted 
                    Request(c) |         | Content(e) 
                               |         | 
                               v         | 
                             +--------------------+ 
                       User  |       Content      |  User 
                     ------->|         IAP        |--------> 
                     Content +--------------------+  Content 
   
 
     Figure 1: Intercept Architecture 
   
4.1. Reference Model Components 
 
  A brief description of the key components in the reference model is 
  as follows: 
   
  Lawful Intercept (LI) Administration Function: 
     This function provides the (typically manual) provisioning 
     interface for the intercept as a result of a written request from 
     the Law Enforcement Agency (LEA). It could involve separate 
     provisioning interfaces for several components but more typically 
     is a single interface to the Mediation Device (MD), which then 
     takes care of provisioning of other components in the network. 
     Because of the requirement to limit accessibility to authorized 
     personnel, as well as the requirement that LEA's not know about 
     each other, this interface must be strictly controlled. The 
     personnel who provision the intercepts are specially authorized to 
     do so and are often employed either directly or indirectly by the 
     service provider whose facilities are being tapped.  In many 
     cases, the identity of the subject received from the LEA has to be 
     translated into an identity that can be used by the network to 
     enable the intercept.   
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 4] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

                              
  Intercept Access Point (IAP): 
     An IAP is a device within the network that is used for 
     intercepting lawfully authorized intercept information. It may be 
     an existing device that has intercept capability or it could be a 
     special device that is provided for that purpose. Two types of 
     IAP's are discussed here: IAP's that provide content; and IAP's 
     that provide intercept related information (IRI). 
      
  Content IAP: 
     A content IAP is an IAP that is used to intercept the IP traffic 
     of interest. 
      
  IRI IAP: 
     This is an IAP that is used to provide intercept related 
     information (IRI). IRI is information related to the IP traffic of 
     interest.  There is currently no standardized definition for IRI 
     for IP traffic.  IRI has been defined for a few services that 
     might run over IP (e.g., VoIP) or that IP runs on top of (e.g., 
     GPRS).  The definition of IRI from ETSI 33.108 is shown below: 
      
               Intercept Related Information: collection of 
               information or data associated with 
               telecommunication services involving the target 
               identity, specifically communication associated 
               information or data (e.g. unsuccessful 
               communication attempts), service associated 
               information or data (e.g. service profile 
               management by subscriber) and location 
               information. 
      
      
  Law Enforcement Agency (LEA): 
     This is the agency that has requested the intercept and to which 
     the service provider delivers the information. 
   
  Mediation Device (MD): 
     The mediation device receives the data from the IAP, packages it 
     in the correct format (which may vary from country to country) and 
     delivers it to the LEA. In the case where multiple law enforcement 
     agencies are intercepting the same subject, the mediation device 
     may replicate the information multiple times. 
   
4.2. Operational Considerations 
      
     In a typical operation, a lawfully authorized surveillance request 
     arrives for a specified intercept subject. Authorized personnel 
     provision the intercept, which may be for content only, IRI only 
     or both. Once the intercept is provisioned, the IAP's send the IRI 
     and/or content to the MD, which formats the information into the 
     appropriate format for delivery to the LEA. Some operational 
     issues that need to be considered: 
      

 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 5] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

       * Location and Address Information for Content Intercepts: In 
          some cases where the location and/or addressing information 
          for the intercept is not known until the subject registers 
          (or makes a call in the case of voice), the IRI may provide 
          needed information in order to do the content tap (e.g. the 
          IP address and port for the content streams). 
      
       * Content Encryption: If the intercept content is encrypted and 
          the service provider has access to the encryption keys (e.g., 
          receives keys in Session Description Protocol for Voice over 
          IP), then the keys can be sent via IRI. It is, however, 
          possible for end-users to exchange keys by some other means 
          without any knowledge of the service provider in which case 
          the service provider will not be able to provide the keys. In 
          any case, content formatting at the MD SHOULD NOT modify the 
          original intercepted information to the extent that 
          decryption at the LEA is not possible. This is why in the 
          case of voice over IP intercepts for example, it is 
          RECOMMENDED that the original voice packets be sent to the 
          LEA rather than attempting to convert them to some other 
          format (TDM for example). 
 
       * Detection by the Intercept Subject: One of the key 
          requirements is to ensure that the intercept subject is 
          unable to detect that they are being intercepted. This 
          document assumes a sophisticated subject:  
 
            - Able to check IP addresses, use traceroute, etc. 
                
            - Able to check if any unusual signaling is occurring on 
               their customer premises equipment (CPE). 
   
            - Able to detect degradation or interruptions in service. 
           
          This implies that the intercept mechanism MUST NOT involve 
          requests to the CPE, re-routing of packets or end-to-end 
          changes in IP addresses. This in turn implies that the 
          content intercept MUST be done on a device along the normal 
          content path (i.e. no re-routing has occurred) that is within 
          the service provider (rather than the customer's) network. A 
          convenient content IAP is a router or switch at the edge of 
          the service provider∆s network to which the intercept subject 
          connects. This is illustrated in Figure 2. 
           










 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 6] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

   
   
                               |                             
            Customer Premises  | Service Provider's Network 
                               | 
                                    +-------+ 
                +-----+             |       | 
                | CPE |-------------| Router|---------- 
                +-----+             | (IAP) | 
                                    |       | 
                                    +-------+ 
   
                  Figure 2  Content IAP - Router 
      
          Another possibility of course is to provide a special device 
          along the path to provide the content IAP capabilities. 
           
       * Unauthorized Creation and Detection: Another concern is the 
          prevention of unauthorized creation and detection of 
          intercepts. This is particularly important when a network 
          element such as a router is used as a content IAP. Those 
          routers that have the capability MUST be carefully controlled 
          with access to intercept capability and information only via 
          authorized personnel. The approach RECOMMENDED in this 
          document is illustrated in the reference model in Figure 1. 
          In this approach the MD is in a controlled environment and 
          the MD does the intercept request to the content IAP over an 
          encrypted link.  In addition, logging and auditing MUST be 
          used to detect unauthorized attempts to access the intercept 
          capability. 
        
       * Maintenance & Management:  The lawful intercept solution 
          SHOULD minimally interfere with normal maintenance and 
          management procedures. 
        
       * Capacity:  Support for lawful intercept on a network element 
          supporting customers consumes resources on that equipment.  
          Therefore, support for lawful intercept requires capacity 
          planning and engineering to ensure that revenue-producing 
          services are not adversely affected. 
 
      












 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 7] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

5.0. Interfaces 
 
  This section provides a brief description of the interfaces in the 
  reference model (Figure 1). A list of these interfaces is included in 
  Table 1 below. 
   
     Table 1 LI Interfaces 
 
      Interface            Description 
    ---------------------  ------------------------------------------- 
   (a) LI Provisioning    LI Administrative provisioning interface;  
                          parameters include target identifier;  
                          duration of intercept, type of intercept,  
                          etc. 
 
   (b) IRI Target         Specifies Target identifier, duration, etc. 
                          for provisioning of delivery of IRI. 
    
   (c) Content Intercept  Provisioning of content intercept. 
 
   (d) IRI to MD          Internal interface between IRI IAP and MD  
                          for delivery of Intercept Related  
                          Information (IRI). 
 
   (e) Content to MD      Internal interface between content 
                          IAP and MD for delivery of Content. 
 
   (f) IRI to LEA         Interface between the MD and LEA for  
                          delivering IRI. This may vary from country  
                          to country. 
 
   (g) Content to LEA     Interface between the MD and LEA for  
                          delivering Content. This may vary from  
                          country to country. 
 
   
  One of the objectives in defining these interfaces is to keep the 
  internal interfaces (a to e) the same regardless of country-specific 
  requirements. The MD then formats the IRI and the content to meet the 
  country specific requirements for interfaces (f) and (g). 
   
5.1. PacketCable(TM) Interfaces 
   
  Packetcable has defined some of these interfaces for Voice over IP on 
  Cable networks: 
   
       * For content intercept provisioning - interface (c), two 
          interfaces have been defined using two different protocols: 
          one for the Cable Modem Termination System (CMTS) [4] and one 
          for PSTN gateways [5]. These requests are performed by a call 
          control element rather than the MD (so follow a different 
          reference model that the one described in Figure 1). 
   
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 8] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

       * The IRI interface to the MD (d) is defined in Appendix A of 
          [3]. 
   
       * The content interface to the MD (e) is the same as the 
          content interface to the LEA (g) and is defined in [2]. 
 
       * The IRI interface to the LEA (f) is defined in [2]. 
 
5.2. Content Intercept Request Interface 
   
  This document does not define any of interfaces (a), (b) or (d) to 
  (f) although these interfaces may be defined in future documents. 
  This document proposes a protocol for interface (c) that more closely 
  follows the reference model in Figure 1. This is described in more 
  detail in this section. 
   
  This section looks at some of the requirements for the content 
  intercept request interface (c) in Figure 1. It recommends the use of 
  a common request protocol (SNMPv3Error! Reference source not found.) 
  regardless of the type of application (e.g. voice, data) and suggests 
  the usage of a TAP-MIB , which is defined in a separate document [1]. 
  Some of the considerations that lead to the use of SNMPv3 and to the 
  definition of the specific Management Information Base (MIB) defined 
  in [1] are provided here. 
   
  In order to provide a generic interface for intercepting, 
  replicating, encapsulating and transporting content packets to the 
  MD, the content intercept interface ("c" in Figure 1) MUST specify: 
   
     * A Filter specification for classifying the packets to be 
       intercepted. 
      
     * The destination address of the MD (where to send the packets). 
 
     * Encapsulation and Transport parameters. 
   
  In addition, a timeout value for the intercept SHOULD be specified. 
  This defines a limited lifetime for the intercept. If a failure of 
  the MD occurs such that it is not able to supply the refresh to the 
  timeout, then the intercept SHOULD cease to exist after the timeout 
  expires. Similarly, if the IAP re-boots, then the intercept SHOULD 
  not survive the re-boot unless the IAP is capable of ascertaining 
  that the intercept lifetime requirements will continue to be met. 
   
  In order for this to work, it MUST be possible for the mediation 
  device to realize that there is a failure in the IAP such that it 
  must re-establish the intercept. This MAY be in the form of an audit 
  (from the MD to the IAP), or in the form of a heartbeat mechanism in 
  the content stream, or both. 
   




 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003              [Page 9] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

5.3 Intercept Content Interface (e) 
 
  The encapsulation method SHOULD retain all of the information in the 
  original packets (source and destination addresses as well as 
  payload) and provide an identifier for correlating the packets with 
  the IRI. One encapsulation that meets those requirements is described 
  in section [2]. 
   
  Note, however, that the interface defined in [2] is based on UDP and 
  is therefore unreliable. If a more reliable transport mechanism is 
  required, then a mechanism that provides timely delivery as well as 
  limits the burden (both processing and buffering) on the Content IAP 
  should be used. One mechanism that meets these requirements is a 
  NACK-oriented retransmission scheme based on [15]. 
 
6.0. Applying the Reference Model 
 
  This section looks at the application of the reference model to some 
  example applications. 
   
6.1. Voice over IP networks 
 
  This section will look at some of the issues surrounding interception 
  of voice over IP calls, taking local voice services as a specific 
  service example. The reference model from Figure 1 will be applied 
  with the use of a common set of interfaces that are independent of 
  the call signaling protocols in use. 
   
6.1.1. Interception of Voice over IP Services 
   
  There are a variety of architectures in use for voice over IP (e.g. 
  centralized versus distributed) as well as various protocols (SIP 
  [9], H.323 [12], MGCP [10], H.248 [11]). There are also a variety of 
  services that may be offered: 
   
     * Local Voice Services (i.e. service to a user that has an IP 
       phone or a phone connected to a gateway) 
      
     * Transit services 
      
     * Long distance access services (e.g. calling/debit card). 
   
  This document does not address any obligations that a service 
  provider might or might not have to support intercepts. It simply 
  looks at how intercept might be done using the reference model 
  described in Figure 1. 
   
  Note that in the case of services where the intercept subject 
  accesses the network via a non-IP endpoint (e.g., TDM), the 
  detectability issue is less acute (e.g. re-routing of packets to 
  intercept them in a special device is a possible option) since the 
  intercept subject does not have access to the IP addresses or to 
  traceroute.  
   
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 10] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

  However, in the case of local services, this is a much more difficult 
  problem. The intercept for a call originating and terminating on-net 
  (i.e. a call that is voice over IP end-to-end) has to be intercepted 
  along its normal route in order to be undetectable. In addition, the 
  call-forwarding feature that is often provided as a local service 
  feature makes interception even more difficult: If call forwarding is 
  invoked, a call that was intended to terminate on the intercept 
  subject may be forwarded anywhere in the network resulting in the 
  media stream bypassing the original content IAP (since in voice over 
  IP, the media stream goes directly from end-to-end). Also, since call 
  forwarding can often be set up on a call-by-call basis, the location 
  of the content IAP will often not be known until the call is set up.   
   
6.1.2. Local Voice Services 
   
  This sub-section will look at the specific case in which the 
  intercept subject under surveillance is being provided with a local 
  voice service by the same provider that also provides the network 
  access (e.g., controls the edge router or switch). This is an 
  important assumption since in VoIP the entity providing call control 
  (e.g., SIP server) can be totally separate from the entity providing 
  network access (e.g., operates edge routers). 
   
  Suppose that a subscriber that subscribes to a local (e.g. 
  residential) voice service is a target for a lawfully authorized 
  surveillance. Part of the system providing these services is a 
  subscriber database that includes addressing information about the 
  subscriber as well information on what features are in effect (e.g. 
  call forwarding). Some call control entity (CCE) accesses that 
  database in order to provide local services. For example, if the 
  subject has call forwarding invoked, that fact (and where to forward 
  the call) is indicated in the subscriber database. A call arriving at 
  the CCE that "owns" that subscriber can then take the appropriate 
  action (e.g. forward the call). 
   
  The CCE that "owns" the target subscriber (which could be an H.323 
  gatekeeper, a SIP proxy or a Media Gateway Controller) is provisioned 
  with the intercept parameters (e.g. subject identification 
  information such as the telephone number and where to deliver the 
  IRI). The provisioning of this CCE could be through interface (b) in 
  Figure 1. The CCE in question is the IRI IAP and once provisioned, it 
  passes the IRI to the MD. In the scenario being discussed, the CCE 
  typically remains in the signaling path throughout the call, even in 
  the call-forwarding case. Part of the IRI it passes to the MD is the 
  media signaling information (i.e. SDP [14] or H.245 [13]), which 
  includes endpoint IP address and port information for the media 
  (content) streams. Armed with this media address information, the MD 
  can determine the content IAP (e.g. [8]) and make the request via 
  interface (c).  The request identifies the voice stream to be 
  intercepted based on information received in the call signaling 
  (i.e., IP addresses and UDP port numbers). 
   
  Note that the content IAP in the case of voice over IP could be an 
  edge router or a PSTN gateway (e.g. a call from the PSTN forwarded to 
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 11] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

  the PSTN). SIP, H.323, MGCP or H.248 call signaling protocols could 
  be used. However, the protocol (SNMPv3 [1]) used for interface (c), 
  is not dependent on the type of call signaling protocol used; nor is 
  the encapsulation format and transport protocol (interface "e"). The 
  same reference model (Figure 1) with the same interfaces can be used 
  for lawfully authorized surveillance, regardless of the signaling 
  protocol and regardless of the type of service being provided (Note: 
  even though a local voice service was used in this example, other 
  voice services could use the same model and interfaces). 
   
6.2. Data Services 
 
  The same model (Figure 1) can also be used for data services. In this 
  case the IRI IAP could be a server that acts as registration, 
  authentication and authorization point for the data service (e.g. a 
  RADIUS server). If a potential IRI IAP does not have the available 
  interfaces ("b" and "d"), the MD may have to do a content tap on 
  registration signaling in order to obtain the IRI. 
   
  The IRI in the case of a data service could include: 
   
     * The time that the user registered or de-registered for the 
       service. 
     * Addressing information (i.e. given the user identity, what IP 
       address or other information is available that could be used in 
       interface "c" to do the content tap). 
   
  Once suitable addressing information is available in order to do 
  content tapping the MD can invoke the tap via interface (c). 
   
  Clearly the IRI interfaces (b, d, f) are different for data than they 
  are for voice services. However, the content IAP is typically the 
  same (an edge router). Interfaces (c, e, and g) may also be the same. 
   
7.0. Security Considerations 
 
  Given the sensitive nature of lawful intercept (LI) -- both from the 
  standpoint of the need to protect sensitive data, as well as conceal 
  the identities of the intercept subjects, the LI solution must 
  contain stringent security measures to combat threats such as 
  impersonation of MD's, privacy and confidentiality breaches, as well 
  as message forgery and replay attacks.  
   
  While this document doesn∆t discuss issues of physical security, 
  operating system, or application hardening within the principals of 
  the LI solution, they are clearly important. In particular, the MD 
  server must be considered a prime target for attacks.  
   
  In general, all interfaces MUST have the capability of providing 
  strong cryptographic authentication to establish the identity of the 
  principals, and MUST correlate the identity of the principal with the 
  action they are attempting to perform. All interfaces MUST perform 
  some sort of cryptographic message integrity checking such as, for 
  example, HMAC-MD5. Message integrity checking MUST also counter 
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 12] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

  replay attacks. Given privacy and confidentiality considerations, the 
  solution SHOULD allow the use of encryption. 
   
  Logging and auditing SHOULD be used to detect unauthorized usage of 
  the LI capability. 
   
  The content and IRI IAPs also MUST protect the identity of the 
  intercept subject and the existence of an intercept. 
   
7.1. Content Request Interface (c) - SNMPv3 Control 
   
  SNMPv3 control requires all of the above requirements, but places new 
  requirements on the IAP as well. Native SNMPv3 security module 
  mechanism MUST be used. The additional requirement is that the IAP 
  MUST support the ability to protect the TAP MIB's [1] from disclosure 
  or control by unauthorized USM [6] users. VACM [7] provides the 
  necessary tools to limit the views to particular USM users, but there 
  are also special considerations: 
   
     * There SHOULD not be any access to the appropriate TAP MIB's by 
       anything other than SNMPv3 USM users which have keys established 
       and the proper VACM views defined. 
   
     * The TAP MIB SHOULD be segregated such that only operators of 
       sufficient privilege level can create VACM views that include 
       the TAP MIB [1]. 
 
8.0. References 
 
     [1]  F. Baker, Cisco Lawful Intercept Control MIB, draft-baker-
       slem-mib-00 
     [2]  PacketCableTM Electronic Surveillance Specification, 
       http://www.packetcable.com/specifications.html 
     [3]  PacketCable Event Messages Specification, 
       http://www.packetcable.com/specifications.html 
     [4]  PacketCable, Dynamic Quality if Service Specification, 
       http://www.packetcable.com/specifications.html 
     [5]  PacketCable PSTN Gateway Call Signaling Protocol 
       Specification, http://www.packetcable.com/specifications.html 
     [6]  Blumenthal, U. and B. Wijnen, "User-based Security Model(USM) 
       for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol 
       (SNMPv3)", STD 62, RFC 3414, December 2002. 
     [7]  B. Wijnen et al, View-based Access Control Model (VACM) for 
       the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), STD 62, RFC 3415 
       December 2002 
     [8]  E. Warnicke, DNS Resolution of Networks and Gateways, IETF 
       Draft draft-warnicke-network-dns-resolution-01.txt 
 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 13] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

     [9]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
       Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, 
       "SIP:Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
     [10] F. Andreasen, B. Foster, Media Gateway Control Protocol 
       (MGCP) Version 1.0, January 2003 
     [11] ITU-T, Gateway Control Protocol H.248, ITU-T 
     [12] ITU-T, Packet-based Multimedia Communications Systems H.323, 
       ITU-T 
     [13] ITU-T, Control Protocol for Multimedia Communications H.245, 
       ITU_T 
     [14] M. Handley, V, Jacobson, SDP: Session Description Protocol, 
       RFC 2327 April 1998 
     [15] RTP Retransmission Payload Format, draft-ietf-avt-rtp-
       retransmission-06.txt 
   
9.0. Authors' Addresses 
 
    
     Fred Baker 
     Cisco Systems 
     1121 Via Del Rey 
     Santa Barbara, CA  93117 
     US 
   
     Phone: +1-408-526-4257 
     Fax:   +1-413-473-2403 
     EMail: fred@cisco.com 
 
     Bill Foster 
     Cisco Systems 
     Email: bfoster@Cisco.com 
   
     Chip Sharp 
     Cisco Systems 
     Email: chsharp@Cisco.com 














 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 14] 

                     Support for Lawful Intercept            April 2003 

  10.0. Full Copyright Statement 
 
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
   
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 
   
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
   
  Acknowledgement 
   
  Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
  Internet Society. 
 
   
 



















 
Baker et al            Expires September 30, 2003             [Page 15] 
