
Network Working Group                                          S. Sherry
Internet Draft                                                    Xyplex
Expires 7 Apr, 1996                                           G.M. Meyer
                                                               Shiva Ltd


                  Protocol Analysis for Triggered RIP
               draft-ietf-rip-trigger-rip-analysis-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is a submission to the RIP Working Group of the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be submitted
   to the ietf-rip@xylogics.com mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material, or to cite them other than as a ``working draft''
   or ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the internet-drafts Shadow
   Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

Abstract

   As required by Routing Protocol Criteria [1], this report documents
   the key features of Triggered Extensions to RIP to Support Demand
   Circuits [2] and the current implementation experience.

Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to thank Johanna Kruger and Jim Pearl of Xyplex for
   many comments and suggestions which improved this effort.







Meyer                                                           [Page 1]

Internet Draft      Triggered RIP Protocol Analysis             Oct 1995


1. Protocol Documents

   "Triggered Extensions to RIP to Support Demand Circuits" [2] suggests
   an enhancement to the "Routing Internet Protocol" (RIP) [3] and
   "RIP-2" [4] to allow them to run more cost-effectively on Wide Area
   Networks (WANs).

2. Applicability

   Triggered RIP requires that there is an underlying mechanism for
   determining unreachability in a finite predictable period.

   The triggered extensions to RIP are particularly appropriate for WANs
   where the cost - either financial or packet overhead - would make
   periodic transmission of routing (or service advertising) updates
   unacceptable:

   o  Connection oriented Public Data Networks - for example X.25 packet
      switched networks or ISDN.

   o  Point-to-point links supporting PPP link quality monitoring or
      echo request to determine link failure.

   A triggered RIP implementation runs standard RIP on Local Area Net-
   works (LANs) allowing them to interoperate transparently with imple-
   mentations adhering to the original specifications.

3. Key Features

   The proposal shares the same basic algorithms as RIP or RIP-2 when
   running on LANs or fixed point-to-point links; Packet formats,
   broadcast frequency, triggered update operation and  database
   timeouts are all unmodified.

   The new features operate on WANs which use switched circuits on
   demand to achieve intermittent connectivity.  Instead of using
   periodic 'broadcasts', information is only sent as triggered updates.
   The proposal makes use of features of the underlying connection
   oriented service to provide feedback on connectivity.

3.1 Triggered Updates

   Updates are only sent on the WAN when an event changes the routing
   database.  Each update is retransmitted until acknowledged.
   Information received in an update is not timed out.

   The packet format of a RIP response is modified (with a different
   unique command field) to include sequence number information.  An



Meyer                                                           [Page 2]

Internet Draft      Triggered RIP Protocol Analysis             Oct 1995


   acknowledgement packet is also defined.

3.2 Circuit Manager

   The circuit manager running below the IP network layer is responsible
   for establishing a circuit to the next hop router whenever there is
   data (or a routing update) to transfer.  After a period of inactivity
   the circuit will be closed by the circuit manager.

   If the circuit manager fails to make a connection a circuit down
   indication is sent to the routing application.  The circuit manager
   will then attempt at (increasing) intervals to establish a
   connection.   When successful a circuit up indication is sent to the
   routing application.

3.3 Presumption of Reachability

   In a stable network there is no requirement to propagate routing
   information on a circuit, so if no routing information is (being)
   received on a circuit it is assumed that:

   o  The most recently received information is accurate.

   o  The intervening path is operational (although there may be no
      current connection).

   If the circuit manager determines that the intervening path is NOT
   operational routing information previously received on that circuit
   is timed out.  It is worth stressing that it can be ANY routed
   datagram which triggers the event.

   When the circuit manager re-establishes a connection, the application
   exchanges full routing information with its peer.

3.4 Routing Information Flow Control

   If the circuit manager reports a circuit as down, the routing
   application is flow controlled from sending further information on
   the circuit.












Meyer                                                           [Page 3]

Internet Draft      Triggered RIP Protocol Analysis             Oct 1995


4. Implementations

   At this stage there is only believed to be one completed
   implementation.

   The Xyplex implementation supports all the features outlined for IP
   RIP-1, IP RIP-2, IPX RIP, and IPX SAP.  However, it only supports one
   outstanding acknowledgement per partner.  The implementation has been
   tested against itself on X.25, ISDN, Frame Relay, V42bis CSU/DSUs,
   and asynchronous modems.

   It has also been tested in operation with various router and host
   implementations on Ethernet LANs.

5. Restrictions

   Demand RIP relies on the ability to place a call in either direction.
   Some dialup services - for example DTR dialing - allow calls to be
   made in one direction only.

   Demand RIP can not operate with third-party advertisement of routes
   on the WAN.  The next hop IP address in RIP-2 should always be
   0.0.0.0 for any routes advertised on the WAN.

6. Security Considerations

   Security is provided through authentication of the logical and
   physical address of the sender of the routing update.  Incoming call
   requests are matched by the circuit manager against a list of
   physical addresses (used to make outgoing calls).  The routing
   application makes a further check against the logical address of an
   incoming update.

   Additional security can be provided by RIP-2 authentication [2] where
   appropriate.

References


   [1]  Hinden, R., "Internet Engineering Task Force Internet Routing
        Protocol Standardization Criteria", RFC 1264, Bolt Beranek and
        Newman, Inc, October 1991.

   [2]  Meyer. G.M. and Sherry, S., "Triggered Extensions to RIP to
        Support Demand Circuits", Internet Draft "draft-ietf-rip-
        trigger-rip-00.txt", Spider Systems, Aug 1995.

   [3]  Hedrick. C., "Routing Information Protocol", RFC 1058, Rutgers



Meyer                                                           [Page 4]

Internet Draft      Triggered RIP Protocol Analysis             Oct 1995


        University, June 1988.

   [4]  Malkin. G., "RIP Version 2 - Carrying Additional Information",
        RFC 1723, Xylogics, November 1994.

Authors'  Address:

   Steve Sherry
   Xyplex
   295 Foster St.
   Littleton, MA 01460

   Phone: (US) 508 952 4745
   Fax:   (US) 508 952 4887
   Email: shs@xyplex.com

   Gerry Meyer
   Shiva Europe Ltd
   Stanwell Street
   Edinburgh EH6 5NG
   Scotland, UK

   Phone: (UK) 131 554 9424
   Fax:   (UK) 131 554 0649
   Email: gerry@spider.co.uk


























Meyer                                                           [Page 5]

