


 
 
 
  
  
  
Internet Engineering Task Force                                    Rajesh Kumar    
Internet Draft                                                    Cisco Systems    
Document: <draft-rajeshkumar-mmusic-gpmd-00.txt>             September 15, 2002      
Expires: March 15, 2003                                      
                                         
    
   SDP attribute for qualifying Media Formats with Generic Parameters    
    
Status of this Document    
    
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with    
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026    
   
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering    
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other    
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts.    
      
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months    
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any    
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference    
material or to cite them other than as work in progress."    
      
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt    
      
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at    
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
 
 
                              Abstract 
                               
 
       This document defines one SDP attribute: 'gpmd', or general-purpose 
       media descriptor. This attribute allows the use of generic parameters to 
       qualify media formats. These generic parameters are not part of the 
       standard (e.g. MIME) definition of the media format. The syntax and 
       semantics of the 'gpmd' attribute and possible generic parameters that 
       constitute it  are defined, along with guidelines for the definition and 
       registration of these generic parameters.  
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 1 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
  
 
1.   Introduction.............................................................2 
2.   Terminology..............................................................2 
3.   Purpose and semantics of the 'gpmd' attribute............................3 
4.   Syntax of the 'gpmd' attribute...........................................3 
5.   ABNF Grammar for 'gpmd' attribute........................................4 
6.   An exemplary 'gpmd'-enclosed parameter, 'vbd'............................5 
7.   Security Considerations..................................................5 
8.   IANA considerations......................................................6 
9.   Acknowledgements.........................................................7 
10.  References...............................................................7 
11.  Author's Address.........................................................7 
 
    
1.   Introduction 
 
In some applications, there is a need to qualify media formats with generic 
parameters. As generic parameters, these are included in the format-specific 
parameters that are an integral part of the standard definition of the media 
format. For example, an endpoint or gateway might want to indicate that an RTP 
payload type will be treated, for the duration of a session, as containing a 
modulated data signal. Other such cases might arise in the future. This creates 
a two-fold need: 
 
  1. An SDP mechanism to bind, on a per-session basis,  values of one or more 
     generic parameters to a media format. 
 
  2. A mechanism for defining and registering such parameters in the future. 
 
The proposed solution is to define, for SDP,  a general-purpose media 
descriptor that can flexibly contain one or more of these generic parameters. 
An endpoint or gateway may choose which generic parameters to advertise using 
this general-purpose media descriptor. Therefore, the proposed solution should 
allow position-independent parsing of these generic parameters. This requires 
that these generic parameters be expressed in the <type>=<value> form.  
 
This internet draft obsoletes its predecessors, which addressed the same 
problem: 
 
     -    draft-rajeshkumar-mmusic-gfmtp-03.txt 
     -    draft-foster-mmusic-vbdformat-01.txt (expired) 
 
 
2.   Terminology    
         
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",   
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be   
interpreted as described in RFC-2119.       
      
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 2 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
3.   Purpose and semantics of the 'gpmd' attribute 
 
The 'gpmd' attribute defined in this document is a media-level  attribute. It 
is to be used when an endpoint or gateway wishes to bind, to a media format,  a 
value of  one of the generic parameters associated with the 'gpmd' attribute. 
An extensible registry of these parameters and their possible values will be 
provided (details in Section 8.2).  
 
Like other SDP attributes, the 'gpmd' attribute is optional. SDP parsers that 
do not understand it understand it can ignore it. The same is true for each  
generic parameter enclosed within the 'gpmd' attribute. SDP parsers may ignore 
these as well.  
 
An application that uses SDP may define certain attributes as mandatory within 
the context of that application. This is also true for the generic parameters 
enclosed within the 'gpmd' attribute. Being mandatory in the context of an 
application does not clash with their being completely optional at the SDP 
parser level.  This, each application must decide what to do if certain generic 
parameters enclosed within the 'gpmd' attribute are not understood. Since an 
application is will define required generic parameters beforehand, the most 
likely approach is to ignore unknown parameters enclosed within the 'gpmd' 
attribute. 
 
The parameters enclosed within a 'gpmd' attribute line are different from the 
parameters enclosed within a 'fmtp' line in the following way:  
 
     The parameters enclosed within a 'fmtp' line are found in the standard 
     definition (e.g. MIME registration) of that format. Some of these 
     parameters are mandatory, while others are optional.  
      
     By contrast, the parameters that may be enclosed within a 'gpmd' line are 
     not part of the standard definition (e.g. MIME registration) of the media  
     format, to which they are dynamically bound, on a per-session basis. These 
     parameters are maintained in a separate, extensible registry (Section 
     8.2). The definition of a 'gpmd'-enclosed parameter within this registry 
     will indicate the range of media formats which may be qualified by it. All 
     'gpmd'-enclosed parameters are optional at the SDP parser level, though 
     some applications may mandate particular parameters. 
 
4.   Syntax of the 'gpmd' attribute 
 
This section contains a verbal description of the syntax of the 'gpmd' 
attribute, and an example of its use. The precise ABNF syntax for the 'gpmd' 
attribute is found in Section 5. 
 
The SDP attribute, gpmd, is defined as:   
   
     a=gpmd:<format><generic parameter list>   
        
<generic parameter list> is represented as a semicolon-separated list of   
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 3 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
<type>=<value> pairs.  
 
For example, the generic parameter  'vbd' (Section 6) is a boolean which may be 
associated with any RTP payload type. Thus, 
 
    m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 0 15     
    a=gpmd:0 vbd=yes 
 
enables voice band data treatment for the static RTP payload type of 0 (PCMU). 
 
Note that <format> need not be an RTP payload type. It is permissible to use 
any value of <format> that appears in an 'm=' line as long as the definition of 
each generic parameter (Section 8.2) allows it to be used to qualify that media 
format. Thus, a hypothetical generic parameter,  'someParameter', may be 
enclosed in a 'gpmd' attribute associated with the format 'wb' (whiteboard) as 
follows: 
 
          m=application 3456 udp wb 
          a=gpmd:wb someParameter=someValue  
 
The 'gpmd' attribute is charset-independent. This property is inherited by all 
generic parameters enclosed within the 'gpmd' attribute. 
5.   ABNF Grammar for 'gpmd' attribute 
 
This section provides an Augmented BNF (ABNF) grammar [4] for the 'gpmd' 
attribute defined in this document. Here, generic parameters that may be 
enclosed within the 'gpmd' attribute are referred to as 'subparameters'. 
 
RFC 2327 [2] generically defines attributes as follows: 
 
     attribute-fields =    *("a=" attribute CRLF)   
     attribute =           (att-field ":" att-value) | att-field 
       
 
For the 'gpmd' attribute, a special case of this ABNF syntax may be stated as 
follows: 
 
     gpmd-attribute-field = "a=" gpmd-attribute CRLF 
     gpmd-attribute = "gpmd" ":" gpmd-value 
     gpmd-value = 1*(gpmd-subparameter) 
     gpmd-subparameter = gpmd-subparameter-name "=" gpmd-subparameter-value 
     gpmd-subparameter-name = 1*(alpha-numeric)  
     gpmd-subparameter-value = byte-string 
     alpha-numeric = ALPHA / DIGIT 
                      ; external reference: 
                      ; ALPHA and DIGIT from RFC 2234 [4] 
     byte-string = 1*(%x01-09/%x0B-0C/%x0E-FF) 
                      ;any byte except NUL, CR or LF 
 
 
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 4 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
6.   An exemplary 'gpmd'-enclosed parameter, 'vbd' 
 
This section describes a generic parameter, 'vbd',  that may be enclosed in the 
'gpmd' attribute. The registration of the this parameter is addressed in 
Section 8.3.  
 
The generic parameter, 'vbd', indicates voice band data. It is a boolean that 
may be assigned the values of "yes" or "no". A value of "no" is equivalent to 
omitting the 'vbd' parameter. Using this generic parameter, any RTP payload 
type associated with audio media may be earmarked for voice band data 
treatment. In practice, applications are likely to use one of the following 
audio media formats for the carriage of voice band data signals: PCMU, PCMA, 
G726-40 and G726-32.  
 
Voice band data treatment implies the use of large, fixed length jitter buffers 
(as opposed to smaller, adaptive jitter buffers) and the absence of packet loss 
concealment techniques. Note that an RTP format (e.g. PCMU) may be associated, 
in the context of a session, with multiple payload types. For a given RTP 
format, one of these may be a static payload type, while the others are 
dynamically assigned payload types. Regardless of whether a given payload type 
is static or dynamic, it may be earmarked for voice band data treatment. 
Without the parameter 'vbd', the payload type, whether static or dynamic,  is 
insufficient to determine whether a modem signal being encoded or not.  
 
The following example shows a static and a dynamic payload type associated with 
the PCMU format. Only the dynamic payload type, 98, is earmarked for voice band 
data treatment. 
 
    m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 0 15 98  
    a=rtpmap:98 PCMU/8000   
    a=gpmd:98 vbd=yes 
 
The following example reverses the association of payload type with voice band 
data. Of the static and dynamic payload types associated with PCMU, only the 
static payload type, 0, is earmarked for VBD treatment.  
 
     m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 0 15 98  
     a=gpmd:0 vbd=yes  
     a=rtpmap:98 PCMU/8000   
 
7.   Security Considerations 
 
This document does not impose any security requirement over and above those for 
SDP session descriptions [2]. In a nutshell, the 'gpmd' attribute, like the 
rest of the session, SHOULD NOT be trusted unless it has been obtained 
by an authenticated transport protocol from a trusted source. If the session 
description containing this line does not inherit proper authentication from a 
transport mechanism, certain precautions are in order. SDP parsers MUST NOT be 
able to start software except  that which is specifically configured as 
appropriate software to participate in multimedia sessions to which the end 
user has consented. Firewalls which parse an SDP description should not open a 
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 5 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
hole in the firewall for unicast data streams in response to a 'gpmd' attribute 
unless the session description has emanated form inside the firewall. For 
multicast data streams, such action should be contingent on administrative 
policy.  
 
8.   IANA considerations 
 
Three IANA actions are indicated in this document: 
 
     -    The registration of 'gpmd' as an SDP attribute,   
          (Section 8.1) 
 
     -    The creation of a new registry for 'gpmd'-enclosed generic parameters  
          (Section 8.2), 
      
     -    The registration of 'vbd' as a generic parameter within this registry  
          (Section 8.3). 
           
8.1  Registration of the SDP attribute 'gpmd' 
 
This section follows the rules of RFC 2327 in describing  the IANA registration 
information for the SDP attribute 'gpmd'. 
 
Source document:         This document 
Contact:                 Section 11 of this document 
Attribute name (SDP):    gpmd 
Attribute name(English): General-purpose media descriptor 
Attribute type:          Media-level 
Charset:                 Not subject to charset. 
Purpose of attribute:    Section 3 of this document 
Attribute values:        Section 4 of this document 
 
8.2  Parameter registry for 'gpmd'-enclosed parameters 
 
It is required that all new, non-experimental parameters that may be enclosed 
within the 'gpmd' attribute be registered with the IANA. Vendors may define use 
unregistered, experimental parameters that being with "X-". The "X-" prefix is 
meant to prevent clashes with parameters that are currently registered or may 
be registered in the future.  
 
New 'gpmd'-enclosed parameters must be described in a specification ("source 
document") approved by an accredited standards  organization such as the IETF.  
This specification must include: 
 
           
     -    The alphanumeric character string that indicates the parameter name.  
          No characters except alphabets and digits are allowed in the name  
          (Section 5). 
           
     -    The range of values and the default value for the parameter.  
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 6 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
 
     -    A one paragraph description of the meaning (semantics) of the 
          parameter. What does it represent? What effect do its values have on 
          media stream processing? What media formats can it be applied to? 
      
     -    Contact name, email address and telephone number. 
      
8.3  IANA Registration of the  'gpmd'-enclosed parameter 'vbd' 
 
This section follows the rules of Section 8.1 in describing  the IANA 
registration information for the parameter 'vbd'.  
 
Source document:         This document 
Parameter name:          vbd 
Range of values:         "yes", "no" without the quotes 
Parameter description:   Section 6 of this document 
Contact:                 Section 11 of this document 
 
9.   Acknowledgements   
   
Steven Casner, Henning Schulzrinne and Colin Perkins for the idea of this new,  
generic SDP attribute. Colin Perkins for suggesting the IANA registry mechanism 
needed with the 'gpmd' attribute. Bill Foster and Flemming Andreasen for their 
energy put in pursuing the logical antecedents of this draft. Flemming 
Andreasen for suggesting that the use of the 'gpmd' attribute may be made 
generic beyond its use with an RTP payload type.    
   
10.  References    
      
  [1]     ITU V.150.1, Procedures for the end-to-end connection of V-series  
          DCEs over an IP Network,  work-in-progress,  
          http://ftp.tiaonline.org/TR-30/TR301/Public. 
      
      
  [2]     M. Handley, V. Jacobson, SDP: Session Description Protocol, RFC    
          2327.   
   
  [3]     An Offer/Answer Model with the Session Description Protocol (SDP),    
          RFC 3264. 
 
  [4]     Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF, RFC 2234. 
 
 
      
11.  Author's Address    
       
  Rajesh Kumar    
  Cisco Systems    
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 7 
                   General-Purpose Media Descriptor      
  170 West Tasman Dr    
  San Jose, CA    
  Phone: +1 408 527 0811    
  Email: rkumar@cisco.com    
      
      
  Full Copyright Statement    
      
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.    
      
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to    
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it    
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published    
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any    
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are    
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this    
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing    
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other    
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of    
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for    
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be    
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than    
  English.    
      
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be    
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.    
       
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an    
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING    
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING    
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION    
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF    
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.    
   
  Acknowledgement    
      
  Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the    
  Internet Society.    
  
R.Kumar                  September 2002                         Page 8 