





Internet Engineering Task Force                             H. Ohno
INTERNET-DRAFT                                          R. Atarashi
                                Communications Research Lab., Japan
                                                      November 2001


              The Emergency Communications on the internet
                           draft-hohno-ecs-00

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF),  its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

    It will be strongly required to provide internet services even in an
    emergency since the internet is one of the most important
    communication infrastructures.  Therefore, it is necessary to
    prepare special communication functoin such as victims' information
    exchange and the disaster information transmission system.  It is
    also necessary to introduce priority control mechanism for the
    emergency communication.  We need to start discussion about the
    emergency communication systems on the Internet.


1. Introduction

    The importance of the internet has been increasing even in an
    emergency situation such as natural disasters and terrible attack by
    terrorism.  On the next generation Internet, it will be strongly
    required to provide reliable internet services even in an emergency



Ohno, et.al.                                                    [Page 1]





Internet Draft        The Emergency Communications             July 2001


    since the internet is one of the most important communication
    infrastructures.

    In order to continue developing the new internet service and it
    standardization, definitions of a number of new functions and
    consensus for operation are necessary.  They are not only in one
    layer but are also related to many other layers.  It is also
    recommended that a large number of people from many fields such as
    governments, administrations, carriers, operators, researchers and
    developers are expected to attend this standardization activity.


    The following two issues are the purpose of this memo.

    1. To start discussion about the status of measures for the
    emergency communications in each organization.

    2. To start discussion about establishing the cooperation and
    collaboration system about emergency communications in the world.




2. The internet in an emergency

    In this chapter, we discuss and define some concepts in this memo.


2.1 In an emergency

    In this memo, we define "in an emergency" as the situation that the
    people and their life may be damaged by unexpected and dangerous
    situation, such as natural disaster or accident.  The special
    operations are required to recover from the damages.  For example,
    when the big earthquake or flood occurs, many people are damaged,
    some people may disappear, and rescues activities are required in
    these circumstances.


2.2 The internet infrastructure in an emergency

    The internet communication is a very good solution for data
    transmission.  Especially text data transmission using the internet
    has long and sucessful history.  Even if the communication quality
    is insufficient and data transmission is often failed because of the
    damage by the disaster, information exchange can be achieved because
    it is possible to transmit small size of divided data over the
    internet.  The topology and routing mechanism of the internet add



Ohno, et.al.                                                    [Page 2]





Internet Draft        The Emergency Communications             July 2001


    redundancy to the internet.  Therefore, if a part of lines is
    damaged, transmitted data can bypass the point of failure and reach
    to the destination.  Generally, the natural disaster area severely
    is restricted, however the communication infrastructure operates
    normally outside of this area.


2.3 The internet services in an emergency

    When a large-scale natural disaster occurs, disaster victims need to
    exchange information with other victims or people outside disaster
    area in a frequent manner. WWW and database services for publish
    several information about disaster are required.

    It SHOULD make use of the internet more effectively in an emergency,
    it is required to make discussions and consensus at the IETF.



3. Internet technology in an emergency.


    Some communication functions are necessary in an emergency stuation.
    For example, victims' information exchange and the disaster
    information transmission are necessary in the disaster area.  As for
    the internet, even these scenes play an important part of
    communication function.  And the internet MUST keep playing an
    important role.

    In this section, we describe the emergency communication support
    system that we have being developing and evaluating, and priority
    control on the emergency communications.  And we have been insisting
    its about the necessity to standardize many functions for the
    emergency communications on the internet.


3.1 The emergency communication support system

    WIDE(Widely Integrated Distributed Environment) project, a well-
    known research consortium on the internet technology in Japan, has
    been developing an emergency communication system called IAA (which
    is named after "I am alive") since 1995. [1] This system consists of
    various user interfaces and scalable and robust distributed database
    system. It has already supported many actual recovery activities in
    natural disaster in Japan. It provides registration and retrieval of
    information for victims.

    Since these systems are expected to prepare each country or each



Ohno, et.al.                                                    [Page 3]





Internet Draft        The Emergency Communications             July 2001


    organization, the function of an emergency information exchange is
    required.  The standards for an emergency information exchange model
    and data exchange protocol for distributed database and usage of
    metadata (structure data about data, it indicate contents of
    information) are required.


3.2 The priority control on the emergency communications

    It SHOULD give more priority to the emergency communications than
    the usual communications.

    The communication of an emergency is required with higher priority
    than other communications. The priority control on the emergency
    communications (voice data and multimedia communication) has been
    discussed on some documents such as ITU-T E.106 and F.706
    Recommendation.[3][4]

    The priority control of the internet is required additional
    considerations. The introduction of the data management scheme such
    as using "metadata" may be necessary to indicate that the emergency
    information SHOULD be processed immediately.

    We MUST proceed with the standardization of the policy of the
    priority control in the emergency communication.



4. Discussion

    According to the discussion, we found many standardization
    activities and consensus were needed across the several layers in
    order to provide reliable internet services continuously in an
    emergency.  These functions described below are examples that
    standardizations are required.

    - Priority control policy

    - Operation policy

    - Victims information exchange model

    - Victims information exchange protocol for distributed databases

    - Some other mechanisms bridge over several independent emergency
    communications systems





Ohno, et.al.                                                    [Page 4]





Internet Draft        The Emergency Communications             July 2001


5. Milestones

    Dec 01  Submit the first Internet-Draft of the emergency communications.
    Dec 01  Meet at Salt Lake City as BOF to review the first Internet-Draft and discussion.
    Mar 01  Submit the second Internet-Draft of the emergency communications.
    Mar 01  Meet at Minneapolis as BOF to review the second Internet-Draft and discussion.
    Jul 02  Meet at Yokohama to discussion.

6. Summary

    We described necessarily of the emergency communications on the
    internet and insist about the necessity to standardize many internet
    functions in an emergency.

7. References


    [1] Nobuhiko TADA, Yukimitsu IZAWA, Masahiko KIMOTO, Taro MARUYAMA,
    Hiroyuki OHNO, Masaya NAKAYAMA, "IAA System (I Am Alive)": The
    Experiences of the Internet Disaster Drills", INET'00, 2000, June.

    [2] IAA system home pages, http://www.crl-iaa.net,
    http://www.iaa.wide.ad.jp/

    [3] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2000), International Emergency
    Preference Scheme (IEPS)

    [4] ITU-T Recommendation F.706 (2001), International Emergency
    Multimedia Services (IEMS)

8. Author's Address

    Hiroyuki Ohno
    Communications Research Laboratory
    4-2-1 Nukui-kitamachi Koganei
    Tokyo 184-8795 Japan
    TEL: +1 81 42 327 5542
    FAX: +1 81 42 327 7941
    Email: hohno@ohnolab.org

    Rei S. Atarashi
    Communications Research Laboratory
    4-2-1 Nukui-kitamachi Koganei
    Tokyo 184-8795 Japan
    TEL: +1 81 42 327 5542
    FAX: +1 81 42 327 7941
    Email: ray@ohnolab.org




Ohno, et.al.                                                    [Page 5]


