INTERNET-DRAFT                          Danny McPherson, Ed.
                                           Geoff Huston, Ed.
                                        Olaf M. Kolkman, Ed.
                                 Internet Architecture Board
Expires: August 2011                        February 9, 2011
Intended Status: Best Current Practice

            Defining the Role and Function of IETF Protocol
                      Parameter Registry Operators
                        <draft-iab-iana-06.txt>



Status of this Memo


   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly-defined values that are
   passed in messages or packets.  To ensure consistent interpretation
   of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
   to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are uniquely
   defined.  The IETF uses registry functions to record assigned
   protocol parameter values and their associated semantic intent. For
   each IETF protocol parameter it is current practice for the IETF to
   delegate the role of protocol parameter registry operator to a
   nominated entity.  This document provides a description of, and the
   requirements for, these delegated functions.



































McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011



Table of Contents


   1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. Roles and Responsibilities Concerning IETF Proto-
   col Parameter Registries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.1. Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.2. IAB Role. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    2.3. IESG Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    2.4. Role of the IETF Trust. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    2.5. Role of the IAOC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   3. Miscellaneous Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5. Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6. IANA Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.1. Normative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.2. Informative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8. Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9. Appendix A: Considerations on the term IANA. . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. Appendix B: IANA registries in context. . . . . . . . . . . .  15
    10.1. Definition of an IETF Protocol Parameter Reg-
    istry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
    10.2. Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry
    Assignments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
    10.3. Procedures Related to IETF Protocol Parameter
    Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
    10.4. Registries for IETF Protocol Parameters. . . . . . . . . .  17
    10.5. Current IETF Protocol Parameter Assignments. . . . . . . .  17
   11. Appendix C: IAB Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18




















McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


1.  Overview


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly-defined values that are
   passed within messages or packets. To ensure consistent
   interpretation of these values between independent implementations,
   there is a need to ensure that the values and associated semantic
   intent are uniquely defined.  The IETF uses registries to record each
   of the possible values of a protocol parameter and their associated
   semantic intent.  These registries, their registration policy, and
   the layout of their content are defined in the so called "IANA
   Consideration" sections of IETF documents.

   The organizational separation between the IETF and its registry
   operators is one that appears to be a relatively unique arrangement
   in the context of standards development organizations (SDOs), and
   similar arrangements of structural separation are not generally used
   by other SDOs. SDOs that undertake a similar protocol parameter
   registration function generally do so as part of their secretariat
   service functions or their equivalent, thereby avoiding the overheads
   of detailed coordination of activity across multiple distinct
   organizations.  However, this structural separation of roles exists
   within several places in the IETF framework (e.g., the RFC Editor
   function) and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), on behalf of the
   IETF, has the responsibility to define and manage the relationship
   with the protocol registry operator role.  This responsibility
   includes the selection and management of the protocol parameter
   registry operator, as well as management of the parameter
   registration process and the guidelines for parameter allocation.

   As with other SDOs, the IETF asserts full authority over the
   management of all its protocol parameters and their registries. This
   document describes the function of these registries as they apply to
   individual protocol parameters defined by the IETF Internet Standards
   Process [RFC2026] as to allow for an orderly implementation by the
   Internet Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) under guidance
   from the IAB.

   Below we provide a description of the requirement for these delegated
   functions, which the IETF traditionally refers to as the Internet
   Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) function.










McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                          Section 1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


2.  Roles and Responsibilities Concerning IETF Protocol Parameter
Registries


   The IETF's longstanding practice is to outsource the management and
   implementation of some important functions (e.g., [RFC5620]). The
   protocol parameter registry function falls into this category of
   outsourced functions, and what follows here the comprehensive and
   normative description of the roles and responsibilities with respect
   to the registration of IETF protocol parameters.

   Specifically, this document describes the operation and role of a
   delegated IETF Protocol Parameter Registry Operator, to be selected
   and administered by the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
   [RFC4071].  While there is generally a single Protocol Parameter
   Registry Operator, additional Operators may be selected to implement
   specific registries.  This document also includes a description of
   the roles of other bodies that interact with IETF protocol parameter
   registry operators.

   Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
   other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been defined and
   deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned (e.g., for a
   new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or authentication
   algorithm for IPsec).  To ensure that such quantities have consistent
   values and interpretations in different implementations, their
   assignment must be administered by a central authority in a
   mechanical manner. For IETF protocols, that role is provided by a
   delegated Protocol Parameter Registry Operator.  For any particular
   protocol parameter there is a single delegated registry operator.  In
   the case of IP addresses and AS numbers, the IANA function resides at
   the root of the number space, and a subsequent allocation hierarchy
   exists below IANA.  The next step in the hierarchy below IANA is the
   Regional Internet Registries (RIR), which make further allocations of
   those resources using policies established through the RIRs' bottom-
   up policy development process.




2.1.  Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role


   The IETF Protocol Parameter registry function is undertaken under the
   auspices of the Internet Architecture Board.

   The roles of a Protocol Parameter registry operator are as follows:




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   o Review and Advise

     * A registry operator may be requested to review
       Internet-Drafts that are being considered by the Internet
       Engineering Steering Group (IESG), with the objective of
       offering advice to the IESG regarding the contents of the
       "IANA Considerations" section, whether such a section,
       when required, is clear in terms of direction to the registry
       operator, and whether the section is consistent with the
       current published registry operator guidelines.


   o Registry

     * To operate a registry of protocol parameter assignments.

     * The delegated registry operator registers values for
       Internet protocol parameters only as directed by the
       criteria and procedures specified in RFCs, including
       Proposed, Draft and full Internet Standards, Best Current
       Practice documents, and other RFCs that require protocol
       parameter assignment.

       If values for Internet protocol parameters were not specified,
       or in case of ambiguity, the registry operator will continue
       to assign and register only those protocol parameters that
       have already been delegated to the operator, following past
       and current practice for such assignments, unless otherwise
       directed in terms of operating practice by the IESG.  In the
       case of ambiguity, the registry operator is expected to
       express the ambiguity and either suggest better text or ask
       the appropriate parties for clarification.

     * For each protocol parameter, the associated registry
       includes:

       + a reference to the RFC document that describes the
         parameter and the associated "IANA Considerations"
         concerning the parameter, and

       + for each registration of a protocol parameter value,
         the source of the registration and the date of the
         registration, if the date of registration is known.

       + If in doubt or in case of a technical dispute, the
         registry operator will seek and follow technical
         guidance exclusively from the IESG.  Where appropriate
         the IESG will appoint an expert to advise the registry



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


         operator.

     * The registry operator will work with the IETF to develop any
       missing criteria and procedures over time, which the registry
       operator will adopt when so instructed by the IESG.

     * Each protocol parameter registry operates as a public registry,
       and the contents of the registry are openly available to the
       public, on-line and free of charge.

     * The registry operator assigns protocol parameter values in
       accordance with the policy associated with the protocol
       parameter, such as "First Come First Served" or "Expert
       Review" [RFC5226].

   o Mailing Lists

     * The registry operator maintains public mailing lists as
       specified in IANA Considerations [RFC5226]. Such lists are
       designated for the purpose of review of assignment proposals
       in conjunction with a designated expert review function.  In
       addition, each protocol parameter registry operator should
       maintain a mailing list that enables the registry staff of
       the registry operator to be contacted by email.  For example,
       iana@iana.org currently provides this function for IANA.

   o Liaison Activity

     * The registry operator will nominate a liaison point of contact.
       The registry operator, through this liaison, may be requested to
       provide advice to the IESG on IETF protocol parameters as well
       as the IANA Considerations section of Internet-Drafts that are
       being reviewed for publication as an RFC.  Where appropriate the
       IESG will appoint an expert to advise the registry operator.

   o Reporting

     * The registry operator will submit periodic reports to the IAB
       concerning the operational performance of the registry function.
       As an example of the requirements for such reports the reader is
       referred to a supplement to the "Memorandum of Understanding
       Concerning the Technical Work of the Internet Assigned Numbers
       Authority" [RFC2860] that was established by the IETF
       Administrative Support Activity (IASA) [RFC4071] and provides
       service level agreement (SLA) guidelines under which the protocol
       parameter registry, as implemented by ICANN, must operate.

     * At the request of the chair of the IETF, IAB, or IAOC the



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


       registry operator will undertake periodic reports to the IETF
       Plenary concerning the status of the registry function.

     * The registry operator will publish an annual report describing
       the status of the function and a summary of performance
       indicators.

   o  Intellectual Property Rights and the Registry Operator

     * All assigned values are to be published and made available free
       of any charges.

     * The assignment values may be redistributed without modification.

     * Any intellectual property rights of the IETF Protocol Parameter
       assignment information, including the IETF Protocol Parameter
       registry and its contents, are to be held by the IETF Trust
       [RFC4748].



2.2.  IAB Role


   An operator of an IETF Protocol Parameter registry undertakes the
   role as a delegated function under the authority of the IAB.

   The IAB has the responsibility to, from time to time, review the
   current description of the registry function and direct the registry
   operator to adopt amendments relating to its role and mode of
   operation of the registry according to the best interests of the
   IETF, and the Internet community in general.

   The IAB has the responsibility to appoint an organization to
   undertake the delegated functions of the Protocol Parameter registry
   operator for each IETF protocol parameter.  Specifically, the IAB
   defines the role and requirements for the desired functions (e.g., as
   with the "RFC Editor Model" [RFC5620], and the IAB, the IAOC is
   responsible for identifying a potential vendor, and once under
   agreement managing the various aspects of the relationships with that
   vendor.  To be clear, the IAB is in the deciding role (e.g., for
   appointment and termination), but must work in close consultation
   with the IAOC.

   The IAB has the responsibility to determine the terms and conditions
   of this delegated role. Such terms and conditions should ensure that
   the registry operates in a manner that is fully conforment to the
   functions described in this document. In addition, such terms and



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.2.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   conditions must not restrict the rights and interests of the IETF
   with respect to the registry contents and maintenance.



2.3.  IESG Role


   The IESG is responsible for the technical direction regarding entries
   into IETF Protocol Parameter registries and maintaining the policies
   by which such technical directions are given (e.g., see Appendix B).
   Technical direction itself is provided through the adoption of
   directives within the "IANA Considerations" section of IETF RFC
   documents, or through stand-alone "IANA Considerations" RFC
   documents.

   The IESG shall verify that Internet-Drafts that are offered for
   publication as IETF-stream RFCs [RFC4844] include IANA Considerations
   sections when needed, and that IANA Considerations sections conform
   to the current published guidelines.

   Since technical assessment is not a responsibility of the registry
   operator the IESG is, as part of providing the technical direction,
   responsible for identifying the technical experts that are required
   to, where appropriate, review registration requests or resolve open
   technical questions that relate to the registration of parameters.

   The IESG will at its discretion organize the liaison activities with
   the registry operator's liaison point of contact as to facilitate
   clear communications and effective operation of the registry
   function.



2.4.  Role of the IETF Trust


   The IETF Trust [RFC4748] was formed to act as the administrative
   custodian of all copyrights and other intellectual property rights
   relating to the IETF Standards Process, a function that had
   previously been performed by ISOC and the Corporation for National
   Research Initiatives (CNRI).

   Any intellectual property rights of IETF Protocol Parameter
   assignment information, including the registry and its contents, and
   all registry publications, are to be held by the IETF Trust on behalf
   of the IETF.




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.4.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   The IETF Trust may make such regulations as appropriate for the
   assignment values redistribution and registry publications.



2.5.  Role of the IAOC


   The IAOC is responsible for identifying a potential vendor in a
   manner of their choosing based on IAB consultation, and managing the
   various aspects of the relationships with that vendor.

   In addition, the IAOC has the responsibility to ensure long-term
   access, stability, and uniqueness across all such registries . This
   responsibility is of particular significance in the event that a
   relation with a protocol parameter registry operator is terminated.




3.  Miscellaneous Considerations


   The IESG is responsible for the technical direction of the IETF
   Protocol Parameter registries and maintaining the policies by which
   such technical directions are given. The IESG is responsible, as part
   of the document approval process for the IETF-stream RFCs [RFC4844],
   for 'IANA Considerations' verification. For the other RFC streams the
   approval bodies are responsible for verifying that the documents
   include IANA Considerations sections when needed, and that IANA
   Considerations sections conform to the current published guidelines.
   In the case the that IANA considerations in non-IETF document streams
   lead to a dispute the IAB has the final word.





4.  Acknowledgements


   This document is adapted from "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
   Considerations Section in RFCs" [RFC5226], and has been modified to
   include explicit reference to Intellectual Property Rights, and the
   roles of the IAB and IESG in relation to the IETF Protocol Parameter
   registry function.

   The Internet Architecture Board acknowledges the assistance provided



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 4.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   by reviewers of earlier drafts of this document, including Scott
   Bradner, Leslie Daigle, Thomas Narten, Ray Pelletier, and Alfred
   Hoenes.



5.  Security Considerations


   This document does not propose any new protocols, and does not
   introduce any new security considerations.



6.  IANA Considerations


   This document requires no direct IANA actions in terms of the
   creation or operation of a protocol parameter registry.  However,
   this document does define the roles and responsibilities of various
   bodies who are responsible for, and associated with, the operation of
   the protocol parameter registration functions for the IETF.



7.  References




7.1.  Normative References




7.2.  Informative References


   [RFC1700] Reynolds, J. and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", RFC 1700,
              STD 2, October 1994.

   [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [RFC2780] Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines
              For Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers",
              RFC 2780, BCP 37, March 2000.




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                       Section 7.2.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   [RFC2850] Carpenter, B., "Charter of the Internet Architecture
              Board", RFC 2850, BCP 39, May 2000.

   [RFC2860] Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
   Internet
              Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC2939] Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition
              of New DHCP Options and Message Types", RFC 2939, BCP 43,
              September 2000.

   [RFC2978] Freed, N. and J. Postel, "IANA Charset Registration
              Procedures", RFC 2978, BCP 19, October 2000.

   [RFC3232] Reynolds, J., "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced by
              an On-line Database", RFC 3232, January 2002.

   [RFC4071] Austein, R., Wijnen, B., "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", RFC 4071,
              April 2005.

   [RFC4748] Bradner, S., "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF
              Trust", RFC 4748, BCP 78, October 2006.

   [RFC4844] Daigle, L., Ed. and IAB, "The RFC Series and RFC
              Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.



   [RFC5226] Narten, T., Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing
              an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5620] Kolkman, O., IAB,  "RFC Editor Model (Version 1)",
                  RFC 5620, August 2009.


   [IANA] Reynolds, J., "IANA Protocol Numbers and Assignment
          Services", October 1994, <http://www.iana.org/numbers.htm>.

   [IAOC_SUPP] ICANN/IANA-IETF MoU Supplemental Agreement
   <http://iaoc.ietf.org/documents/IETF-
   ICANN_Supplemental_Agreement.pdf>

   [CORR] Dyson, E., "Correspondence from Esther Dyson, Interim
          Chairman, ICANN to Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter and
          Fred Baker of the IETF", February 1999,



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                       Section 7.2.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


        <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/bradner-dyson-25feb99.htm>.


   [ENUM_INSTR] IAB, "ENUM LIAISON ON IAB INSTRUCTIONS TO RIPE-NCC",
              September 2002,
       <http://www.iab.org/Documents/sg2-liaison-e164-sep-02.html>.

   [RIPE_ENUM]  RIPE NCC, "ENUM Registry", September 2002,
       <http://www.ripe.net/enum>.



8.  Authors' Addresses



   Danny McPherson, Editor
   Verisign, Inc.
   Email: dmcpherson@verisign.com

   Geoff Huston, Editor
   APNIC
   Email: gih@apnic.net

   Olaf M. Kolkman, Editor
   NLnet Labs
   Email: olaf@NLnetLabs.nl

   Internet Architecture Board
   Email: iab@iab.org





9.  Appendix A: Considerations on the term IANA



   The term "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)" has been used
   historically in different contexts.  Specifically:


     1) "IANA" has commonly referred to the set of protocol, DNS,
        and Address registry functions currently operated by ICANN:

        It is noted that there is current general use of the term
        "IANA" or "IANA function" to refer specifically to the set of



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 9.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


        registries currently operated by ICANN funded through a
        contract [DoC_IANA] between ICANN and the U.S. Government's
        National Telecommunications and Information Administration
        (NTIA).


     2) Within the IETF context "IANA" has been referred to as the set
        of registry operators of the IETF protocol parameters:

        At the time of writing this document (February 2011) the
        operation of the majority of the protocol parameter registries
        are delegated to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
        and Numbers (ICANN). Not all IETF protocol parameter
        registries are delegated to ICANN, and at present the
        operation of the 'e164.arpa' registry has been delegated to
        the RIPE Network Coordination Center (RIPE NCC) [ENUM_INSTR].


     3) Additionally, and also within IETF context, "IANA" has been
        referred to as the entire set of IETF protocol parameter
        registries:

        IETF specifications continue to use the term "IANA
        Considerations" when referring to specific functions to be
        performed with respect to a protocol parameter registry, as
        provided in "Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations
        Section in RFCs" [RFC5226].  It is noted that the use of
        the term 'IANA' in this context does not necessarily imply
        the delegation of the parameter registry operation to the
        functions operated by ICANN.



   In addition to the multiple contexts of the use of the term "IANA",
   the structure and association of the U.S. Government's contractual
   relationship with ICANN over the performance of a protocol parameter
   registry operation that is commonly known as the "IANA" role, is a
   source of some common confusion regarding the question as to who
   maintains ultimate authority over the protocol parameter registries
   themselves. ICANN undertakes these "mechanical" tasks on behalf of
   the IETF at the discretion of the IAB, as defined in the Memorandum
   of Understanding [RFC2860] between the IETF Administrative Support
   Activity (IASA) and ICANN, and in supplements [IAOC_SUPP] provided
   thereafter.







McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 9.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


10.  Appendix B: IANA registries in context



10.1.  Definition of an IETF Protocol Parameter Registry


   Using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF protocol
   parameter registries, the Internet Standards document, STD 2
   [RFC1700], published in October 1994, defined the role of the IANA as
   follows:

     The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the central
     coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
     Internet protocols.  The IANA is chartered by the Internet
     Society (ISOC) and the Federal Network Council (FNC) to act as
     the clearinghouse to assign and coordinate the use of numerous
     Internet protocol parameters.

     The Internet protocol suite, as defined by the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF) and its steering group (the IESG),
     contains numerous parameters, such as Internet protocol addresses,
     domain names, autonomous system numbers (used in some routing
     protocols), protocol numbers, port numbers, management information
     base object identifiers, including private enterprise numbers, and
     many others.

     The common use of the Internet protocols by the Internet
     community requires that the particular values used in these
     parameter fields be assigned uniquely.  It is the task of the
     IANA to make those unique assignments as requested and to maintain
     a registry of the currently assigned values [RFC1700].

   Again using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF
   protocol parameter registries, the definition of the protocol
   parameter registry role is provided in "Guidelines for Writing an
   IANA Considerations Section in RFCs" [RFC5226]:

     Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants
     and other well-known values.  Even after a protocol has been
     defined and deployment has begun, new values may need to be
     assigned (e.g., for a new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption
     or authentication transform for IPsec).  To ensure that such
     quantities have consistent values and interpretations across all
     implementations, their assignment must be administered by a
     central authority.  For IETF protocols, that role is provided by
     the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.1.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   This text appears to confuse two of the three (1 and 3) contexts
   presented in Appendix A with which the "IANA" term is used.



10.2.  Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry Assignments


   Currently there are two registry operators that publicize protocol
   parameter registry assignments: the IANA registry as operated by
   ICANN, and the RIPE NCC.

   The current mode of publication of protocol parameter registry
   assignments undertaken within registries whose operation is currently
   delegated to ICANN is described in the Informational Document
   "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced by an On-line Database"
   [RFC3232], published in January 2002:

     From November 1977 through October 1994, the Internet
     Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) periodically published
     tables of the Internet protocol parameter assignments in
     RFCs entitled, "Assigned Numbers". The most current of these
     Assigned Numbers RFCs had Standard status and carried the
     designation: STD 2.  At this time, the latest STD 2 is
     RFC 1700.

     Since 1994, this sequence of RFCs have been replaced
     by an online database accessible through a web page
     (currently, www.iana.org). The purpose of the present RFC
     is to note this fact and to officially obsolete RFC 1700,
     whose status changes to Historic.  RFC 1700 is obsolete, and
     its values are incomplete and in some cases may be wrong
     [RFC3232].

   The mode of publication of the e164.arpa protocol parameter registry
   operated by the RIPE NCC is documented in the ENUM Registry
   [RIPE_ENUM].




10.3.  Procedures Related to IETF Protocol Parameter Management


   IETF Protocol Parameter registry actions are defined through the
   inclusion of an "IANA Considerations" section in IESG-approved RFC
   documents [RFC5226].  Within these considerations the IETF defines
   the policies through which a registry operator manages assignments



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.3.  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


   within the registry. There are also RFCs that specifically address
   IETF protocol parameter considerations for particular protocols
   [RFC2780][RFC2939] [RFC2978].



10.4.  Registries for IETF Protocol Parameters


   As documented in the IAB Charter [RFC2850], the role of the IAB
   includes responsibility for the IETF Protocol Parameter registration
   function (referred to in the charter as 'IANA'). The IAB, acting on
   behalf of the IETF, approves the appointment of an organization to
   act as a protocol parameter registry operator on behalf of the IETF,
   and also approves the terms and conditions of this delegation of this
   function.

   The technical direction of the IETF Protocol Parameter registry
   function is provided by the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG) [RFC2850].



10.5.  Current IETF Protocol Parameter Assignments


   The list of current IETF protocol parameters for which parameter
   value assignments are registered within registries whose operation is
   currently delegated to ICANN appears on the IANA web site [IANA].  In
   addition there is the e164.arpa registry function [RIPE_ENUM].

   Those protocol parameter registries that refer to registrations
   related to the allocation of public unicast IPv4 addresses, public
   unicast IPv6 addresses, public use Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs)
   and the top level delegations within the Domain Name System, have
   associated registration mechanisms that have been delegated to the
   IANA function currently operated under the auspices of ICANN
   [RFC2860]. In these cases other bodies are responsible for the
   development of policies to manage the registrations of allocations
   performed as part of this aspect of the registration function.
   Registrations that refer to reservations (e.g., IP address blocks for
   documentation purposes or ASNs defined for documentation purposes)
   and all other use cases within those registries must be performed
   under the exclusive direction of the IETF.







McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.5.  [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2011             February 2011


11.  Appendix C: IAB Members


   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   published were:


      Marcelo Bagnulo
      Gonzalo Camarillo
      Stuart Cheshire
      Vijay Gill
      Russ Housley
      John Klensin
      Olaf Kolkman
      Gregory Lebovitz
      Andrew Malis
      Danny McPherson
      David Oran
      Jon Peterson
      Dave Thaler































McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 11.  [Page 18]
