


Network Working Group                                          W. Haddad
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                               E. Nordmark
Expires: May 15, 2011                                             Oracle
                                                               F. Dupont
                                                                     ISC
                                                              M. Bagnulo
                                        Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
                                                                B. Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                           Nokia Siemens
                                                       November 11, 2010


   Anonymous Layers Identifiers (ALIen): Threat Model for Mobile and
                            Multihomed Nodes
                   draft-haddad-alien-threat-model-04

Abstract

   This memo describes privacy threats related to the MAC and IP layers
   identifiers in a mobile and multi-homed environment.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the MAC Layer . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Threats from Collecting Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.1.  Discovering the Identity Presence  . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.2.  Determining the Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the IP Layer  . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Threats Against Privacy in Mobile IPv6 Protocol  . . . . . 10
       5.1.1.  Quick Overview of MIPv6 Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.2.  Threats Related to MIPv6 BT Mode . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.3.  Threats Related to MIPv6 RO Mode . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Threat Model Applied to a Static Multi-homed Node  . . . . . . 13
     6.1.  Threats againt Privacy on the MAC Layer  . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.2.  Threats against Privacy on the IP Layer  . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19



















Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


1.  Introduction

   The ALIen problem statement document [ALIen] introduced new
   attributes related to the privacy and described critical privacy
   issues related to providing these attributes on both the IP and MAC
   layers.  In addition, ALIen highlighted the interdependency between
   privacy issues on the MAC and IP layers and the need to solve them
   all together.

   This memo describes privacy threats and potential attacks related to
   the MAC and IP layers identifiers in a mobile and multi-homed
   environment.







































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   In addition, it would be useful to describe the following entities
   involved in defining threats against privacy:

   Target

      We use the term "target" to specify an entity who's privacy is
      threatened by an adversary/malicious node.

   Adversary/Malicious Node

      This term refers to the entity that is trying to violate the
      privacy of its target.

   In addition, this draft uses the terminology described in [ALIen].































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


3.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy

   Before listing threats against privacy, we start by describing the
   privacy threat model, which will be applied on the MAC and IP layers
   in order to perform our analysis.  The locations of adversaries
   violating privacy must be taken into account when analyzing different
   threats.

   In a mobile environment, the three main threats against privacy are
   the following:

   o  Identifying

   o  Locating

   o  Tracing

   In the ALIen context, a malicious node can identify its target via
   its device identifier(s), i.e., MAC address and/or its IPv6
   address(es).  Once the identification procedure is achieved, it
   becomes by itself a threat against privacy, since a malicious node
   located in one particular place will be able to claim with certain
   confidence that its target was present in the same place at a
   specific time, by just capturing its MAC address.

   The next logic step after identifying a target is to locate it with
   maximum accuracy.  The third step consists on tracing the target
   (possibly in real-time) while it is moving across the Internet.

   Performing these three steps allow the malicious node to gradually
   increase its knowledge about its target by gathering more and more
   information about it.  These information may allow, for example to
   build a profile of the target and then to launch specific attacks or
   to misuse the obtained information in other ways (e.g., marketing
   purposes, statistics, etc).  Data gathered may include higher-layer
   identifiers (e.g., email addresses) or pseudonyms, location
   information, temporal information, mobility patterns, etc.

   In order to access the MAC address of a targeted node in a WLAN, the
   malicious node needs to be either on the same link or within the
   distributed system (DS).  However, in other scenarios, especially in
   the ongoing deployment of public outdoor WLAN technologies, more
   complex attacks involving multiple malicious nodes need to be
   considered.

   Actually, taking a look at today's WLAN deployments in some cities
   like Chicago and New York [WIGLE] gives a clear picture of the high
   density of APs already deployed.  These examples of today's WLAN



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   deployment lead to the following conclusions:

   o  the high density of APs deployed nowadays greatly extends the
      spatial and temporal coverage of the three main threats against
      privacy mentioned above.

   o  the MAC address is becoming easier to detect and thus is causing a
      growing privacy concern, in particular for mobility.

   o  in some existing public areas covered by WLAN technologies, any
      efficient tracing of a designed target is greatly improved
      whenever multiple co-operative malicious nodes are deployed in
      different locations covered by WLAN technologies.

   Based on the above, the suggested threat model when applied to the
   MAC layer should take into consideration the classic scenario, where
   one malicious node is collecting data on the link/DS and the scenario
   where many malicious nodes are deployed in different locations,
   within the WLAN covered area, and performing data collection while
   collaborating together for identifying, locating and tracking
   purposes.






























Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


4.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the MAC Layer

   We start our analyze by applying the threat model to the MAC layer.

4.1.  Threats from Collecting Data

4.1.1.  Discovering the Identity Presence

   The WLAN technologies discloses the user's device identifier, i.e.,
   the MAC address, in each data frame sent/received by the mobile node
   (MN) within the distribution system (DS) thus, making the device
   identifier readable/available to any malicious eavesdropper located
   on the link or in the same DS.

   Based on this observation, collecting data on one particular link/DS,
   coupled with prior knowledge of the targeted node's MAC address
   allows the malicious node to check first if its target is located
   within the covered area or not.

   An eavesdropper can perform data collecting via two ways.  The first
   one is by positioning itself on the link/DS and sniffing packets
   exchanged between the MNs and the APs.  The second way consists on
   deploying rogue access points in some particular areas.  The ability
   to deploy rogue access points requires a missing security protection
   of the WLAN network.

   In WLAN, the targeted MN does not even need to exchange data packets
   with another node, to disclose its MAC address to a malicious node
   eavesdropping on the same link than the MN.  In fact, the target's
   MAC address appears in control messages exchanged between the MN and
   the AP(s) or between different MNs (adhoc mode).

   In addition, identifying the target allows the malicious node to
   learn the target's IPv6 address and the data sequence number.

   On the other side, a malicious node collecting data from one
   particular DS, may also try to conduct an active search for its
   target within the DS by trying to connect to the target, using the
   IPv6 address derived from the link local address, according to the
   stateless address configuration protocol defined in [STAT].  In such
   scenario, if the targeted node replies to the malicious node's
   request while being located within the same DS, then its presence
   will immediately be detected.

   A malicious node may also choose and add new targets to its list,
   based on other criterias, which are learned from collecting data.
   For example, the frequency, timing and the presence duration of one
   particular node may encourage the malicious eavsedeopper to learn



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   more in order to gradually build a profile for that node.

4.1.2.  Determining the Location

   After identifying its target within a DS, a malicious node may
   attempt to determine its location.  Such step can be performed by
   different means.

   But it should be noted first, that discovering the target's presence
   on the MAC layer, implicitly maps its geographical location within a
   specific area.  Depending on the network topology and the link layer
   technology, this area might be quite large or might have a fairly
   irregular shape.  Hence, the malicious node may want to learn the
   most accurate location of its target.

   It is also possible to determine the geographical location of the MN
   with a certain accuracy at the physical layer.  This is done by
   identifying the Access Point (AP) to which, the MN is currently
   attached and then trying to determine the geographical location of
   the corresponding AP.

4.1.2.1.  Tracing the Target

   After identifying and locating its target, a malicious node located
   in a particular DS, can use data collecting to trace its target in
   real time within the entire ESS.

   Tracing can be done either via the target's MAC address or its IPv6
   address or via the data sequence number carried in each data frame or
   through combining them.

   On the other side, these information allow the malicious node to
   break the unlinkability protection provided by changing the MAC
   address, e.g., during a L2 handoff, since it will always be possible
   to trace the MN by other tools than its MAC address.

4.1.2.2.  Threats from Various Malicious Nodes

   An efficient way to trace a target within an area covered by wireless
   link layer technologies is by deploying many malicious nodes within
   one specific area.

   As it has been mentioned above, a malicious node located within a
   specific DS can trace its target only within the DS.  However, there
   may be scenarios where tracing a particular target needs to go beyond
   one specific DS boundaries.  In addition, the target MN's MAC address
   may change many times before the MN leaves the DS.  Consequently,
   even if the new DS is monitored by a malicious eavesdropper, it will



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   not be possible for him to identify the target anymore.

   If the malicious nodes collaborate with each other, it would be
   possible to keep tracing the target within a specific region.  In
   fact, the main goals behind collaborative tracing is to break the
   unlinkability protection when provided in an independent way at the
   MAC and IP layers.  In fact, changing the MAC address alone while
   keeping using the same IP address will always make the target
   identifiable and traceable through different DSs.

   Note that in addition to using the MAC and IP addresses, the sequence
   number can also be used for tracing purposes.







































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


5.  Threat Model Applied to Privacy on the IP Layer

   Learning the target's IP address discloses the topological location,
   which may in turn reveal also geographical location information of
   the target.  For example, location specific extensions to the DNS
   directory [LOC_DNS] can help to reveal further information about the
   geographical location of a particular IP address.  Tools are also
   available, e.g., [HEO] that allows everyone to querry this
   information using a graphical interface.  Note that the location
   information cannot be always correct, for example due to state
   entries in the DNS, NATed IP addresses, usage of tunnels (e.g., VPN,
   Mobile IP, etc.).

   This information can be used to link the current target's location(s)
   to the regular one and provide the eavesdropper more information
   about its target's movements in real time.

5.1.  Threats Against Privacy in Mobile IPv6 Protocol

   In Mobile IPv6 protocol (described in [MIPv6]), threats against
   privacy can originate from the correspondent node (CN) and/or from a
   malicious node(s) located either between the MN and the CN or between
   the MN and its home agent (HA).

5.1.1.  Quick Overview of MIPv6 Protocol

   MIPv6 protocol allows a mobile node to switch between different
   networks, while keeping ongoing session(s) alive.  For this purpose,
   MIPv6 offers two modes to handle the mobility problem.  The first
   mode is the bidirectional tunnelling (BT) mode, which hides the MN's
   movements from the CN by sending all data packets through the MN's
   HA.  Consequently, the BT mode provides a certain level of location
   privacy by hiding the MN's current location from the CN.

   The other mode is the route optimization (RO) mode, which allows the
   MN to keep exchanging data packets on the direct path with the CN,
   while moving outside its home network.  For this purpose, the MN
   needs to update the CN with its current new location each time it
   switches to a new network.  This is done by sending a binding update
   (BU) message to the CN to update its binding cache entry (BCE) with
   the MN's new location, i.e., care-of address (CoA).  In addition, the
   RO mode requires the MN and the CN to insert the MN's home address
   (HoA) in each data packet exchanged between them.

5.1.2.  Threats Related to MIPv6 BT Mode

   As mentioned above, the BT mode keeps the CN totally unaware of the
   MN's movements across the Internet.  However, the MN must update its



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   HA with its new current location each time it switches to a new
   network, in order to enable the HA to encapsulate data packets to its
   new location, i.e., new CoA.

   In the BT mode, tracing the MN can either be done via the MAC address
   as described earlier, or by having a malicious node located somewhere
   between the MN and the HA, and looking into the inner data packet
   header.

   On the other side, the MIPv6 protocol suggests that the tunnel
   between the MN and the HA can be protected with ESP protocol.  In
   such case, the malicious node won't be able anymore to identify its
   target (when located between the MN and the HA) thus making the
   tracing impossible.  However, tracing can always be possible at the
   MAC layer.

5.1.3.  Threats Related to MIPv6 RO Mode

   The MIPv6 RO mode and all new optimizations, e.g., [OMIPv6],
   [MIPSec], etc, requires that the MN sends a BU message to update the
   CN in order to announce its new current location after each IP
   handover, and to insert the MN's home address in each data packets
   sent to/from the MN.

   Consequently, threats against MN's privacy can emanate from a
   malicious CN, which starts by establishing a session with the target,
   i.e., by using its target's IPv6 HoA, sending it enough data packets
   and then waiting till its target switches to the RO mode.

   But it should be noted that the MN may not decide to switch to the RO
   mode but keep using instead the BT mode, in order to avoid disclosing
   its current location to the CN.

   On the other side, a malicious node may position itself somewhere on
   the direct path between the MN and the CN and learn the MN's current
   location from sniffing the BU message(s) and/or the data packets
   exchanged between the two entities.

   Another possibility is to do the tracing on the MAC address.  As
   mentioned above, this requires the malicious node to be located on
   the same link/DS than the MN.

   The MIPv6 RO mode requires protecting all signalling messages
   exchanged between the MN and the HA by an ESP tunnel.  In such case,
   a malicious node located between the MN and the HA cannot identify
   its target.

   However, the IETF has recently adopted a new authentication protocol



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   for MIPv6 [MIPAuth], which allows securing the BU/BA signalling
   messages exchanged between the HA and the MN by using an
   authentication option carried in the BU/BA messages.

   MIP6_AUTH protocol may have a serious impact on the MN's privacy,
   since it offers the malicious node a new location, i.e., the path
   between the targeted MN and its HA, to identify, locate and trace its
   target.  This is in addition to positioning itself on the path
   between the targeted MN and the CN.  It should be noted also that the
   path between the MN and the HA may be more interesting to use in
   order to break the MN's privacy, since the MN may try to hide its
   real identity (and consequently its location) from the CN, as
   proposed in [MIPLOP] while still using the real IPv6 home address to
   exchange signalling messages with its HA.

   Furthermore, it would also be possible to learn the MN's pseudo-
   identifier(s) used in exchanging data packets and signalling messages
   between the MN and the CN on the direct path, by having two malicious
   nodes located between the MN and the HA and between the MN and the CN
   and collaborating together.































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


6.  Threat Model Applied to a Static Multi-homed Node

   A multi-homed node can be described as being attached to more than
   one Internet Service Provider (ISP).  Consequently, the multiple
   addresses available to a multi-homed node are pre-defined and known
   in advance in most of the cases.

   The main goals behind providing the multi-homing feature are to allow
   the multi-homed node to use multiple attachments in parallel and the
   ability to switch between these different attachments during an
   ongoing session(s), e.g., in case of a failure.

   For these purposes, the SHIM6 WG specified a proposal to address
   multi-homing issues, based on using the Hash Based Addresses
   (described in [HBA]) and the SHIM6 protocol (described in [SHIM6]).

   The HBA technology offers a new mechanism to provide a secure binding
   between multiple addresses with different prefixes available to a
   host within a multihomed site.  This is achieved by generating the
   interface identifiers of the addresses of a host as hashes of the
   available prefixes and a random number.  Then, the multiple addresses
   are generated by prepending the different prefixes to the generated
   interface identifiers.  The result is a set of addresses that are
   inherently bound.  In addition, the HBA technology allows the CN to
   verify if two HBA addresses belong to the same HBA set.

   The SHIM6 protocol aims to eliminate any impact on upper layer
   protocols by ensuring that they can keep operating unmodified in a
   multi-homed environment while still seeing a stable IPv6 address.

   For a static multi-homed, the main privacy concern are the ability to
   identify the multi-homed node by an untrusted party and to discover
   its available addresses.  The untrusted party can be the CN itself or
   a third party located somewhere between the multi-homed node and the
   CN.

6.1.  Threats againt Privacy on the MAC Layer

   A malicious node can identify the targeted multi-homed node via its
   MAC address.  The ability to identify the target at the MAC layer
   allows the malicious node to learn part or all available locators
   used by the targeted node.  However, it should be noted that for a
   static target, a successful identification of the MAC address may
   probably require more precise information concerning the geographical
   location of the target.






Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


6.2.  Threats against Privacy on the IP Layer

   In a multi-homed environment, threats against privacy on the IP layer
   can emanate from the CN itself, in an attempt to learn part/all
   multi-homed node's available locators.

   For example, a malicious CN can use one pre-identified locator
   belonging to its target, to establish a session with the target.
   After that, the CN can try to push its target to switch (i.e.,
   disclose) to new locator(s) by stopping replying to packets sent with
   the initial address, i.e., pretending a failure.  In such scenario,
   and in order to avoid interrupting ongoing session, the targeted node
   may decide to switch to another (or more) locator(s), depending on
   the CN willingness to re-start sending packets to the new locator.

   On the other side, an untrusted third party located near its target
   (e.g., based on prior knowledge of one of the target's locator) or
   one particular CN, can correlate between different locators used by
   the targeted node by eavesdropping on packets exchanged between the
   two entities.

   Depending on the final solution adopted, the attacker can also sniff
   context establishment packets that will probably contain some or all
   the locators available to the multi-homed node.



























Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


7.  Security Considerations

   This document aims to formalize a privacy threat model for the MAC
   and IP layers and does not suggest any solutions to counter these
   threats.  Based on that, the suggested threat model does not add nor
   amplify any existing attacks against the mobile or multi-homed node.













































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.
















































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [MIPAuth]  Patel, A., Leung, K., Khalil, M., Akhtar, H., and K.
              Chowdhury, "Authentication Protocol for Mobile IPv6",
              RFC 4285, January 2006.

   [MIPv6]    Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              for IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [OMIPv6]   Arkko, J., Vogt, C., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
              Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [STAT]     Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

9.2.  Informative References

   [ALIen]    Haddad, W., Nordmark, E., Dupont, F., Bagnulo, M., and B.
              Patil, "Anonymous Layers Identifiers for Mobile and Multi-
              homed Nodes: Problem Statement", Internet
              Draft, draft-haddad-alien-problem-statement-02.txt,
              October 2007.

   [HBA]      Bagnulo, M., "Hash Based Addresses (HBA)", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-shim6-hba-05.txt, December 2007.

   [HEO]      "High Earth Orbit", February 2005.

   [LOC_DNS]  Davis, C., Vixie, P., Goodwin, T., and I. Dickinson, "A
              Means for Expressing Location Information in the Domain
              Name System", RFC 1876, January 1996.

   [MIPLOP]    Montenegro, G., Castelluccia, C., and F. Dupont, "A
              Simple Privacy Extension for Mobile IPv6", Mobile and
              Wireless Communication Networks", IEEE MCWN, October 2004.

   [MIPSec]   Dupont, F. and J-M. Combes, "Using IPsec between Mobile
              and Correspondent IPv6 Nodes", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-mip6-cn-ipsec-07.txt, Februray 2008.

   [SHIM6]    Nordmark, E. and M. Bagnulo, "Shim6: Level 3 Multihoming
              Shim Protocol for IPv6", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-shim6-proto-10.txt, February 2008.



Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   [WIGLE]    "Wireless Geographic Logging Engine,
              http://wigle.net/gps/gps/Map/", 2006.

















































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad
   Ericsson
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 6462562030
   Email: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com


   Erik Nordmark
   Oracle
   17 Network Circle
   Mountain View, CA
   USA

   Email: Erik.Nordmark@oracle.com


   Francis Dupont
   ISC
   Rennes
   France

   Email: Francis.Dupont@fdupont.fr


   Marcelo Bagnulo
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad 30, leganes
   Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Email: Marcelo@it.uc3m.es


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, Tx  75039
   USA

   Email: Basavaraj.Patil@nsn.com






Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                    ALIen                    November 2010


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo 02600
   Finland

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@nsn.com












































Haddad, et al.            Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 20]

