

ENUM WG                                                      J. Peterson
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Expires: August 25, 2003                               February 24, 2003


          enumservice registration for SIP Addresses-of-Record
                         draft-ietf-enum-sip-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document registers an ENUM service for SIP (the Session
   Initiation Protocol), pursuant to the guidelines in RFC2916bis.
   Specifically, this document focuses on provisioning SIP addresses-of-
   record in ENUM.











Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. ENUM Service Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3. Addresses-of-record in SIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4. The 'E2U+SIP' enumservice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5. Example of E2U+SIP enumservice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   A. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   B. To Do  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





































Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


1. Introduction

   ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping, RFC2916 [1]) is a system that uses DNS
   (Domain Name Service, RFC1034 [4]) to translate telephone numbers,
   like '+12025332600', into URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers, RFC2396
   [5]), like 'sip:user@sipservice.com'.  ENUM exists primarily to
   facilitate the interconnection of systems that rely on telephone
   numbers with those that use URIs to route transactions.  ENUM is
   currently under revision in RFC2916bis [2]; this document applies to
   the revised version of ENUM described in the work-in-progress.

   SIP (Session Initiation Protocol, RFC3261 [3]) is a text-based
   application protocol that allows endpoints on the Internet to
   discover one another in order to exchange context information about a
   session they would like to share.  Common forms of communication that
   are set up by SIP include Internet telephony, instant messaging,
   video, Internet gaming and other forms of real-time communications.
   SIP is a multi-service protocol capable of initiating sessions
   involving different forms of real-time communications simultaneously.
   SIP is a protocol that finds the best way for parties to communicate.

2. ENUM Service Registration

   As defined in [2], the following is a template covering information
   needed for the registration of the enumservice specified in this
   document.

      Enumservice Name: "E2U+SIP"

      Type(s): "SIP"

      Subtype(s): N/A

      URI Scheme(s): "sip:", "sips:"

      Functional Specification: see Section 4

      Security considerations: see Section 6

      Intended usage: COMMON

      Author: Jon Peterson (jon.peterson@neustar.biz)

      Any other information that the author deems interesting: See
      Section 3






Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


3. Addresses-of-record in SIP

   This document specifies an enumservice field that is appropriate for
   SIP addresses-of-record URIs.  Various other types of URIs can be
   present in SIP requests.  A URI that is associated with a particular
   SIP user agent (for example, a SIP phone) is commonly known as a SIP
   contact address.

   The difference between a contact address and an address-of-record is
   like the difference between a device and its user.  While there is no
   formal distinction in the syntax of these two forms of addresses,
   contact addresses are associated with a particular device, and may
   have a very device-specific form (like sip:10.0.0.1, or
   sip:user@ua21.sipservice.com).  An address-of-record, however,
   represents a identity of the user, generally a long-term identity,
   and it does not have a dependency on any device; users can move
   between devices or even be associated with multiple devices at one
   time while retaining the same address-of-record.  A simple URI,
   generally of the form 'sip:user@sipservice.com', is used for an
   address-of-record.

   When a SIP request is created by a user agent, it populates the
   address-of-record of its target in its To header field and
   (generally) Request-URI.  The address-of-record of the user that is
   sending the request populates the From header field of the message;
   the contact address of the device from which the request is sent is
   listed in the Contact header field.

   By sending a registration to a registrar on behalf of its user, a SIP
   device (i.e.  a user agent) can temporarily associate its own contact
   address with the user's address-of-record.  In so doing, the device
   becomes eligible to receive requests that are sent to the address-of-
   record.  Upon receiving the registration request, the registrar
   modifies the provisioning data in a SIP location service to create a
   mapping between the address-of-record for the user and the device
   where the user can currently be reached.  When future requests arrive
   at the administrative domain of this location service for the user in
   question, proxy servers ask the location service where to find the
   user, and will in turn discover the registered contact address(es).
   A SIP-based follow-me telephony service, for example, would rely on
   this real-time availability data in order to find the best place to
   reach the end user without having to cycle through numerous devices
   from which the user is not currently registered.  Note that
   addresses-of-record can be registered with other addresses-of-record;
   for example, while at home, a user might elect to register the
   address-of-record they use as their personal identity under their
   work address-of-record in order to direct requests for their work
   identity to whatever devices they might have associated with their



Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


   home address-of-record.

   When a SIP entity (be it a user agent or proxy server) needs to make
   a forwarding decision for a Request-URI containing an address-of-
   record, it uses the mechanisms described in the SIP specification
   (RFC3263) to locate the proper resource in the network.  Ordinarily,
   this entails resolving the domain portion of the URI (sipcarrier.com
   in the example above) in order to route the call to a proxy server
   that is responsible for that domain.

   SIP user agents have specific communications capabilities (such as
   the ability to initiate voice communications with particular codecs,
   or support for particular SIP protocol extensions).  Because an
   address-of-record does not represent any particular device or set of
   devices, an address-of-record does not have capabilities as such.
   When a SIP user agent sends a request to an address-of-record, it
   begins a phase of capability negotiation that will eventually
   discover the best way for the originator to communicate with the
   target.  The originating user agent first expresses capabilities of
   its own in the request it sends (and preferences for the type of
   session it would like to initiate).  The expression of these
   capabilities may entail the usage of SDP [10] to list acceptable
   types of media supported and favored by the client, the inclusion of
   Required/Supported headers to negotiate compatibility of extensions,
   and possibly the usage of optional SIP extensions, for example using
   caller/callee preferences [8] to communicate request handling
   dispositions.  Proxy servers or endpoints subsequently return
   responses that allow a rich bidirectional capability negotiation
   process.

   The process by which SIP endpoints negotiate capabilities can overlap
   with the primary service provided by NAPTR records: permitting the
   originating client to select a particular URI for communications
   based on an ordered list of enumservices.  However, ENUM's capability
   management mechanism is decidedly one-way - the administrator of the
   telephone number expresses capabilities (in the form of protocol
   names) and preferences that the client must evaluate without
   negotiation.  Moreover, listing available protocols is not comparable
   to agreement on session media (down to the codec/interval level) and
   protocol extension support - it would be difficult to express, in the
   level of detail necessary to arrange a desired session, the
   capabilities of a SIP device within a NAPTR service field.
   Provisioning contact addresses in ENUM rather than addresses-of-
   record would compromise the SIP capability negotiation and discovery
   process.  Much of the benefit of using a URI comes from the fact that
   it represents a logical service associated with a user, rather than a
   device - indeed, if ENUM wished to target particular devices,
   'E2IPv4' would be a more appropriate resolution service to define



Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


   than 'E2U'.

   SIP addresses-of-record may use the SIP URI scheme or the SIPS URI
   scheme.  The SIPS URI scheme, when used in an address-of-record,
   indicates that the user it represents can only be reached over a
   secure connection (using TLS).

4. The 'E2U+SIP' enumservice

   Traditionally, the services field of a NAPTR record (as defined in
   [11]) contains a string that is composed of two subfields: a
   'protocol' subfield and a 'resolution service' subfield.  ENUM in
   particular defines an 'E2U' (E.164 to URI) resolution service.  This
   document defines an 'E2U+SIP' enumservice for SIP.

   The scheme of the URI that will appear in the regexp field of a NAPTR
   record using the 'E2U+SIP' enumservice may either be 'SIP' or 'SIPS'.
   This enumservice is best suited to SIP addresses-of-record.

   When a SIP address-of-record appears in the regexp field of a NAPTR
   record, there is no need to further qualify the enumservice field
   with any capability data, since addresses-of-record do not have
   capabilities.

   There is also generally no need to have more than one NAPTR record
   under a single telephone number that points to a SIP address-of-
   record.

   Note that the user portion of a SIP URI may contain a telephone
   number (e.g.  'sip:+12025332600@neustar.biz').  Clients should be
   careful to avoid infinite loops when recursively performing ENUM
   queries on URIs that result from an ENUM lookup.

5. Example of E2U+SIP enumservice

   The following is an example of the use of the enumservice registered
   by this document in a NAPTR resource record.

   $ORIGIN 0.0.6.2.3.3.5.2.0.2.1.e164.arpa.
      IN NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+sip"    "!^.*$!sip:jon.peterson@neustar.biz!"     .


6. Security Considerations

   A SIP address-of-record is a canonical address by which a user is
   known - placing this address in ENUM is comparable to placing an
   email address or a similar URI in the DNS.




Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


   DNS does not make policy decisions about the records that it shares
   with an inquirer.  All DNS records must be assumed to be available to
   all inquirers at all times.  The information provided within an ENUM
   record set must therefore be considered to be open to the public -
   which is a cause for some privacy considerations.

   Unlike a traditional telephone number, the resource identified by a
   SIP URI may require that callers provide cryptographic credentials
   for authentication and authorization before a user is alerted.  In
   this respect, ENUM in concert with SIP can actually provide far
   greater protection from unwanted callers than the existing PSTN,
   despite the public availability of ENUM records.

7. IANA Considerations

   This document registers the 'E2U+SIP' enumservice under the
   enumservice registry described in the IANA considerations in
   RFC2916bis.  Details of the registration are given in Section 2.

References

   [1]   Faltstrom, P., "E.164 number and DNS", RFC 2916, September
         2000.

   [2]   Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to URI DDDS
         Application", draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-03 (work in progress),
         January 2003.

   [3]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, May 2002.

   [4]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities", RFC
         1034, November 1987.

   [5]   Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform
         Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August
         1998.

   [6]   International Telecommunications Union, "Recommendation E.164:
         The international public telecommunication numbering plan", May
         1997, <http://www.itu.int>.

   [7]   Vaha-Sipila, A., "URLs for Telephone Calls", RFC 2806, April
         2000.

   [8]   Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "SIP Caller Preferences and
         Callee Capabilities", draft-ietf-sip-callerprefs-05 (work in



Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


         progress), November 2001.

   [9]   Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer
         (NAPTR) DNS Resource Record", RFC 2915, September 2000.

   [10]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
         Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [11]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403,
         October 2002.


Author's Address

   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St
   Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   USA

   Phone: +1 925/363-8720
   EMail: jon.peterson@neustar.biz
   URI:   http://www.neustar.biz/

Appendix A. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Richard Shockey for comments on the initial draft of this
   document.

Appendix B. To Do

      This document cannot proceed until RFC2916bis has passed.

















Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              SIP enumservice                February 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Peterson                Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 9]

