

   Internet Research Task Force                                  M. Eder 
   Internet Draft                                             H. Chaskar 
   Document: draft-irtf-smrg-ipsmf-00.txt                          Nokia 
                                                                  S. Nag 
   Category: Experimental                                   July 11, 2001 
    
    
    
                 IP Service Management in the QoS Network 
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This  document  is  an  Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10  of  RFC2026.   Internet-Drafts 
   are  working  documents  of  the  Internet Engineering Task Force 
   (IETF), its areas, and  its  working  groups.   Note  that  other 
   groups  may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a  maximum  of  six 
   months  and  may  be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other 
   documents at any time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet- 
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
   in progress." 
    
   The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can   be   accessed   at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The  list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights  Reserved. 
    
   Abstract 
    
   The guiding principles in the design of IP network management were 
   simplicity and no centralized control.  The best effort service 
   paradigm was a result of the original management principles and the 
   other way around.  New methods to distinguish the service given to 
   one set of packets or flows relative to another are well underway. 
   However, as IP networks evolve the management approach of the past 
   may not apply to the QoS-capable network envisioned by some for the 
   future.   We examine some of the areas of impact QoS is likely to 
   have on management and look at some questions that remain to be 
   addressed. 
    






 
 

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
    
  1. Introduction 
    
   Simplicity above all else was one of the guiding principles in the 
   design of IP networks. However, as IP networks evolve, the concept 
   of service in IP is also evolving, and the strategies of the past 
   may not apply to the full-service QoS-capable network envisioned by 
   some for the future.  Within the IP community, their exists a good 
   deal of impetus for the argument that if the promise of IP is to be 
   fulfilled, networks will need to offer an increasing variety of 
   services.  The definition of these new services in IP has resulted 
   in a need for reassessment of the current control mechanism utilized 
   by IP networks.  Efforts to provide mechanisms to distinguish the 
   service given to one set of packets or flows relative to another are 
   well underway, yet many of the support functions necessary to 
   exploit these mechanisms are limited in scope and a complete 
   framework is non-existent.  This is complicated by the fact that 
   many of these new services will also demand some form of billing 
   framework in addition to a control one, something radically new for 
   IP. 
    
   This paper intends to evaluate the network and service management 
   issues that will need to be addressed, if the IP networks of the 
   future are going to offer more than just the traditional best effort 
   service in any kind of significant way. 
    
  2. Background 
    
   The task of defining a management framework for QoS will be 
   difficult due to the fact that these new services represent a 
   radical departure from the best effort service model that was at the 
   core of IP in the past, and had a clear design strategy to have 
   simplicity take precedence over everything else [1].  This 
   philosophy was nowhere more apparent than in the network and service 
   management area for IP [2].  Proposed changes to support a variety 
   of QoS  features will impact the existing control structure in a 
   very dramatic way.  Compounding the problem is the  lack of 
   understanding of what makes up a "service" in IP [3].  IP, in 
   contrast to other network technologies, does not limit the scope of 
   service management simply to end-to-end connectivity, but combines 
   service management with regards to transport with the management of 
   the actual applications and how they are using the network.  If the 
   available transport services in IP expand, this will result in the 
   further expansion of what is considered a service.  The now de-facto 
   inclusion of WEB services in the scope of IP service, which is 
   remarkable given that the WEB did not even exist when IP was first 
   invented, illustrates this situation well.  This phenomenon can be 
   expected to increase with the current trend towards moving network 
   decision points towards the boundary of the network and, as a 
   result, closer to the applications and customers.  Additionally, the 
   argument continues over the need for QoS in IP networks at all.  New 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               2 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   technologies based on fiber and wavelength-division multiplexing 
   have many people convinced that bandwidth will be so inexpensive it 
   is not going to be necessary to offer QoS. However uneconomical it 
   is to engineer a network for peak usage, a major argument in this 
   debate certainly is the cost of developing operational support 
   systems for a QoS network and deploying them in the existing 
   networks.  Just the fact that customers might be willing to pay for 
   additional service may not be justification for implementing 
   sweeping architectural changes that could seriously affect the 
   Internet as it is known today.  The IP community must be very 
   concerned that the equality that characterized the best effort 
   Internet may be sacrificed in favor of a service that has a 
   completely different business model. If the core network started to 
   provide services that generated more revenue, its could easily come 
   at the expense of the less revenue generating best effort service. 
    
  3. IP Management Standardization 
    
   Management standardization efforts in the IP community have 
   traditionally been concerned with what is commonly referred to as 
   "element management" or "device management".  Recently, new efforts 
   in IP management have added the ability to address service issues 
   and to look at the network in more abstract terms. These efforts 
   which included a logical representation of services as well as the 
   representation of resources in the network, combined with the notion 
   of a user of a service, has made possible the much talked about 
   concept of 'policy'.  Notable among these efforts are the Policy 
   work in the IETF and the DMTF work on CIM and DEN.  Crucial elements 
   of the service management framework are coming into perspective, but 
   point to a trend in IP that is a quite radical departure from the 
   control mechanisms of the past.  As the service model evolves from 
   being what was sufficient to support best effort to being able to 
   support variable levels of service, a trend towards a centralized 
   management architecture has become quite apparent. 
    
   This is becoming increasingly apparent for two reasons.  QoS 
   mechanisms need network wide information [4], and for them to 
   succeed, they must not require a tremendous amount of support from 
   the core network.  It is becoming increasingly accepted that only at 
   the edge of the network will there be sufficient resources to 
   provide the mechanisms necessary to admit and control various QoS 
   flows. 
     
  4. Telecommunications Service Management 
    
   One place to start an effort to define service management in IP 
   networks is by looking at what was been done previously in 
   telecommunications networks.  The telecommunications standards have 
   not been very successful in defining an industry accepted service 
   management framework even in an environment in which the service is 
   fairly constrained.  Yet regulation has made it necessary for 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               3 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   network operators to open their networks sufficiently to allow for 
   multiple vendor participation in providing the service.  This 
   indicates that some formalized boundaries exist or the markets are 
   sufficiently large to justify the development of interfaces.  
   International telecommunications management standards look at the 
   complete management problem by dividing it into separate but highly 
   related layers.  Much of the terminology used to describe the 
   management problem in IP has diffused from the telecommunications 
   standards [5].  These standards were designed specifically to 
   address telecommunications networks, and it is not clear how 
   applicable they will be to IP networks.  Service management is 
   defined in terms of the set of services found in telecommunications 
   networks and the management framework reflects the hierarchical 
   centralized control structure of these networks.  The framework for 
   service management is based on the Telecommunications Management 
   Network (TMN) layered approach to management.  Current IP standards 
   are heavily weighted towards the element management layer and 
   especially towards the gathering of statistical data with a 
   decentralized approach being emphasized.  In TMN a dependency exists 
   between layers and clear functions at their boundaries are defined.  
   To what extent service management, as defined in the TMN standards, 
   can be applied to IP which is lacking a network layer that supports 
   a Logical Layered Architecture must be further investigated [5]. 
    
   TMN concepts must be applied carefully to IP networks because 
   fundamental differences exist.  Control of IP networks is highly 
   distributed especially in the network layer.  Management is non-
   hierarchical and decentralized with many peer-to-peer relationships.  
   A formal division of management into layers, where management 
   dependencies exist at the borders of these layers, may not be 
   applicable to IP. Any effort to define service management in IP must 
   be constantly vigilant that it does not assume the 
   telecommunications concepts can be applied directly to IP networks.  
   The most basic abstraction of the network management problem into 
   element, network, and service management has as its origins in the 
   telecommunications industry's standardization work.  The IP 
   management framework might not have made even these distinctions if 
   it where not for the telecommunications legacy. 
    
    
  5. IP Service Management: Problem Statement 
   
   In defining the Service Management Framework for IP, the nature of 
   services that are going to need to be managed must be addressed. 
   Traditionally network management frameworks consist of two parts, an 
   informational framework and the proper framework architecture to 
   enable management information to be distributed in the network 
   environment.  The informational framework appears to be the easier 
   problem to address and the one that is principally being focused on 
   by the IP community. 
    
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               4 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   Efforts by organizations such as the DMTF with their CIM and DEN 
   initiatives are currently trying to define network, and to a lesser 
   extent service, information models.  These efforts show a surprising 
   similarity to those of the telecommunications industry to define 
   information models [6].  What has not emerged is a clear framework 
   for defining how the network management functionality will exist and 
   how the information within the network domain and between domains 
   will be exchanged.  Clearly the size of these networks will require 
   this information to be highly distributed.   
    
   There is a good deal of disagreement on this subject, but one would 
   expect that highly distributed directories would be a prime 
   candidate for the information that is of a static nature.  For 
   information that is of a dynamic nature the problem becomes far more 
   complex and has yet to be satisfactorily addressed.  Policy 
   management is a logical extension of having distributed directories 
   services available in the network.  The IETF and DMTF are looking to 
   Policy management to be the framework by which certain service 
   management issues can be addressed, primarily concentrating on those 
   concerning access and traffic prioritization within a single 
   administrative domain [7]. 
    
   Many of the current policy efforts are focused on classifying 
   traffic flows and enforcing policies at the edge with the intent of 
   focusing on admission issues, without addressing the end-to-end 
   nature of the problem.  The full scope of problems associated with 
   providing a commodity service that will need to be verifiable have 
   not been addressed. A second issue with current policy efforts is 
   the static nature in which they have been architect. Policies are 
   not going to be functional if they cannot accommodate the dynamic 
   nature of the network and its users. 
  
   Standardization efforts need to concentrate on the management 
   problems that are multi-domain in character.  The test for multi-
   domain often centers around there being a many-to-one or a one-to-
   many relationship requiring the involvement of two or more distinct 
   entities.  Domains could reflect the administrative domain, routing 
   domain, or include agreements between domains.   Element or device 
   management does not meet the requirements for being multi-domain 
   because the scope is primarily that of the device manufacturer.  
   This may partially explain why it is proving to be not a very 
   worthwhile candidate for standardization.  The implementation of 
   element management systems standards have varied depending on the 
   nature of the hardware and been pretty dependent on a particular 
   manufacturers implementation.  
    
   The problem with the domain model as it relates to IP networks is 
   that so much of the traffic is likely to traverse multiple domains 
   under separate administrative control.  Unlike the 
   telecommunications network in which traffic traverses only a 
   relatively small number of domains, IP traffic may traverse many 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               5 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   separately administered networks.  Further complicating the 
   situation is, that unlike the telecommunications network many of 
   these domains will be highly competitive in nature, offering and 
   accommodating varying service level agreements.  Telecommunications 
   traffic, even with deregulation, passes from the access providers 
   network to a core network and then, if it is an international call, 
   across international boundaries.  To be successful IP will need to 
   model the domain problem in a way that reduces the complexity. 
    
   A service management framework must address the business processes 
   that operate when providing a service [5].  The processes a service 
   framework must address can be separated into two fundamental 
   divisions for any service.  The first is the definition of the 
   service and the second is the management of an embodiment of the 
   service.  While this division is intuitive, a formal process needs 
   to be in place if management of the service is to be actually 
   realized.  
    
   In specifying a service, the service architecture must first be 
   mapped onto the capabilities of the underlying network architecture.  
   The service needs to be specified in an unambiguous way so that the 
   mechanisms can be put in place to enable the control of the service.  
   It can be a useful tool to view the relationship of the definition 
   of a service to an instance of that service to the relationship 
   between the definition of an object to the instantiation of that 
   object in object oriented modeling.  Increasingly, as networks 
   evolve it is going to be necessary to logically describe the network 
   capabilities to the service.  As the IP networks become more 
   fragmented it will be increasingly the case that specific service 
   classifications will need to be made available.  A method that will 
   allow for the logical definition of the network from a service 
   perspective would allow for greater control of the network by the 
   service management systems.   An ever increasing number of service 
   specific devices are being added to the network.  These devices are 
   often designed with management capabilities consistent with the 
   services they offer.  It has been recognized that there exists a 
   requirement for the user to have as much control over the management 
   of the service as possible.  As the number and type of service 
   specific devices increase in the network it will become important to 
   provide management access to these devices over well understood 
   methods.  IP services will need to be highly customizable 
   necessitating that the management of the service be with the user to 
   the extent possible.     
     
   Paramount to the success of any service is determining how that 
   service will be billed.  The process of billing must take place at 
   the service inception.   It is here that the network support 
   necessary for billing should be addressed.  Analogously, security 
   must also be addressed  in the most early stages of the service 
   definition.   It is not practical to assume that the billing and the 
   security services will be hosted by the same provider as the service 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               6 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   itself or that it will be possible to have the billing and security 
   functions specifically designed for every service.  These functions 
   will have to be a generic part of the network. 
    
   Given the limited success of telecommunications efforts to formalize 
   the relationship between different management support functions it 
   is highly suspect that such efforts would have any chance of 
   succeeding in IP networks which have a more diverse concept of 
   network and services.  If the IP network is to be made up of peer 
   domains of equal dominion it will be necessary to have management 
   functionality that is able to traverse these domains.   Of course 
   the perspective of where management responsibility lies is largely 
   dependent on the reference point.  A centric vantage point indicates 
   responsibility shared equally among different domains.   From within 
   any particular domain management responsibility exists within that 
   domain and that domain only.   For a management framework to succeed 
   in IP networks logical management functions will have to be 
   identified along with an extremely flexible definition language to 
   define the interface to these management functions.   The more the 
   management functionality will have to cross boundaries of 
   responsibility, the more the network management functions have to be 
   distributed throughout the network.   
    
  6. Core Inter-domain Functions 
    
   The service management paradigm for IP must address management from 
   a perspective that is a combination of technical solutions as well 
   as a formula for representing vendor business relationships.  
   Currently services that need support between domains require that 
   the service level agreements (SLAs) be negotiated between the 
   providers.   At some point these agreements will likely become 
   unmanageable, if the number of agreements becomes very large and/or 
   the nature of the agreements is highly variable. This will result in 
   their being sufficient need for standardization or regulation to 
   control these agreements resulting in it becoming no longer 
   acceptable to make individual arrangements.   
    
   Bandwidth Brokers have been conceived as a method for dealing with 
   many of the problems between the domains relating to traffic from a 
   business perspective. The premise of the Bandwidth Brokers is to 
   insure agreement between the network domains with regards to 
   traffic, but security and billing issues, that are not likely to be 
   as quantifiable, will also need to be addressed.  Service providers 
   have traditionally been reluctant to use bandwidth broker or SLA 
   types of functions since they consider that such tools expose their 
   weaknesses to competitors and customers.  While this is not a 
   technical problem, it does pose a real practical problem in managing 
   a service effectively. 
    
   Looking at the basic requirements of the QoS network of the future 
   two competing philosophies become apparent.  The network providers 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               7 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   are interested in having more control over the traffic to allow them 
   to choose what traffic gets priority especially in a congested 
   environment.  Users desire the ability to identify a path that has 
   the characteristics very similar to a leased line [8].  In either 
   situation as IP bandwidth goes from being delivered on a basis equal 
   to all, to being delivered based on a particular authorities 
   formula, there will become a need to provide authentication and 
   validation.  This will include the ability to measure that service 
   specified is being provided, to define the exact parameters of the 
   service, and to verify that only an authorized level of service is 
   being provided.   
    
   Some of the earlier work on an architectural framework for mixed 
   traffic networks has suggested that the only method that will work 
   between administrative domains is that of bilateral agreement [9].  
   Multilateral agreements may indeed be complex to administer, but 
   another type of multilateral agreements exists that is not so 
   complex.  This is the multilateral agreements mandated by means of 
   national or international regulation.  Bilateral agreements will not 
   scale well and if the traffic needs to traverse many administrative 
   domains it will be hard to quantify the end-to-end service being 
   provided. If the current instability in the ownership and 
   administration of domains continues this will also limit the 
   usability of bilateral agreements.  Only through a regulated process 
   will it be possible to eliminate the effects competitive pressures 
   will have on these types of agreements and make it possible to get a 
   truly open environment.  Much pressure of a non-technical nature 
   exists today to discourage this scenario.  If traffic agreements 
   between the boundaries of networks is not mandated or standardized a 
   continuing consolidation of network providers will result. Providers 
   unable to induce other providers to pair with them will lose 
   business if QoS networks become commonplace.  This result would be 
   especially visible in its effects on small and midsize service 
   providers. 
 
   The majority of contemporary activity on higher level management 
   functions for IP networks have been restricted to the issue of 
   differentiating QoS with regards to transport.  Many service issues 
   still remain to be resolved with respect to the current best effort 
   paradigm and many more can be expected if true QoS support is 
   realized.  Authentication, authorization and accounting services 
   still inadequate for the existing best effort service will need 
   additional work to support QoS services.  
    
   It is reasonable that services can be classified into application 
   level services and transport level services.  Transport services are 
   the services that the network provides independent of any 
   application. These include services such as Packet Forwarding and 
   Routing, QoS, Traffic Engineering, RSVP/Intserv, Diffserv and MPLS.  
   These might also include such functions as security (Ipsec) and 
   Directory services.  In IP networks, QoS transport services can be 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               8 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   viewed as end-to-end (RSVP) or per-hop (Diffserv).  Transport level 
   services tend to be unalterable requiring application level services 
   to fit into the transport framework.  An application that needs a 
   new transport level service will need to be a mass-market 
   application where the investment in new infrastructure can be 
   justified.  Because of the effort in altering transport services, 
   applications that need new ones will have a longer time to market.  
   The effort and cost to develop a framework necessary to support new 
   transport services should not be underestimated. 
    
   Application level services are those specific to the application. 
   Many service management functions occur between the application 
   supplier and  the application consumer which require no knowledge or 
   support by the existing network.  By keeping service management 
   functions at this level time to market and costs can be greatly 
   reduced.  The disadvantages are that many applications need the same 
   functionality causing inefficient use of the network resources.  
   Transport services are able to be built more robustly and can 
   provide additional functionality, by virtue of having access to 
   information that applications can not, providing additional benefit 
   over application level services.  An example of an application level 
   service that could benefit from a transport service is the AAA 
   paradigm for E-Commerce.  Sometimes application level service 
   requirements have the disadvantages of both transport service and 
   application service level.  For instance, in IP telephony, this may 
   include services provided by a gateway or other network device 
   specific to IP telephony to support such services as call forwarding 
   or call waiting.  The mass appeal of IP telephony made it possible 
   to suggest considerable infrastructure changes, but the nature of 
   this kind of change has contributed to the slow penetration of IP 
   telephony applications. 
    
  7. A New Service Management Architecture 
    
   An overview of the new management architectures shows a clear need 
   for a consolidated framework.  Transport level QoS will demand 
   traffic engineering that has a view of the complete network that is 
   far more comprehensive than what is currently available via the 
   Routing protocols, including network dynamics and network congestion 
   information in the networks at a given instant of time, for the 
   network administrator to take appropriate actions at any given 
   instant.  The current existing best-effort transport control plane 
   may become more of a hindrance to new services and may be of 
   questionable value if the IP network will truly become a full 
   service QoS network.  Both IntServ and DiffServ QoS schemes require 
   network administrators to provision their networks to support QoS 
   within a particular domain  and to establish SLAs for traffic 
   traversing domains.  In reality, very few administrators would be 
   able to understand the complexities of such a task and would simply 
   accept the factory default settings with the expectation that these 
   would provide adequate operations.  Policy management, object 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                               9 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   oriented information models, and domain gateways are leading to a 
   need for a more centralized management structure that is no less 
   automated than the infrastructure of the past but provides an 
   approach able to insure full service throughout the network and 
   across domains. Given the probable cost and complexity of such a 
   system failure to come up with a standard, even if it is a de facto 
   standard, will have serious implications for the Internet in the 
   future. 
    
   For the current trends in QoS to succeed, there will need to be 
   harmonization across the new and existing control structures.  By 
   utilizing a structure very similar to the existing routing control 
   structures, it should be possible develop functionality, not in the 
   data path, that can allocate traffic within a domain and use inter-
   domain signaling to distribute between domains.   Additional 
   functionality, necessary to support QoS-like authorization and 
   authentication functions for edge devices admitting QoS traffic and 
   administering and allocating traffic between administrative domains 
   could also be supported.  While meeting the requirements for a 
   bandwidth broker [9], additional functionality of making more 
   general policy decisions and QoS routing could also be performed.  
   Given that these tasks are interrelated it makes sense to integrate 
   them if possible.  
    
   The architecture is based on a centrally located functionality 
   responsible for allocating traffic within a particular 
   administrative domain and capable of signaling traffic requirements 
   across domains.  This would be accomplished by redirecting routing 
   messages to the central functionality which would then calculate 
   paths based on the entire network and the transport requirements.  
   Routing messages, very similar in content to the existing ones, 
   would provide information sufficient to support the traffic 
   engineering requirements without changing the basic forwarding 
   functions of the devices.  Having routes computed centrally would 
   simplify the network devices and release them from performing 
   computationally intensive routing related tasks. 
    
   Given the growth of the Internet, for scalability reasons the core 
   can not know about flow states [10], and this information can be 
   known only in the edge routers.  As the information needed to 
   forward traffic through the network becomes more and more related to 
   complex parameters that have nothing to do with the forwarding of 
   packets, which routers do best, it makes less and less sense to have 
   the determination of routes as a component of a routers functions.  
   In a QoS network routing decisions become increasingly dependent on 
   information not easily discernable from the data that routers can 
   logically share between themselves.  This will necessitate the need 
   for additional functionality to determine the routing of data 
   through the network and further suggests that all the information 
   needed to allow a router to forward packets might not be better 
   provided external to the routers functions. 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              10 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
    
   At the edges of the network where the traffic is admitted it will be 
   necessary to have mechanisms that will insure the traffic is within 
   the bounds of what has been specified.  To achieve this 
   functionality, it will be necessary to buffer and control the input 
   traffic.  Second the traffic would need to be marked so the other 
   network elements would be aware that this was the preferred traffic.  
   Conversely, a path could be chosen for this traffic that was 
   dedicated to the level of service being requested.  Some combination 
   of these two would be possible.  In fact these two methods are more 
   similar than they first appear from a management perspective.  Both 
   are really identical in that one is just a virtual path based on the 
   handling of the packets by the device in the network and the second 
   would be more a pre-configured path through the network.  It can not 
   be expected that the existing best effort routing will provide the 
   optimum routes for these new levels of service.  To achieve this it 
   would be necessary to have either routing protocols that supported 
   optimum path discovery or mechanisms to configure paths necessary to 
   support the required services. 
    
   There are implications of providing shaping at the network 
   boundaries.  Shaping would include both rate and burst parameters.  
   Having to provision services, that cannot be over subscribed, would 
   present both major business and technical problems. By definition, 
   packet data is bursty in nature and there exist long periods of 
   idleness during the session.  It is not practical to expect a 
   consumer paying a premium for a service would not check that the 
   service was truly available.  Such a service model seems to be 
   filled with peril for the existing best effort Internet if any 
   significant amount of the bandwidth was reserved for exclusive use. 
    
   Clearly with respect to traffic within the network itself there will 
   be the need to pre-configure routes and to provide the ability to 
   have routes be dynamically configured.  Each is complex in itself.  
   Some of the problems with pre-configured traffic include it's basic 
   inconsistency with the way traffic is currently engineered through 
   the Internet and the difficulty in developing arrangements between 
   administrative domains.  The current Internet has been developed 
   with one of the most egalitarian yet simplistic methods of sharing 
   bandwidth.  Supporting the existing best effort service, in an 
   unbiased way, while at the same time providing for other classes of 
   service could potentially add a tremendous amount of complexity to 
   the QoS scheme.  On the other hand, if the reserved bandwidth is not 
   shared it could result in a significant impact on the availability 
   of the bandwidth in the Internet as we know it today.  QoS could 
   potentially contribute more to their being insufficient bandwidth, 
   by reserving bandwidth within the network that can not be used by 
   other services, even though it can be expected that this bandwidth 
   will be underutilized for much of the time.  Add to that the 
   motivation of the service providers in wanting to sell commodity 

 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              11 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   bandwidth, and that could be tremendous pressures on the 
   availability of Internet bandwidth. 
    
   Current work within the IP community on defining mechanisms to 
   provide QoS have centered on a particular few architectures and a 
   handful of new protocols.  In the following sections, we will 
   examine some of the particular issues with regards to the current IP 
   community efforts as they relate to the previous discussions.  It is 
   not the goal of this paper to serve as a tutorial on these efforts 
   but rather to identify some of the support issues related to using 
   particular technologies that support some form of classifiable 
   service within an IP network.  
    
  8. The DiffServ Architecture 
    
   The DiffServ management problem is two pronged.  First there is the 
   management within the administrative domain that must be addressed, 
   and then the management between the domains.  The second is 
   certainly easier to address because there has been little actual 
   work on this aspect of the architecture.  What work there has been 
   anticipates that service level agreements will be reached between 
   the administrative domains, and that end-to-end service will be a 
   concatenation of these various service level agreements.  This is 
   problematic for many reasons.  From the business perspective, it 
   presumes that agreements reached bilaterally could be concatenated 
   and continue to provide a level of end-to-end service the customer 
   would be willing to pay a premium for.  Market conditions mentioned 
   earlier with trying to maintain large numbers of these agreements 
   between competitive networks would also apply.  
    
   Guaranteeing a class of service on a per hop basis is in no way a 
   guarantee of the service on an end-to-end basis.  It is not likely 
   that a customer would be willing to pay for an improved level of 
   service if it did not include guarantees on the bandwidth and the 
   quantitative bounds on delay and error rates guaranteed end-to-end.  
   While it is very likely that an initial attempt at providing this 
   kind of service will specify only a particular ingress and egress 
   border, for robustness and flexibility it will be desirable to have 
   a network that can support such service without such limitations.  
   The Intserv approach, as opposed to the DiffServ architecture, would 
   require too much per flow and overhead information in the core 
   network and not be scaleable [10].  A DiffServ type architecture, 
   with a limited number of service classes, could be pre-provisioned, 
   and as network circumstances warranted, be modified to support the 
   actual dynamics of the network. 
    
   The high level functional requirements for edge routers has been 
   quite well defined in the DiffServ architecture, but the true scope 
   of the effort to implement this functionality has not been well 
   recognized.  While interesting differences exist between the QoS 
   architecture of the Internet and the circuit switched network used 
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              12 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   for telecommunications much of the lessons learned in 
   telecommunications should, even if they might do little else, 
   provide some insight into the level of effort needed to implement 
   these kinds of requirements.  Ironically, given the Internet 
   community in the past has rejected the level of standardization that 
   was proposed for management of telecommunications networks, it may 
   be the full service internet where it becomes actually imperative 
   that such requirements be completed if the desired services will 
   ever be offered. 
    
  9. Common QoS Functional Areas 
    
   The management of QoS will need to provide functionality to the 
   application and/or at the access, at the core, and at the boundaries 
   to administrative regions.  
    
   QoS traffic functions will need to include admission control, 
   authentication and authorization, and billing.  Verification that 
   traffic is within agreed parameters and programmatic interfaces to 
   advise when the service is outside the agreed limits.  Interfaces 
   that provide service verification, fault notification, and re-
   instantiation and termination will also be necessary. 
    
   Core functions will include traffic engineering, network device 
   configuration, fault detection, and recovery.  Network devices will 
   need to inform the management system of their available resources 
   and the management system will need to tell devices how and where to 
   forward data. 
    
   Between administrative regions accounting, service signaling, 
   service verification will be needed.  At the administrative 
   boundaries of the network functions similar to those provided at the 
   edge will be necessary.  Peer entities in different administrative 
   domains would signal their needs across the boundary.  Verification 
   at the boundary could then occur consistent with the verification at 
   the edge.  Actual traffic through the boundaries could be measured 
   and billing information be transferred between the domains.  The 
   central management function would be responsible for re-routing 
   traffic in the event of a failure or to better utilize the existing 
   network resources. 
    
    
  10.    Summary 
    
   The paradigm for service management in IP networks has been adopted 
   from that of telecommunications networks.  Basic differences between 
   the service models of these networks call into question if this is 
   realistic.  Further analysis is needed to determine what is the 
   proper paradigm for IP service management and to define a common 
   vocabulary for it.  
    
 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              13 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
   The IP community is currently very active in solving problems 
   relating to transport QoS issues.  These activities are illustrated 
   by the work of the Diffserv, Intserv, and Policy working groups.  In 
   contrast not enough effort is being focused on service issues 
   relating to applications.  The present solution is for applications 
   to build in their own service management functionality.  This is 
   often an inefficient use of network resources, but more importantly 
   will not provide for access to transport level services and the 
   functionality that only those services will offer.   
    
   The IP community needs to focus on adding service functionality that 
   is flexible enough to be molded to specific application needs, yet 
   will have assess to transport information that will be necessary to 
   provide superior application functionality.  Principal needs to be 
   addressed relate to developing transport level services for billing 
   and security.  Directory services and extending the work done to 
   define AAA services are promising starting points for developing 
   this needed functionality. 
    
  11.    Authors 
    
   Michael Eder 
     Nokia Research Center 
     5 Wayside Road 
     Burlington,  MA  01803 
     Phone:    +1-781-993-3636 
     Fax:      +1-781-993-1907 
     E-mail:   Michael.eder@nokia.com 
    
   Sid Nag 
     PO Box 104 
     Holmdel, NJ 07733 
     Phone:    +1-732-687-1762 
     E-mail:   thinker@monmouth.com 
      
   Hemant Chaskar 
     Nokia Research Center 
     5 Wayside Road 
     Burlington,  MA  01803 
     Phone:    +1-781-993-3785 
     Fax:      +1-781-993-1907 
     E-mail:   hemant.chaskar@nokia.com 









 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              14 
    

 
 
IP Service Management in the QoS Network         expires January, 2002 
 
    
  12.    References 
 
                     
   [1]   Laurent Mathy, Christopher Edwards, David Hutchison, "The 
   Internet: A Global Telecommunications Solution?", IEEE Network, 
   July/August 2000. 
    
   [2]   Barry M. Leiner, Vinton G. Cerf, et. al., ôA Brief History of 
   the Internetö version 3.31, revised 4 Aug 2000 
     
   [3]   J. Strassner and E. Ellesson, "Terminology for describing 
   network policy and services", draft-ietf-policy-terms-02.txt, June 
   1999. 
    
   [4]   Yoram Bernet, "The Complementary Roles of RSVP and 
   Differentiated Services in the Full-Service QoS Network", IEEE 
   Communications Magazine, February 2000 
    
   [5]   Recommendation M.3010 (02/00) - Principles for a 
   telecommunications management network, ITU-T 
    
   [6]   Recommendation M.3100 (07/95) - Generic network information 
   model, ITU-T 
     
   [7]   B. Moore, et. al., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 
   1 Specification", IETF, RFC 3060, February 2001 
    
   [8]   Van Jacobson, Differentiated Services for the Internet, 
   Internet2 Joint Applications/Engineering QoS Workshop 
     
   [9]   K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, L. Zhang, A Two-bit Differentiated 
   Services Architecture for the Internet, RFC 2638, July 1999 
     
   [10]  Mankin, A., Baker, F., Braden, R., O'Dell, M., Romanow, A., 
   Weinrib, A. and L. Zhang, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) 
   Version 1 Applicability Statement", RFC 2208, September 1997. 














 
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar                                              15 
    
