

 Internet Engineering Task Force                             SIPPING WG 
 Internet Draft                                              D. Trossen 
                                                         Nokia Research 
                                                         H. Schulzrinne 
                                                    Columbia University 
 draft-trossen-sipping-ondemand-01.txt                  24. August 2004 
                                                     Expires: Feb. 2005 
 
 
          Ad-hoc Access Authorization for SIP Event Subscriptions 
 
 
 Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All rights reserved. 
    
 Abstract 
    
   A target or presentity may want to temporarily allow limited access 
   to its location or presence information to a third party. We will 
   describe in this document use cases and solutions (focusing on the 
   delivery of geospatial information and presence). We will further 
   outline the relation to ongoing SIMPLE and GEOPRIV work. 
 
 









     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February  2005                     [1] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
 Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................3 
   2. Terminology.....................................................3 
   3. Use Cases.......................................................4 
   3.1. Enhanced Location Services....................................5 
   3.2. Context-aware News Service....................................5 
   3.3. Service Discovery in Visitor Environment......................5 
   3.4. Match Making Service..........................................5 
   3.5. Context-aware Gaming..........................................5 
   4. Design Alternatives and Relation to SIMPLE and GEOPRIV Work.....6 
   4.1. Data Push.....................................................6 
   4.2. Policy Conveyance via Rule Holder or directly to SIP Event 
   Server.............................................................7 
   4.3. Policy Conveyance from Rule Maker to Subscriber...............7 
   5. Protocol for Policy Conveyance Within Subscriptions.............8 
   5.1. Conveyance of Authorization Policy towards Subscriber.........8 
   5.2. Subscriber Generation of SUBSCRIBE Requests...................8 
   5.3. Notifier Processing of SUBSCRIBE Requests.....................9 
   6. Open Issues.....................................................9 
   7. Security Considerations.........................................9 
   8. Acknowledgements...............................................10 
   9. References.....................................................10 
   10. Authors' Addresses............................................10 


























     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [2] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Access authorization for SIP event subscriptions is crucial due to 
   the highly private nature of information revealed in the resulting 
   notifications, e.g., all presence subscriptions must be authorized 
   by the presentity. Work is currently ongoing within the SIMPLE and 
   GEOPRIV working groups to define, manage and convey authorization 
   policies for resource information such as geospatial information [1] 
   and presence [8].  
    
   The policy documents envisioned in [1] are based on a three-step 
   process. In the first step, the target or presentity composes a set 
   of rules. In the model noted, these rules are encoded as a sequence 
   of XML elements, each element representing a rule allowing 
   comparison by user identity, time of day and other factors. These 
   rules are, as a second step, uploaded to the presence agent  
   (PA) or location server (LS). Since they have similar roles, we 
   refer to this entity as a PA/LS. The protocol for uploading might be 
   XCAP [9], among other choices. In the final step, the rules are 
   applied when subscriptions arrive and when a notification is 
   generated for a particular watcher. 
    
   It is important to note that policy documents may allow anonymous 
   access, i.e., access that does not depend on the querier or 
   subscriber to identify itself. In this document however, we are only 
   concerned with identity-dependent access, i.e., where access depends 
   on the identity of the entity requesting the information. 
    
   Most of the discussions for authorization have assumed long-term 
   relationships between the entities requesting information and the 
   target or presentity. However, there is a class of applications 
   where the presentity or target wishes to grant temporary and limited 
   access to its data to services. In this, the service might require a 
   single or more than one sample of the location or presence 
   information to perform its function. These services might transform 
   the presence or location data into more useful renditions or use it 
   to provide services that have little to do with presence or 
   location. Section 3 discusses some examples of these services. 
    
   Several design alternatives are possible to tackle the above 
   outlined problem of temporarily granting access to presence or 
   location information. Section 4 discusses these design alternatives 
   and their relation to the currently ongoing work in the SIMPLE and 
   GEOPRIV working groups. While there exist solutions for most of 
   these design alternatives, we present in Section 5 a particular 
   solution for one of the design alternatives. 
    
2. Terminology 
    
   Resource:  A resource in the scope of this document is an object to  
      which a certain state information is associated, called æresource    
      dataÆ in the remainder of the document. Examples are presence as  
      a resource belonging to the presentity. The resource data is the  
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [3] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
      current presence information (subject to the particular  
      disclosure policy of the presentity). Resources can also be  
      associated to devices, such as printers, in which the resource  
      data represents, for instance, the current state of the printer.  
      In the context of the SIP event framework, the resource state is  
      abstracted with SIP events and hosted at particular SIP event  
      servers. 
    
   Resource owner:  An entity that has authorization power over the  
      particular resource data. Examples are presentities in SIP  
      presence or rule makers as introduced in [1]. 
    
   Information generator: An entity that determines or gathers resource  
      data for a particular resource. Examples are publishers in SIP  
      presence or location generators in GEOPRIV [1]. 
    
3. Use Cases 
    
   With the defined terminology of Section 2, consider that a 
   subscriber S desires access to a particular resource D (or 
   particular parts of the resource), such as presence or geospatial 
   location information, at a particular SIP event server. In this, the 
   desire for access is somehow conveyed from the subscriber towards 
   the resource owner A. The desired access can be time-limited or 
   limited in notifications (such as time window based, one-time or N-
   time notifications).  
    
   The following additional constraints might occur: 
     * The identity of the subscriber might not be known to the  
       resource owner before the desire for access is conveyed towards  
       the resource owner.  
     * The type of access, i.e., the resource as such as well as the  
       resource data, might not be known to the resource owner before  
       the desire for access is conveyed towards the resource owner. 
     * The conveyance of the desire to access the resource data and the  
       actual access might lie within a rather short time window.  
    
   The problem to be solved is to enable an authorized access to the 
   desired resource by the subscriber at the SIP event server. It is 
   worth mentioning that such authorized access is not restricted to 
   currently discussed presence items only rather than to any kind of 
   (future) presence items or SIP events in general. 
    
   Further note that it is beyond the scope of this document as to how 
   the subscriber conveys the desire for access to the resource owner. 
   A variety of methods, such as within an HTTP or SOAP transaction 
   between subscriber and resource owner (see also the following use 
   cases), are possible for such conveyance.  
    
   In the following, use cases are presented as examples for such 
   temporary access to resource information.  
    

     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [4] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
3.1. Enhanced Location Services 
    
   Consider the provisioning of location-based services from a service 
   provider (the subscriber S) to a user (the resource owner A).  
    
   As an example, Alice would like a mapping service S to create a map 
   that plots her trajectory for a limited time period, For this, S 
   needs access to location data, but only for a limited time. 
    
3.2. Context-aware News Service 
    
   Alice subscribes to a news service that delivers news items adapted 
   to her current activity, mood and location. In order to perform the 
   adaptation, the news provider S needs to access particular presence 
   items for the time of the news delivery (which can be rather 
   temporary in cases where the content was found during surfing the 
   Internet).   
    
3.3. Service Discovery in Visitor Environment 
    
   Alice would like to discover services in a visitor environment 
   (i.e., Alice and the discovery system most likely do not have an 
   existing trust relationship), the service selection depending on her 
   location, activity, currently used communication devices and other 
   information. In order to perform the appropriate (context-aware) 
   filtering of available services, the discovery agent requires access 
   to AliceÆs information, such as presence or location. 
    
3.4. Match Making Service 
    
   Alice temporarily subscribes to a match making service (e.g., within 
   an amusement park or bar) that alerts its customers if two or more 
   compatible individuals are in close proximity. In order to perform 
   the desired match making, the match making service provider might 
   require access to certain user information, such as location within 
   the point of interest (if the place is larger) or current activity.  
    
3.5. Context-aware Gaming 
    
   Mobile games combine players moving about in the real world with 
   computer-mediated interaction. Such games require rich presence 
   information, including sensor data representing activities (such as 
   æstandingÆ or æwalkingÆ) and current location. All players have to 
   be able to subscribe to the location of, say, their teammates. Such 
   games could be established between a-priori unknown parties (ad-hoc 
   gaming in point-of-interest for instance) but could also require a-
   priori unknown set of information from either player. 
    
   Hence, upon starting the game, each player requires access 
   authorization for this particular set of information from each of 
   the other players for the duration of the game (if the duration of 
   the game is unknown, the authorization can be renewed before 
   expiring).  
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [5] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
    
4. Design Alternatives and Relation to SIMPLE and GEOPRIV Work 
    
   As said in the introduction, different design alternatives exist to 
   tackle the problem of temporarily granting access to presence or 
   location information. This section outlines these design 
   alternatives in the context of ongoing SIMPLE and GEOPRIV work in 
   the area of access authorization for SIP events.  
    
   The following picture outlines the relation of the different design 
   alternatives to this ongoing work. For this, we use the GEOPRIV 
   architecture as introduced in [1]. However, for the sake of 
   generality the entities are named independent of the particular 
   resource data, i.e., the information generator equals the location 
   generator in [1], while the SIP event server equals the location 
   server and the SIP event subscriber the location recipient in [1]. 
   The SIP event subscriber in this figure is similar to the service 
   provider in the use cases. 
            
             +---------------------------------------------+ 
        +----+---+            +----------+                 | 
        |  Rule  |     (2)    |   Rule   |                 |(4) 
        | Maker  +----------->|  Holder  |                 | 
        ++-+---+-+            +----+-----+                 | 
         | |  /|\                  |(2)                    | 
      (3)| |   |                   |                       | 
         V |   |(1)                V                       V  
      +--------+----+         +----------+    (4)    +----------+ 
      | Information |   (3)   | SIP Event|<----------|SIP Event | 
      |  Generator  +-------->|  Server  +---------->|Subscriber| 
      +-------------+         +----------+           +-----+----+ 
           |                                              /|\ 
           +-----------------------------------------------+ 
                                      (1) 
   Figure 1: Design Alternatives And Their Relation to Ongoing Work 
    
   Figure 1 shows four different alternatives to tackle the problem of 
   temporarily granting access to the desired information. These 
   alternatives are discussed in the following. 
    
4.1. Data Push 
    
   In data push mode (alternative (1) in the figure), resource owners 
   do not allow subscriptions at all. Rather, the rule maker simply 
   delivers the desired resource information (after having the 
   information obtained from the information generator), e.g., presence 
   or location data, via, e.g., SIP MESSAGE, to the service provider. 
   This mode offers the presentity/target (P/T) complete control over 
   data delivery, but otherwise has little to recommend it. It requires 
   that the P/T establish an authentication relationship with the 
   service provider so that the service provider can know who is 
   submitting data. The P/T has to guess how often the service provider 
   needs updated data. Finally, this method is not very bandwidth 
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [6] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
   efficient for mobile P/Ts as, e.g., they may need to obtain location 
   data from a location generator and then transport the data again 
   over the same air interface, possibly in multiple copies to multiple 
   service providers. 
    
4.2. Policy Conveyance via Rule Holder or directly to SIP Event Server 
    
   In case (2) of the figure above, the rule maker defines the 
   appropriate authorization policy and conveys it to the rule holder 
   using, e.g., XCAP operations [4] for upload. The authorization 
   policy is then pushed to or pulled by the SIP event server, e.g., 
   using the XCAP event package [5]. Incoming subscriptions then use 
   the available authorization policy information to grant or deny the 
   subscription.  
    
   In case (3) of the figure above, the rule maker is publishing the 
   authorization policy directly to the SIP event server via the 
   information generator. The conveyance from the information generator 
   to the SIP event server usually happens during the publication of 
   the particular information itself to the SIP event server. 
    
   In case of a temporary access, both schemes require additional steps 
   in order to cope with the temporary character of the desired access: 
    
   (1) Create a new identity for the subscriber S or ask S for the  
       identity it wants to use in the subscription to the data. (A may  
       only know S as a web page, so it cannot necessarily guess the  
       user identity.) There does not appear to be a standard protocol  
       for this step. 
    
   (2) Create a policy rule that allows appropriate access for the  
       particular resource information by this identity. 
    
   (3) Create a user-password entry so that S can authenticate itself,  
       e.g., via Digest authentication. The password can be created by  
       S or A, but in either case needs to be exchanged securely. 
    
   (4) Remove the rule when S no longer needs access, to avoid  
       inflating the policy information at the SIP event server and  
       rule holder. 
    
   This approach clearly works, as it corresponds to the normal mode of 
   managing subscribers. However, it incurs significant complexity and 
   is particularly inefficient in mobile environments. 
    
4.3. Policy Conveyance from Rule Maker to Subscriber 
    
   Alternative (4) in the figure above outlines the policy conveyance 
   from the rule maker directly to the subscriber, then to be used in 
   the particular subscription. As a simple solution, the rule maker 
   could send the subscriber a subscription URI that includes the 
   authorization policy, such as  
      sip:alice:Z@example.com  
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [7] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
   where Z is the encrypted authorization policy and alice@example.com 
   is the rule makerÆs URI. The subscriber will use the provided 
   subscriber URI in its subscription. This approach only works if the 
   policy is relatively simple, e.g., a selection of standard data 
   profiles combined with a time limitation. 
    
5. Protocol for Policy Conveyance Within Subscriptions 
    
   The design alternative in Section 4.3 outlined the conveyance of the 
   (temporary) access authorization policy from the rule maker directly 
   to the subscriber. The suggested usage of a subscription URI that 
   includes the (encrypted) policy bears the problem of allowing only 
   simple policies. To overcome this problem, this section outlines a 
   protocol for conveying the particular policy as part of the 
   SUBSCRIBE message body itself. 
    
   The protocol operation is divided into three steps, explained in the 
   following. 
    
5.1. Conveyance of Authorization Policy towards Subscriber 
    
   The first step is concerned with generating and conveying an 
   authorization policy towards the subscriber for the particular 
   information.  
    
   For that, the rule maker, according to Figure 1, generates such 
   authorization rules for the particular pieces of resource 
   information that are desired to be accessed by the subscriber. The 
   rule maker signs the authorization rules description for 
   authenticity and conveys the signed authorization information 
   towards the subscriber. 
    
   It is beyond the scope of this document how the rule maker obtained 
   knowledge as to which information the subscriber desires to 
   subscribe to (usually, certain service interactions with the 
   subscriber will convey such knowledge beforehand, such as web page 
   interactions). Further, the protocol that is used to convey the 
   signed authorization policy from the rule maker to the subscriber is 
   beyond the scope of this document. Candidates for such operation are 
   HTTP or SOAP. 
    
   AUTHOR NOTE: Details of protocol operation, such as for signing, and 
   exact referencing of the XCAP application usages are still missing. 
    
5.2. Subscriber Generation of SUBSCRIBE Requests 
    
   After the subscriber in Figure 1 received the signed authorization 
   policy for the subscription, it will include this authorization 
   policy in future subscriptions according to the provided 
   authorization policy.  
    
   For that, the subscriber will include the signed policy in the 
   message body of the subscription, in addition to event package 
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [8] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
   specific information, such as presence document information, 
   according to RFC 3265 [7] (i.e., using multi-part bodies).  
    
   AUTHOR NOTE: Details of protocol operation, such as inclusion of 
   policy in message bodies, are still missing. 
    
5.3. Notifier Processing of SUBSCRIBE Requests 
    
   The notifier will process incoming SUBSCRIBE requests according to 
   RFC 3265 [7]. If the inclusion of the signed authorization policy in 
   the message body is indicated, the signed policy information is 
   extracted from the body. 
    
   The extracted policy information is then forwarded to the rule 
   holder (see Figure 1). 
    
   The rule holder verifies the signature of the received authorization 
   policy. If the verification has been successful, the authorization 
   policy is deemed valid. The success or failure of the verification 
   is signaled to the notifier, which in turn grants or denies the 
   submission appropriately. 
    
   AUTHOR NOTE: Details of using protocol between notifier and rule 
   holder is missing. Is this in scope of the document? 
    
6. Open Issues 
    
     * Verification Step: Is the protocol between notifier and rule  
       holder for verification purpose within scope of the document?  
       What are candidates for this protocol? 
     * Usage of authorization policy: After the authorization policy  
       was verified by the rule holder, is the answer simply conveyed  
       back to the notifier or is the policy used otherwise. One could  
       see the authorization policy as implicitly defined (and  
       verified) and the rule holder could add the policy to its  
       current policy document. Or we use it for THIS subscription only  
       and discard the policy at the rule holder after verification. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   A solution for the problem described in this document shall allow 
   for granting access in ad-hoc authorization scenarios as described 
   in Section 3.2. In this, any solution should allow for  
     * defining all relevant resource information in the authorization, 
     * tying the access to a particular querier, if so desired by the  
       resource owner, 
     * preventing re-usage of the authorization through the querier or  
       third parties, 
     * preventing disclosure of the authorization to third parties 
     * tying the access to a particular (relative or absolute) time  
       window, if so desired by the resource owner, and 
     * verifying the identity of the resource owner. 
    
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                     [9] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
   These security considerations have been identified and are addressed 
   through the mechanism presented in Section 5. 
    
8. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors would like to thank Dana Pavel for her input. 
    
9. References 
    
   [1]  J. Cuellar et al., "Geopriv Requirements", RFC 3693, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, February 2004. 

   [2]  H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, et al., "Presence information data 
        format (PIDF)", Internet draft, Internet Engineering Task 
        Force, (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [3]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement 
        levels", RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, March 1997. 

   [4]  J. Rosenberg, "The Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
        Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)", Internet Draft, Internet   
        Engineering Task Force, (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [5]  J. Rosenberg, "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event 
        Package for Modification Events for the Extensible Markup 
        Language (XML) Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP) Managed 
        Documents", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
        (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [6]  H. Schulzrinne (ed.), "RPID -- Rich Presence Information Data 
        Format", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, (work 
        in progress), July 2003. 

   [7]  A. Roach, "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event 
        Notification", RFC 3265, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 
        2002. 

   [8]  J. Rosenberg, ôA Presence Event Package for the Session 
        Initiation Protocol (SIP)ö, Internet Draft, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, (work in progress), July 2003. 

   [9]  J. Rosenberg ôThe Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
        Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)ö, Internet Draft, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, (work in progress), February 2004. 

 
10. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Dirk Trossen 
   Nokia Research 
   5 Wayside Road              
   Burlington, MA 02474 USA      
   Email:  dirk.trossen@nokia.com 
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                    [10] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
    
   Henning Schulzrinne 
   Dept. of Computer Science 
   Columbia University 
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue 
   New York, NY 10027 USA 
   Email: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu 
    













































     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                    [11] 
 Internet Draft Ad-hoc Authorization for SIP SUBSCRIBE     August 2004 
    
    
   Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
 
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
     
 Trossen, Schulzrinne   Expires February 2005                    [12] 


