
Geopriv WG                                                   James Polk
Internet-Draft                                       Jonathan Rosenberg
Expires: January 7, 2009                                  Cisco Systems
Intended Status: Standards Track (PS)                      July 7, 2008
Updates: RFC 4119 (if published as an RFC)


         An Extension to the Presence Information Data Format - 
       Location Object (PIDF-LO) for the Timezone of a Presentity
             draft-polk-geopriv-pidf-lo-timezone-element-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).


Abstract

   The Presence Information Data Format - Location Object (PIDF-LO) 
   lacks an indication for the timezone offset of a particular 
   presentity is in.  This document extends the PIDF-LO for including 
   such an XML element.








Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         PIDF-LO Timezone Element               July 2008


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.  Introduction  

   Presence is defined as the ability, willingness and desire to 
   communication across differing devices, media types and services. 
   Presence documents contain information about the presentity that 
   allows a watcher to make a determination about how, if and when to 
   communicate with it.

   One valuable piece of information that watchers can use to make a 
   communications decision is the local time of a presentity. The local
   time is invaluable for giving the watcher a hint about whether the 
   presentity is sleeping, working, commuting, or doing some other 
   activity that typically takes place at a particular time in the 
   local time of the presentity. For example, user Joe is watching user
   Alice, and Joe is in San Francisco. Alice is typically in San 
   Francisco also, but is visiting Europe this week. In the middle of 
   his work day, Joe wants to contact Alice. He sees that her local 
   time is 2am. This gives Joe a strong hint that Alice is probably 
   sleeping, and he probably should not ring her cell phone (which is 
   likely to wake her up).

   The local time for a presentity is directly a function of their 
   timezone. Timezones are themselves intertwined with geolocation, 
   since a timezone is nothing more than a complex polygon overlaid on 
   top of the globe which defines a region in which the local time is 
   invariant.

   One solution is for the watcher to determine, on their own, the 
   local time as a function of the geolocation of the presentity. In 
   our example above, Joe can know, using [RFC4119], that Alice is in 
   "London, England". Joe, as a user, knows that London is 9 hours 
   ahead of California, and so he knows not to place the call. In this 
   solution, there is no need to separately convey the timezone of 
   Alice.

   The problem with that approach is that it relies on a human 
   translation operation that takes the geolocation of a presentity, 
   and determines the timezone offset of that location from the 
   location of the watcher. For savvy users with a good grasp of world 
   geography, users can do this translation function with coarse 
   accuracy (plus or minus a few hours) for major world cities. 
   However, users will not know the timezone for many, many cities in 
   the world. Furthermore, they are unlikely to know it accurately. For
   example, what would Joe do if Alice's location was "Andorra la 
   Vella, Andorra"? Odds are good that Joe has no idea that Andorra is 
   in Europe and is UTC+1.



Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         PIDF-LO Timezone Element               July 2008

   Rather than make users manually figure out local time from civic or 
   geodesic coordinates, it would be valuable for presence documents to
   contain the timezone of the presentity. This would allow a watcher 
   to compare the timezone of the presentity with their own timezone 
   and local time, and then easily render the exact local time of the 
   presentity.

   Since timezone is effectively another form of geolocation, 
   independent of either coordinate or civic location formats, this 
   document proposes a new top-level field in PIDF-LO which contains 
   the timezone, as an offset from GMT.  This new format can be carried
   in the same message as either (or both) existing location formats.


2.  Timestamp verses Timezone Elements in PIDF-LO

   Greenwich Mean Time (or GMT or Zulu time), which the existing 
   <timestamp> element is defined as, lacks a timezone offset 
   Indication [wiki-time].  The above scenarios cannot be addressed 
   using GMT alone.


3. The PIDF-LO Timezone Location Format (Element)

   RFC 4119 extended the PIDF [RFC3863] <status> element with a complex 
   element called <geopriv>.  PIDF-LO also created two major 
   subselements which are encapsulated within <geopriv>: one for 
   location information and one for usage rules.  This document does 
   not affect the usage rules subelement.  The <location-info> element 
   MUST contain one or more directives indicating the XML schema(s) 
   that are used for geographic location formats, according to RFC 
   4119.  This document creates a new, single child element under the 
   <location-info> element that is considered its own location format, 
   effectively lateral to geo-coordinate location and civic location 
   already established within RFC 4119.

   This extension to PIDF-LO creates the <gp:tzOffSet reference="GMT"> 
   element.  This is a simple individual element to solve the problem 
   of understanding which timezone a presentity is in.  It is merely 
   the offset from  GMT time, of where the presentity is currently.  
   Here is the format of the element:

      <gp:tzOffset reference="GMT">+5</gp:tzOffset> 

   The tzOffSet element indicates the reference time standard used by 
   including the ' reference="" ' identifier.  Here we mandate 
   'Greenwich Mean Time', or "GMT", MUST be understood by all entities 
   who support his specification.  Other references MAY be defined in 
   future standards efforts.

   The first character within the element value is a '+' (plus sign) or
   a '-' (minus sign) to indicate the timezone offset in relation to 


Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         PIDF-LO Timezone Element               July 2008

   Greenwich, England.  The offset MUST be positive for those timezones
   east of Greenwich, England, and negative to those west of Greenwich.
   The next character(s) are the integer of offset.  

   For example, if GMT is currently 

      22:07:13 (Greenwich, England time)

   Those on the East Coast of the US 

      18:07:13 (or 6:07pm EDT)

   which is GMT-4.

   Those in the Central Europe Timezone are GMT+1, meaning it is 
   23:07:13 there (in this same example).

   Once the presentity determines it has changed timezones, it MUST 
   refresh its state information with the presence server.

   A full understanding of time on planet earth is a good idea if you 
   want to understand timezones other than in typical hourly 
   increments. Some timezones have 30 minute increments, while other 
   timezones have 15 minute increments to timezones.  This document 
   gives no history or guidance into this.


4.  Security considerations

   This document creates no new security considerations beyond what is 
   already in RFC 4119.


5.  IANA considerations

   TBD


6.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Marc Linsner for help comments made during 
   the formation of this document.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

 [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997




Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         PIDF-LO Timezone Element               July 2008

 [RFC4119] J. Peterson, "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object 
           Format", RFC 4119, December 2005


 [RFC3863] H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, G. Klyne, A. Bateman, W. Carr, J. 
           Peterson, "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)", RFC 
           3863, August 2004

 [wiki-time] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenwich_Mean_Time


7.2.  Informative References

 [RFC3693] J. Cuellar, J. Morris, D. Mulligan, J. Peterson. J. Polk, 
           "Geopriv Requirements", RFC 3693, February 2004


Authors' Addresses

   James Polk
   Cisco Systems
   3913 Treemont Circle
   Colleyville, Texas, USA
   +1.817.271.3552

   mailto: jmpolk@cisco.com


   Jonathan Rosenberg
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Edison, NJ
   USA

   Email: jdrosen@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.jdrosen.net




Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 


Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         PIDF-LO Timezone Element               July 2008

   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
















Polk & Rosenberg       Expires January 7, 2008                 [Page 6]
