


Network Working Group                        Tomonori Takeda (Editor)
Internet Draft                                                    NTT
Proposed Status: Informational
Expires: March 2006                                    September 2005


               Applicability analysis of GMPLS protocols
                  to Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks

                 draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other
   than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
   accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document provides an applicability analysis on the use of
   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and
   mechanisms to satisfy the requirements of Layer 1 Virtual Private
   Networks (L1VPNs).

   In addition, this document identifies areas where additional
   protocol extensions or procedures are needed to satisfy the
   requirements of L1VPNs, and provides guidelines for potential
   extensions.


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 1]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



Contents

   1.     Contributors .............................................  3
   2.     Terminology ..............................................  3
   3.     Introduction .............................................  3
   3.1.   Work Items ...............................................  4
   3.2.   Existing Solution Drafts .................................  4
   4.     General Guidelines .......................................  5
   5.     Applicability to Management-based Service Model ..........  6
   5.1.   Overview of the Service Model ............................  6
   5.2.   Applicability of Existing Solutions ......................  6
   5.3.   Additional Work Area(s) ..................................  6
   6.     Applicability to Signaling-based Service Model (Basic
          Mode)  ...................................................  8
   6.1.   Overlay Service Model ....................................  8
   6.1.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................  8
   6.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ......................  9
   6.1.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 10
   7.     Applicability to Signaling and Routing Service Model
          (Enhanced Mode) .......................................... 13
   7.1.   Overlay Extension Service Model .......................... 13
   7.1.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 13
   7.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 13
   7.1.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 13
   7.2.   Virtual Node Service Model ............................... 14
   7.2.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 14
   7.2.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 15
   7.2.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 15
   7.3.   Virtual Link Service Model ............................... 16
   7.3.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 16
   7.3.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 16
   7.3.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 16
   7.4.   Per-VPN Peer Service Model ............................... 17
   7.4.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 17
   7.4.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 17
   7.4.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 17
   8.     Management Aspects ....................................... 19
   8.1.   Fault Management ......................................... 19
   8.2.   Configuration Management ................................. 19
   8.3.   Security Management ...................................... 20
   9.     Discussion ............................................... 20
   10.    Security Considerations .................................. 22
   11.    IANA Considerations ...................................... 22
   12.    Acknowledgement .......................................... 22
   13.    Normative References ..................................... 23
   14.    Informative References ................................... 23
   15.    Authors' Addresses ....................................... 25
   Appendix I: Network Usage of L1VPN Service Models ............... 26


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 2]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   Intellectual Property Considerations ............................ 27
   Full Copyright Statement ........................................ 27

1. Contributors

   The details of this document are the result of contributions from
   several authors who are listed here in alphabetic order. Contact
   details for these authors can be found in a separate section near
   the end of this document.

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Adrian Farrel (Old Dog Consulting)
   Hamid Ould-Brahim (Nortel Networks)
   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Tomonori Takeda (NTT)

2. Terminology

   The reader is assumed to be familiar with the terminology in
   [RFC3031], [RFC3209], [RFC3471], [RFC3473], [GMPLS-RTG], [RFC4026]
   and [L1VPN-FW].

3. Introduction

   This document shows the applicability of existing Generalized
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and mechanisms to
   Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks (L1VPNs). In addition, this document
   identifies several areas where additional protocol extensions or
   modifications are needed to meet the L1VPN service requirements set
   out in [L1VPN-FW].

   In particular, this document shows section by section (from section 5
   to 7) the applicability of GMPLS protocols and mechanisms to each
   L1VPN service model mentioned in [L1VPN-FW], along with additional
   work areas needed to fully support the requirements for each service
   model. Note that management aspects, some of which are common over
   various service models, are described separately in section 8.
   
   Additional, non-normative information regarding network usage of
   L1VPN service models is provided in the appendix.

   Note that discussion in this document is limited to areas where GMPLS
   protocols and mechanisms are relevant.

   As will be described in this document, support of the
   Management-based service model, the Signaling-based service model,
   the Overlay Extension service model and the Virtual Node service
   model are well covered by existing documents, with only minor
   protocol extensions required. The Virtual Link service model and the


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 3]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   Per-VPN Peer service model are not explicitly covered by existing
   documents, but can be realized by extending current GMPLS protocols
   and mechanisms as described in this document.

   Also, as will be described, the following are possible work areas
   where additional work may be required to fully support the
   requirements for each L1VPN service model. Some of the requirements
   are optional therefore the additional work is also optional. Also,
   some items below may have more than one existing mechanism (with
   possible extensions). For those items, the required work is to choose
   the minimum set of mechanisms.

   Commonalities of mechanisms over various service models need to be
   considered. Also, various mechanisms should be coordinated in such a
   way that services are provided in a fully functional manner.

3.1. Work Items

   This list of additional work areas is a summary derived from the main
   body of this document. The list will be updated in later versions of
   this document along with the development of the additional or
   enhanced requirements and increased understanding of the issues. As
   work progresses on protocol extensions, it is expected that this list
   will be updated to remove completed items, and the body of this
   document will be updated to describe the analysis of protocol
   extensions.

   o MIB module for SPC
   o Resource management per VPN
   o Signaling mechanisms
   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network
   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network
   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE
   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE
   o Routing representation (how a VPN should be represented in routing,
     e.g., single area, multi area, multi AS)
   o Control plane routing (routing information exchange related to
     control plane topology, per-VPN control packet routing)
   o Signaling and routing for support of the Per-VPN Peer service model
   o Management aspects (fault management, configuration management,
     security management)
   o MIB modules for protocol extensions

3.2. Existing Solutions Drafts

   This section lists existing solutions documents that describe how
   L1VPNs may be constructed using the mechanisms of GMPLS. This
   document draws on those solutions and explains their applicability
   and suggests further extensions to make the solutions more closely


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 4]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   match the framework described in [L1VPN-FW]. Further solutions
   documents may be listed in a future version of this document.

   o [GVPN] describes a suite of port-based Provider-provisioned VPN
     services called Generalized VPNs (GVPNs) that use BGP for VPN
     auto-discovery and GMPLS as a signaling mechanism.

   o [GMPLS-UNI] addresses the application of GMPLS to the overlay
     model. The document provides a description of how the overlay model
     may be used to support VPN connections across a core GMPLS network.

4. General Guidelines

   This section provides general guidelines for L1VPN solutions. Note
   that applicability to specific service models will be separately
   described in following sections.

   One important general guideline is that protocol mechanisms should be
   re-used where possible. This means that solutions should be
   incremental, building on existing protocol mechanisms rather than
   developing wholly new protocols. Further, as service models are
   extended or developed resulting in the requirement for additional
   functionalities, deltas should be added to the protocol mechanisms
   rather than developing new techniques. [L1VPN-FW] describes how the
   service models can be seen to provide "cascaded" functionality, and
   this should be leveraged to achieve re-use of protocol extensions so
   that, for example, it is highly desirable that the same signaling
   protocols and extensions are used in both the Signaling-based service
   model and the Signaling and Routing service model.

   In addition, the following are general guidelines.

   - The support of L1VPNs should not necessitate any change to core (P)
     devices. Therefore, any protocol extensions made to facilitate
     L1VPNs need to be made in a backward compatible way allowing GMPLS
     aware P devices to continue to function.
   - Customer (C) devices not directly involved in providing L1VPN
     services should also be protected from protocol extensions made to
     support L1VPNs. Again, such protocol extensions need to be backward
     compatible. Note however, that some L1VPN service models allow for
     VPN connectivity between C devices rather than between CE devices:
     in this case, the C devices may need to be aware of protocol
     extensions.
   - It should be considered to minimize the protocol extensions on CE
     devices.
   - Solutions should be scalable and manageable. Solutions should not
     require L1VPN state to be maintained on the P devices.
   - Solutions should be secure. Providers should be able to screen and
     protect information based on their operational policies.


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 5]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   - Solutions should provide an operational view of the L1VPN for the
     customer and provider. There should be a common operational and
     management perspective in regard to other (L2 and L3) VPN services.

   Note that some deployments may wish to support multiple L1 connection
   types (such as VC3, VC4, etc.) at the same time. Specific
   functionalities may need to be considered for these scenarios. This
   is for further study.

5. Applicability to Management-based Service Model

5.1. Overview of the Service Model

   The customer and the provider communicate via a management interface.
   The provider management system(s) communicate with the PE/P to set up
   a connection.

   Note that in this service model the PE-PE connections may be signaled
   using GMPLS under management control at the ingress PE, or may be
   statically provisioned through management control of the PEs and
   Ps. Thus, it remains appropriate to describe signaling and routing
   mechanisms within this service model.

5.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   SNMP MIB modules are one way to realize connection
   setup/deletion/modification from the management system(s). In
   particular, GMPLS-LSR-STD-MIB [LSR MIB] can control static
   connections, while GMPLS-TE-STD-MIB [TE MIB] can control signaled
   connections.

   As indicated in [L1VPN-FW], the specification of interface(s)
   between management system(s) (i.e. customer and provider) is out of
   the scope of this document.

5.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Management-based Service Model.

   o MIB module for SPC (Soft Permanent Connection)

     The notion of an SPC only applies if the PE-PE connection is
     signaled.

     There are no required extensions to the MIB modules to support the
     static parts of the connections (CE-PE links) since they can be
     managed as normal static links using [LSR-MIB].



T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 6]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     For the signaled part of the connection (PE-PE), the ingress and
     egress PEs need to know which (static) CE-PE TE links to use. This
     information can be carried to the egress PE using egress control
     [EGRESS-CONTROL], but needs to be configurable at the ingress PE.
     There are two alternatives.

     Option1: MIB module extension

        Define two new MIB objects as part of the specification of the
        TE LSP [TE-MIB] to specify the ingress and egress CE-PE TE links
        to be used.

     Option2: MIB object usage extension

        Use the current MIB objects, but define new, extended meanings.
        There are two possible ways to do this.
        
        (1) Set the mplsTunnelIngressLSRId in the mplsTunnelTable (that
            corresponds to the Tunnel Sender Address in the Sender
            Template object of RSVP-TE) to the ingress CE-PE TE link
            address. Set the mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the final
            MplsTunnelHopEntry in the mplsTunnelHopTable to the egress
            CE-PE TE link address.

        (2) Set the mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the first MplsTunnelHopEntry
            in the mplsTunnelHopTable to the ingress CE-PE TE link
            address. This may require a new mplsTunnelHopAddrType value
            to be defined in order to give precise meaning. Set the
            mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the final MplsTunnelHopEntry in the
            mplsTunnelHopTable to the egress CE-PE TE link address.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Resource management per VPN

     In the Management-based service model, the data plane may be
     managed to create two optional functional requirements.

     - Resource management to create a dedicated per-VPN data plane. The
       provider network partitions link resources per-VPN for exclusive
       use by a particular VPN.
     - Resource management to share part of the data plane among a
       specific sub-set of VPNs. The provider network assigns link
       resources to a specific sub-set of VPNs.

     The default behavior, without this option, is that all resources
     are available for use by any VPN.

     If either of these options are applied with a statically managed


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 7]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     PE-PE connection then the required function is a matter for policy
     within the network management tool for the core network. No
     extensions are required.

     There are two alternatives to achieve this function for signaled
     PE-PE connections.

     Option 1: Policy

        A simple way to meet this requirement is to implement resource
        management functionalities as a policy solely in the entity that
        computes a path. No protocol extensions are needed because links
        and resources can be explicitly configured using [TE-MIB] and
        signaled using [RFC3473].

        This scheme is especially effective when path computation is
        done in a centralized manner (e.g., in the management system(s))
        and is similar to the policy applied to achieve these functional
        options using statically configures PE-PE connections.

     Option 2: Routing extension

        The other alternative is advertise the amount of resources
        available to each VPN using extensions to the TE information
        flooding performed by the routing protocol within the core
        provider network.

        In this scheme, the PE/P can compute a path in a distributed
        way, thus this scheme is especially beneficial in the case of
        dynamic restoration (restoration that does not reserve backup
        resources in advance).

        Note that link coloring might be used for this purpose, but this
        would eliminate the opportunity to use link coloring for other
        purposes (e.g., link coloring within VPNs).

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Other considerations

     When path computation is done in a centralized entity (e.g.,
     management system(s)), it is important that resource information is
     synchronized between the core provider network and such an entity.

6. Applicability to Signaling-based Service Model (Basic Mode)

6.1. Overlay Service Model

6.1.1. Overview of the Service Model


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 8]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



   In this service model, there is no routing exchange between the CE
   and the PE. Connections are setup by GMPLS signaling between the CE
   and the PE, and then across the provider network.

   Note that routing operates within the provider network and may be
   used by PEs to exchange information specific to the VPNs supported by
   the provider network.

6.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The following are required in this service model.

   - VPN membership information exchange: CE-PE TE link address exchange
     between PEs, along with information associated with a VPN. The TE
     link addresses may be customer assigned private addresses.
   - Signaling: CE-CE LSP setup, deletion and modification
   - Others: Resource management per VPN etc.

   [GVPN] and [GMPLS-UNI] cover most of the requirements.

   Specifically, [GVPN] covers VPN membership information exchange by
   BGP running on the PEs. Customer assigned private addresses for
   customer site CEs are configured on the PE that provides VPN access
   to the customer site, and are exchanged by BGP along with a
   provider network address (which is reachable in the provider
   network's routing) and an ID associated with the VPN (i.e., Route
   Target). This allows PEs to perform address translation/mapping and
   connectivity restriction.

   The other possibility is to use IGP based VPN membership information
   exchange (e.g., similar to as an AS external route, or based on
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR], with extensions for VPN applications).

   In addition, [GVPN] and [GMPLS-UNI] suggest two signaling mechanisms
   for VPN connections.

   o Shuffling [GVPN]

     Information carried in RSVP-TE messages identifying a LSP (i.e.,
     SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE objects) is translated by the ingress
     and egress PE. There is one end-to-end session (i.e., CE-CE), but
     the identifiers of that session change along the path of the LSP.

   o Nesting [GVPN][GMPLS-UNI][LSP HIER]

     When Path message arrives at the ingress PE, the ingress PE checks
     whether there is appropriate PE-PE connectivity. If there is
     not, it initiates a PE-PE FA-LSP. The CE-CE LSP is carried nested


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006               [Page 9]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     hierarchically within the FA-LSP. There are two sessions (i.e.,
     CE-CE and PE-PE).

     LSP stitching [STITCHING] operates in a similar manner to LSP
     nesting. The properties of the PE-PE LSP segment are such that
     exactly one end-to-end LSP can be stitched to the LSP segment i.e.,
     the PE-PE LSP and the CE-CE LSP correspond exactly one to one.
     There are two sessions (i.e., CE-CE and PE-PE).

   LMP [LMP] may be running between a CE and a PE. In that case, the PE
   is able to obtain customer assigned private addresses on directly
   attached CEs automatically. This eliminates configuring manually the
   customer assigned private addresses on PEs, which are distributed by
   membership information exchange mechanisms.

6.1.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Overlay service model.

   o Signaling mechanisms

     As described in section 6.1.2, [GMPLS-UNI] and [GVPN] suggest
     two signaling mechanisms for VPN connections.

     Option 1: Shuffling

        In this mechanism, objects need to be translated at the ingress
        and egress PEs. It is necessary to specify rules for this
        translation and mechanisms to ensure that the information is
        available in order to perform the translation.

     Option 2: Nesting

        In this mechanism, there is a need to set up a PE-PE FA-LSP.

        In the case of nesting, PE-PE direct signaling message exchange
        takes place, and this message exchange may use the provider
        network addressing space, or the VPN addressing space. It may be
        necessary to specify an addressing space to be used.

        When the provider network addressing space is used, there must
        be a mechanism to identify which VPN each message is associated
        with at PEs. Otherwise, the PE received the message is not able
        to proceed the message furthermore (i.e., session
        identification, and next hope resolution). This mechanism needs
        to be specified.

        When the VPN addressing space is used by forming per-VPN control


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 10]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


        channels between PEs, the identification of VPN is
        straightforward. However, the mechanisms to realize per-VPN
        control channels need to be specified (e.g., IP-based tunnel,
        physically separate control channels).

     Detailed analysis, including under which condition signaling
     mechanisms (shuffling or nesting) should be used, is for further
     study.

   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network

     As described in section 6.1.2, there are two existing mechanisms
     for the functional option of exchanging VPN membership information
     within the provider network. This model does not support VPN
     membership exchange between CE and PE (see section 7.1) and so such
     information is assumed to be configured within the provider
     network, usually on the PEs.

     Option 1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] specifies a BGP-based mechanism to realize VPN membership
        information exchange between PEs without informing core Ps.
        Configuration of this information is performed at the PEs that
        provide access to a VPN. There is no additional work required,
        except to update [GVPN] for detailed specification of format and
        encoding.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        OSPF allows AS external routes to be advertised. In addition,
        [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] extends OSPF-TE to advertise a router's local
        addresses. These mechanisms can be used to advertise CE-PE TE
        link addresses within the core provider network. In order to
        support customer assigned private addresses and connectivity
        restrictions, this mechanism needs to be extended to exchange
        information similar to an RT (Route Target) and possibly an RD
        (Route Distinguisher), along with CE-PE TE link addresses.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Resource management per VPN

     Section 5.2 describes how provider network resources can be
     partitioned for use by a single VPN or a sub-set of VPNs. Note that
     in option 1 of section 5.2, when path computation is done in a
     separate entity, the interface to the PCE (Path Computation
     Element) [PCE ARCH] may need to be extended for VPN identification.

     Note also that it is also possible to apply resource partitioning


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 11]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     in the CEs and on the CE-PE links in this model. It will be
     necessary, however, to ensure consistent configuration through the
     network management tools of both the customer and provider
     equipment to provide this function.

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network

     In the Signaling-based service model, it may be useful to consider
     not only TE link information within the provider network (PE-P,
     PE-PE TE links), but also remote CE-PE TE link information in path
     computation. This prevents connection setup failure due to lack of
     resources on remote CE-PE TE links. Therefore, CE-PE TE link
     information should be optionally propagated within the provider
     network to be used for path computation.

     There are two alternatives for this.

     Option1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] describes potential use of BGP for exchanging CE-PE TE
        link information. Detailed protocol specifications are needed as
        additional work. This option is consistent with the BGP-based
        membership exchange described above.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        An alternative is to use IGP to advertise CE-PE TE links. Since
        a CE does not participate in routing protocol exchange with the
        provider network, TE link information must be properly
        constructed by the PE advertising full CE-PE TE link
        information. This option is consistent with the IGP-based
        membership exchange described above.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Other considerations

     Note, there could be a L1VPN solution where connectivity
     restriction, address translation/mapping etc. are performed not in
     PEs, but in other entities, such as a centralized policy server. In
     this case, the interface between the PE and the other entity may
     need to be specified. This could utilize existing mechanisms such
     as COPS or LDAP.

     Also note that [GVPN] assumes that a PE and a CE communicate using
     separate control channels for each VPN (i.e., a CE-PE control
     channel is not shared by multiple VPNs). As described above, this
     facilitates easy separation of VPN signaling messages, but is
     achieved at the cost of extra configuration at the CE and PE. If


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 12]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     a shared control channel is desired in the [GVPN] solution,
     additional mechanisms such as VPN identification within signaling
     messages, may be required.

7. Applicability to Signaling and Routing Service Model (Enhanced Mode)

7.1. Overlay Extension Service Model

7.1.1. Overview of the Service Model

   This service model is a slight extension from the Overlay service
   model (section 6.1) and may assume all of the requirements, solutions
   and work items for that model.

   In this service model, a CE receives from its attached PEs a list of
   TE link addresses to which it can request a VPN connection (a list of
   CE addresses within the same VPN).

   The CE may also receive some of TE information concerning these CE-PE
   links within the VPN (e.g., switching type).

   The CE does not receive any of the following from the PE

   - Routing information about the core provider network
   - Information about P device addresses.
   - Information about P-P, PE-P or PE-PE TE links.
   - Routing information about other customer sites. The CE may have
     access to routing information about the remainder of the  VPN
     (C-C and CE-C links) but this is exchanged by control plane
     tunneling on the CE-CE connections and is not passed to the CE in
     the control plane exchange between PE and CE.

7.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The following are required in this service model.

   - VPN membership information exchange between a CE and PE
   - CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE

   [GVPN] covers the requirement to exchange membership information
   between the CE and the PE by BGP for overlay extension.

   The other possibility is to use IGP based VPN membership information
   exchange (e.g., similar to as an AS external route, or based on
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR], with extensions for VPN applications). 

7.1.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 13]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



     As described in section 7.1.2, there are two existing mechanisms
     based on which VPN membership information exchange is realized.

     Option 1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] suggests a BGP-based mechanism to realize VPN membership
        information exchange between a CE and a PE.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        OSPF allows AS external routes to be advertised. In addition,
        [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] extends OSPF-TE to advertise a router's local
        addresses. These mechanisms can be used to advertise CE-PE TE
        link addresses between a CE and a PE.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE

     As just mentioned [GVPN] suggests a BGP-based mechanism to realize
     VPN membership information exchange. Such a mechanism does not
     extend well to carrying additional TE information about the CE-PE
     link either between PEs or between PE and CE because it is
     generally agreed that BGP should not be used to transport TE
     information.

     However, there is no reason in principle why specific, tightly
     specified extensions should not be used to transport this
     additional information within the limited context of the L1VPN.

     An alternative is to use an IGP mechanism to distribute this
     information. [GVPN] does not constrain the CE-PE routing protocol
     to be BGP, so this option could be used in either of the options
     listed for membership exchange.

   Note that the additional membership and TE information might be
   considered as superfluous within the core provider network were it to
   be flooded by an IGP to all P devices. An option, in this case might
   be to run a separate instance of the IGP including only the CEs and
   PEs.

   Mechanisms other than routing protocols could be used to exchange
   reachability/TE information between the CE and the PE.

7.2. Virtual Node Service Model

7.2.1. Overview of the Service Model



T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 14]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   In this service model, there is a private routing exchange between
   the CE and the PE, or to be more precise between the CE routing
   protocol and the VPN routing protocol instance running on the PE. The
   provider network is considered as one private node from the
   customer's perspective. The routing information exchanged between the
   CE and the PE includes CE-PE TE link information, CE sites, and may
   include TE links (Forwarding Adjacencies) connecting CEs (or Cs)
   across the provider network as well as control plane topology
   information from CE sites.

7.2.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The followings are required in this service model.

   - VPN routing
   - Signaling: CE-CE LSP setup, deletion, and modification
   - Others: Resource management per VPN etc.

   [GVPN] covers most of the requirements.

   Specifically, [GVPN] handles VPN routing by a per VPN database called
   the GVSI (Generalized Virtual Switching Instance) held in each PE.
   GVSIs are inter-connected by tunnel-based control channels, and
   routing adjacencies are established between them. BGP is used for
   auto-discovery of remote GVSIs (VPN auto-discovery) in the same VPN.
   GVSIs advertise VPN routing information by using a single ROUTER_ID
   to represent the provider network as one node.

   In addition, [GVPN] supports nested signaling (as in the case of the
   Signaling-based service model).

   There are other ways to realize VPN auto-discovery. One such way is
   to use an IGP-based mechanism (e.g., based on [OSPF-CAP] or
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] with extensions). Other possibilities are to use a
   server based approach (e.g., DNS, based on [DNS DISCOVERY], RADIUS,
   based on [RADIUS DISCOVERY]) and multicast (e.g., based on
   [RFC2917]).

7.2.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Virtual Node service model.

   o Routing representation

     In the Virtual Node service model, one item that should be
     considered is how to represent a VPN in routing (e.g., single IGP
     area, multiple IGP areas, multiple ASes). Depending on the routing
     representation, solution details may differ (e.g., use of


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 15]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     auto-discovery). This requires further discussion.

   o Resource management per VPN

     See section 6.1.3

   o Control plane routing

     An explicit decision must be taken about whether the provider
     network's control plane topology information should be leaked to
     the CE. If it is, it may be necessary to separate the address
     spaces. Further, if control messages (e.g., BGP messages) can be
     transferred between CE sites using the provider network control
     plane, care must be taken over how to route per VPN control packets
     received from the CE.

7.3. Virtual Link Service Model

7.3.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, virtual links are established between PEs. The
   routing information exchanged between the CE and the PE includes
   CE-PE TE links, CE sites, virtual links (i.e., PE-PE links), and may
   include CE-CE (or C-C) Forwarding Adjacencies as well as control
   plane topology from the CE sites.

7.3.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   Currently, there is no solution document for this type of service
   model.

7.3.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   Simple modifications of [GVPN], in addition to enhancements mentioned
   in section 7.2.3, may realize this type of service model.
   Modifications could be:

   - Do NOT modify the ROUTER_ID of the TE link information when
     advertising a CE-PE TE link to the CE (in the OSPF packet header as
     well as in the LSA header).

   - Set up FA-LSPs (GVSI-LSPs in [GVPN] terms) between PEs to construct
     virtual links, and advertise these FAs in VPN routing. Note these
     FAs (virtual links) may be assigned private addresses, which means
     customer assigned addresses (or that customers are allowed to
     configure addresses). This may require extensions to current IGP
     behavior.

   Note there could be other ways to construct virtual links (e.g.,


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 16]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   virtual links without actually setting up a FA-LSP [MRN REQ]).

   There is no additional work area beyond the work already identified
   for the Virtual Node service model mentioned in section 7.2.3, and
   that described above.

   Note that resource management for a dedicated data plane is a
   mandatory requirement for the Virtual Link service model. This could
   be realized by assigning pre-configured FA-LSPs to each VPN routing
   protocol instance (no protocol extensions needed) in order to
   instantiate the necessary FAs.

   Note: as in the case of the Virtual Node service model, solution
   details may differ depending on the routing representation. This
   requires further discussion.

7.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Model

7.4.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, the provider partitions TE links within the
   provider network per VPN. The routing information exchanged between
   the CE and the PE includes CE-PE TE links, CE sites, as well as
   partitioned portions of the provider network, and may include CE-CE
   (or C-C) Forwarding Adjacencies and control plane topology from the
   CE sites. Note that PEs may abstract routing information about the
   provider network and advertise it to CEs.

   Note scalability must be carefully considered for advertising
   provider network routing information to the CE [INTER-DOMAIN FW].

7.4.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   Currently, there is no solution document for this type of service
   model. However, [GVPN] provides several functionalities to meet this
   type of service model, as described in section 7.2.2. One way is to
   extend mechanisms for the Virtual Node service model. The other way
   is to extend mechanisms for the Virtual Link service model.

7.4.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   As described in section 7.4.2, there are two approaches for this
   service model.

   Note that as in the case of the Virtual Node service mode, solution
   details may differ depending on routing representation. This requires
   further discussion.

   o Signaling and routing for support of the per-VPN Peer service


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 17]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     model

     Option 1: Virtual node-based

        The Per-VPN Peer service model may be realized by extending the
        virtual node technique so that PEs selectively advertise
        provider internal TE links to CEs. There are several extensions
        needed for this.

        - Topology filtering

          The PE must choose TE links that are assigned to a specific
          VPN, and then advertise these TE links to a specific set of
          CEs corresponding to that VPN.

        - Topology abstraction

          The PE may abstract routing information of the provider
          network, and then advertise abstracted topology information to
          the CE. It means that the PE may construct a TE link where a
          direct physical link does not exit, or the PE may construct a
          single node to represent multiple nodes and TE links.

          Note scalability must be carefully considered [INTER-DOMAIN
          FW].

        - ERO/RRO expansion/modification

          The CE may specify an ERO with abstracted topology. The
          provider network must expand this ERO to match the provider
          network topology. Note this must be done even if a strict
          route is specified in the ERO passed from the CE.

          At the same time, when an RRO is requested, the RRO passed to
          the CE must be either edited to match the abstracted topology,
          or removed.

        - Private address

          The provider network may support private addresses for routing
          information provided to the customer. This means that the
          customer is able to assign private addresses to a partitioned
          portion of the TE links within the provider network.

   Option 2: Virtual link-based

      The Per-VPN Peer service model may be realized by extending the
      virtual link technique so that not only PEs but also Ps that
      contain end points of virtual links in the abstracted topology


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 18]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


      contain VPN routing instances. There may be no additional protocol
      extensions needed from the Virtual Link service model.

   Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

8. Management Aspects

8.1. Fault Management

   The provider network may support various recovery techniques
   mentioned in [P&R TERM]. The customer may be allowed to specify the
   desired level of recovery in connection setup requests. The provider
   network may constitute a recovery domain (PE-PE recovery).

   The following aspects need to be considered relative to L1VPNs.

   o Shared recovery

     When the provider network supports shared recovery (e.g., shared
     mesh restoration), the provider network may be able to support
     shared recovery only within the same VPN and/or shared recovery
     among multiple VPNs. The default mode is to be specified.

     If the provider network supports both, the provider network must
     provide configuration tools for operators.

   o Extra traffic

     GMPLS recovery mechanisms support extra traffic. Extra traffic
     allows supporting preemptable traffic on recovery resources when
     these resources are not being used for the recovery of normal
     traffic [P&R TERM].

     When the provider network supports extra traffic, the provider
     network may be able to support extra traffic only within the same
     VPN and/or extra traffic among multiple VPNs. The default mode is
     to be specified.

     If the provider network supports both, the provider network must
     provide configuration tools for operators.

8.2. Configuration Management

   Some VPN specific configuration aspects must be considered, such as:

   o Configuration of resource management per VPN

     Physical link resources may be dedicated, shared by a specific
     sub-set of VPNs, or shared by any VPNs. The provider network must


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 19]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     provide configuration tools for resource management per VPN.

   o Configuration of virtual links

     For the Virtual Link service model and the Per-VPN Peer service
     model, the provider network must provide configuration tools for
     operators.

   o Configuration of service model for each VPN

     When the provider network supports multiple service models, the
     provider network must provide configuration tools for operators.

8.3. Security Management

   o CE-PE security

     When a CE-PE control channel is physically shared by multiple VPNs,
     security mechanisms need to be applied for data integrity and
     confidentiality of control messages exchanged. Furthermore, when a
     CE-PE control channel is dynamically setup, authentication need to
     be performed. The mechanisms to achieve these include IPsec.

     Denial of service attack is one significant security threat. The
     provider network must have mechanisms to detect denial of service
     attach, and to protect against it reactively and proactively.

     Details for additional work areas are for further study.

   o CE-CE security

     The provider network must restrict connections between CEs in the
     same VPN. As such, the provider network must avoid mis-connection
     under any scenario, including failures, recovery and preemption.

     Furthermore, when customers want to assure security against the
     provider network, the customers may apply their own security
     mechanisms (CE-CE security). IPsec can be used for this purpose.

9. Discussion

   This section summarizes items for which existing solutions may need
   to be extended in order to fulfill the full set of L1VPN service
   model functionalities.

   Note that several of these items are in support of optional features.
   For the Management-based service model, the Signaling-based service
   model, the Overlay Extension service model and the Virtual Node
   service model, the existing solutions can be applied with few


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 20]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   extensions.

   As described in sections 7.3.2 and 7.4.2, there are no existing
   solutions to support the Virtual Link service model and the Per-VPN
   Peer service model. For the Virtual Link service model, however,
   minor extensions from existing solutions are expected to meet the
   requirements.

   Note that the list of additional work areas will be updated in later
   versions of this document with the development of additional or
   enhanced requirements and further understanding of the issues.

   o MIB module for SPC
     - Optional, but highly required for the Management-based service
       model
     - Two alternatives (MIB module extension or MIB object usage
       extension)
     - Impact: MIB module or none

   o Resource management per VPN
     - Optional requirement for the Management-based, the
       Signaling-based, the Overlay extension and the Virtual Node
       service models
     - Mandatory requirement for the Virtual Link and the Per-VPN Peer
       service models (support of resource management for dedicated data
       plane)
     - Two alternatives (policy or routing extension)
     - For the Virtual Link service model, can be realized by no
       protocol extensions (assign pre-configured FA-LSPs to each VPN
       routing instance).
     - Impact: None or IGP

   o Signaling mechanisms
     - Mandatory requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Two alternatives (shuffling or nesting)
     - Impact: Signaling

   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network
     - Mandatory requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network
     - Optional requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 21]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE
     - Mandatory requirement for the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE
     - Optional requirement for the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o Routing representation
     - One building block for the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Further discussion required (single area, multi areas, multi
       ASes, etc.)
     - Impact: Details to be studied (routing, use of auto-discovery,
       etc.)

   o Control plane routing
     - Optional requirement for the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Impact: Routing

   o Signaling and routing for support of the Per-VPN Peer service model
     - Two options (virtual node-based, virtual link-based)
     - Impact: Routing, signaling (details to be studied)

   o Management aspects
     - Default mode to be specified for shared recovery and extra
       traffic
     - Support of configuration tools mandatory for fault management and
       configuration management
     - Details for security management to be studied
     - Impact: mostly on operational tools (impacts on protocols to be
       studied)

10. Security Considerations

   Section 8.3 describes security considerations.

11. IANA Considerations

   This document defines no new protocols or extensions and makes no 
   requests to IANA for registry management.

12. Acknowledgement

   We would like to thank Marco Carugi, Ichiro Inoue and Takumi Ohba for
   their useful comments and suggestions.



T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 22]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


13. Normative References

   [RFC3668]          Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
                      Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.

   [L1VPN-FW]         Takeda, T., Editor "Framework for Layer 1 Virtual
                      Private Networks", draft-takeda-l1vpn-framework,
                      work in progress.

14. Informative References

   For information on the availability of this document, please see
   http://www.itu.int.

   [Y.1312]           Y.1312 - Layer 1 Virtual Private Network Generic
                      requirements and architecture elements, ITU-T
                      Recommendation, September 2003.

   For information on the availability of this document, please see
   http://www.itu.int.

   [Y.1313]           Y.1313 - Layer 1 Virtual Private Network
                      service and network architectures, ITU-T
                      Recommendation, July 2004.

   [GMPLS-UNI]        Swallow, G., et al., "Generalize Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching(GMPLS) User-Network Interface
                      (UNI): Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
                      Engineering (RSVP-TE) Support for the Overlay
                      Model", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-overlay, work in
                      progress.

   [GVPN]             Ould-Brahim, H., and Rekhter, Y. (editors), "GVPN
                      Services: Generalized VPN Services using BGP and
                      GMPLS Toolkit", draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gvpn-
                      bgpgmpls, work in progress.

   [LSP HIER]         Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., "LSP Hierarchy with
                      Generalized MPLS TE", draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-
                      hierarchy, work in progress.

   [STITCHING]        Ayyangar, A. (editor), "Label Switched Path
                      Stitching with Generalized MPLS Traffic
                      Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp-lsp-stitching, work
                      in progress.

   [INTER-DOMAIN FW]  Farrel, A., et al., "A Framework for Inter-Domain
                      MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp-
                      inter-domain-framework, work in progress.


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 23]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



   [P&R TERM]         Mannie, E., and Papadimitriou, D. (editors),
                      "Recovery (Protection and Restoration) Terminology
                      for Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
                      (GMPLS)", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-
                      terminology, work in progress.

   [LSR MIB]          Nadeau, T., et al., "Generalized Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Label Switching Router
                      (LSR) Management Information Base", draft-ietf-
                      ccamp-gmpls-lsr-mib, work in progress.

   [TE MIB]           Nadeau, T., et al., "Generalized Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering
                      Management Information Base", draft-ietf-ccamp-
                      gmpls-te-mib, work in progress.

   [RFC3031]          Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A. and R. Callon,
                      "Multiprotocol label switching Architecture", RFC
                      3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3209]          Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T.,
                      Srinivasan, V.  and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE:
                      Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209,
                      December 2001.

   [RFC3471]          Berger, L., Editor, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional
                      Description", RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [RFC3473]          Berger, L., Editor "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling - Resource
                      ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
                      Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [GMPLS-RTG]        Kompella, K., et al., "Routing Extensions in
                      Support of Generalized MPLS", draft-ietf-ccamp-
                      gmpls-routing, work in progress.

   [EGRESS CONTROL]   Berger, L., "GMPLS Signaling Procedure For Egress
                      Control", RFC 4003, February 2005.

   [OSPF-CAP]         Lindem, A. (editor), "Extensions to OSPF for
                      Advertising Optional Router Capabilities",
                      draft-ietf-ospf-cap, work in progress.

   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR]   Aggarwal, R., Kompella, K., "Advertising a
                      Router's Local Addresses in OSPF TE Extensions",
                      draft-ietf-ospf-te-node-addr, work in progress.


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 24]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005



   [LMP]              Lang, J., "Link Management Protocol (LMP)",
                      draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp, work in progress.

   [DNS DISCOVERY]    Squire, M., et al., "Using DNS for VPN Discovery",
                      draft-luciani-ppvpn-vpn-discovery (Expired).

   [RADIUS DISCOVERY] Weber, G., Editor "Using RADIUS for PE-Based VPN
                      Discovery", draft-ietf-l2vpn-radius-pe-discovery
                      (Expired).

   [RFC2917]          Muthukrishnan, K., Malis, A., " A Core MPLS IP VPN
                      Architecture", RFC2917, September 2000.

   [RFC4026]          Anderssion, L., and Madsen, T., "Provider
                      Provisioned Virtual Private Network (VPN)
                      Terminology", RFC 4026, March 2005.

   [PCE ARCH]         Ash, J., et al., "Path Computation Element (PCE)
                      Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture, work
                      in progress.

   [MRN REQ]          Shiomoto, K., et al., "Requirements for GMPLS-
                      based multi-region and multi-layer networks",
                      draft-shiomoto-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-reqs, work in
                      progress.

15. Authors' Addresses

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Rm. D1-3C22 - 200 S. Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
   Phone: +1 732 4201573
   Email: dbrungard@att.com

   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting
   Phone:  +44 (0) 1978 860944
   Email:  adrian@olddog.co.uk

   Hamid Ould-Brahim
   Nortel Networks
   P O Box 3511 Station C
   Ottawa, ON K1Y 4H7 Canada
   Phone: +1 (613) 765 3418
   Email: hbrahim@nortel.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellensplein 1,


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 25]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 2408491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Tomonori Takeda
   NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories, NTT Corporation
   3-9-11, Midori-Cho
   Musashino-Shi, Tokyo 180-8585 Japan
   Phone: +81 422 59 7434
   Email: takeda.tomonori@lab.ntt.co.jp

Appendix I: Network Usage of L1VPN Service Models

   This appendix provides additional information concerning network
   usage of the L1VPN service models.

   o Management-based service model

     In this model, the provider network can support non-GMPLS capable
     CEs. Therefore, this model is best suited when customer networks
     are non-GMPLS, e.g., legacy SONET/SDH and IP/MPLS networks.

     It is expected that the provider network requires no or minimal
     GMPLS extensions for L1VPN specific functions.

   o Signaling-based service model

     In this model, by implementing GMPLS signaling functions in CEs,
     the customer can request an LSP setup/deletion/modification to the
     provider by signaling. Other customer site nodes (C devices) do not
     need to be GMPLS-capable. Customers will receive rapid failure
     notifications of an LSP by using notification mechanisms available
     in GMPLS RSVP-TE.

     There are some L1VPN specific extensions required within the
     provider network. Concerning customer network routing information,
     since only CE-PE TE link addresses are contained within the
     provider network, it is expected that there is less concern on
     scalability. Trust relationships between the customer and the
     provider may need to be carefully considered.

   o Signaling and Routing service model

     In this model, a customer can seamlessly operate its VPN using
     end-to-end GMPLS. Therefore, this model is best suited when
     customer networks are operated by GMPLS.

     For the service model where the provider network's routing
     information is not provided to customers (i.e., Virtual Node


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 26]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


     service model), a customer can outsource routing complexity within
     the provider network to the provider. On the other hand, in the
     service model where the provider network routing information is
     provided to customers (i.e., Virtual Link service model and Per-VPN
     Peer service model), customers play more of a role. For example, by
     allowing customers to assign SRLG IDs for virtual links, customers
     can compute and set up end to end disjoint LSPs in their VPN.

     There are some L1VPN specific extensions required within the
     provider network. Concerning customer network routing information,
     since the customer network routing information is contained within
     the provider network, scalability must be carefully considered.
     Trust relationships between the customer and the provider may need
     to be carefully considered as well.

Intellectual Property Considerations

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,


T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 27]

Internet Draft   draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-00.txt  September 2005


   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
















































T.Takeda, et al.             Expires March 2006              [Page 28]