
Network Working Group                                     Emanuele Jones
INTERNET DRAFT                                                   Alcatel
draft-ietf-rpsec-ospf-vuln-00.txt                      Olivier Le Moigne
                                                                 Alcatel
                                                                May 2004
      
      
                 OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis 
      
    
Status of this Memo  
        
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions 
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.   
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.   
        
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".
     
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  
     
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html   
     
Specification of Requirements  
        
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119.   
     
Abstract  
     
   Internet infrastructure protocols were designed at the very early 
   stages of computer networks when "cyberspace" was still perceived as 
   a benign environment. As a consequence, malicious attacks were not 
   considered to be a major risk when these protocols were designed, 
   leaving today's Internet vulnerable. This paper provides an analysis 
   of OSPF vulnerabilities that could be exploited to modify the normal 
   routing process across a single domain together with an assessment
   of when internal OSPF mechanisms can or cannot be leveraged to 
   better secure a domain.  
        
    
    
    
    
    


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 1]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


Table of Contents  
        
   Status of this Memo ...........................................    1
   Specification of Requirements .................................    1
   Abstract ......................................................    1
   1. Introduction ...............................................    3
   1.1. Attacker's Definition ....................................    3
   1.2. Attacker's Location ......................................    4
   1.3. Vulnerabilities Damages and Consequences .................    4
   2. Generic Attack Techniques ..................................    5
   3. Vulnerabilities and Risks ..................................    6
   3.1. OSPF General Vulnerabilities .............................    6
   3.1.1. Local Intrusion Global Impact ..........................    6
   3.1.2. Remote Attacker ........................................    7
   3.1.3. Attacker Disabling Fight Back ..........................    7
   3.1.4. Attacker Leveraging Fight Back .........................    8
   3.1.5. Dealing with External Routes ...........................    8
   3.2. Protocol-specific Vulnerabilities ........................    9
   3.2.1. Packet Header with Cryptographic Authentication Enabled.    9
   3.2.2. Hello Message ..........................................   10
   3.2.3. DB Description, Link State Request and Acknowledgment ..   12
   3.2.4. Link State Update ......................................   12
   3.3. Resource Consumption Vulnerabilities .....................   15
   3.3.1. OSPF Cryptographic Authentication ......................   15
   3.3.2. Hello Message ..........................................   16
   3.3.3. Link State Request Message .............................   16
   3.3.4. Link State Acknowledgment Message ......................   16
   3.3.5. Link State DB Overflow .................................   16
   3.3.6. Others .................................................   17
   3.4. Vulnerabilities through Other Protocols ..................   18
   3.4.1. IP .....................................................   18
   3.4.2. Other Supporting Protocols (Management) ................   18
   3.5. Residual Risk ............................................   18
   4. References .................................................   19
   5. Authors' Addresses .........................................   20
     
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    




    


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 2]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


1.  Introduction  
     
   Internet infrastructure protocols were designed at the very early 
   stages of computer networks when "cyberspace" was still perceived as 
   a benign environment. As a consequence, malicious attacks were not 
   considered to be a major risk when these protocols were designed, 
   leaving today's Internet infrastructure vulnerable.   
     
   Since routers work in a cooperatively manner based on forwarding 
   network information received from their peers, they are all 
   threatened by the possibility that the exchanged routing information 
   may have been contaminated or forged by a malicious or faulty 
   entity.  
     
   This paper provides an analysis of OSPF [1] vulnerabilities that 
   could be exploited to modify the normal routing process across a 
   single domain, together with an assessment of when internal OSPF 
   mechanisms can or cannot be leveraged to secure a domain.  
    
     
1.1.  Attacker's Definition
   Throughout this paper the term attacker will be used to define any 
   entity capable of posing any threat to an OSPF routing domain. 
   Hence, this definition includes: 1) any subverted OSPF router, 2) 
   any malicious software capable of interacting with an OSPF routing 
   domain, 3) any faulty or misconfigured legitimate OSPF peer.  
     
   From a security standpoint, this paper is consolidating all possible 
   OSPF deployment situations into two opposite scenarios.   
     
   The first scenario requires OSPF Cryptographic Authentication or 
   Simple Password Authentication to be present on all links within a 
   routing domain. The second scenario takes place when Null 
   Authentication is adopted. 
     
   If one link is not protected then the whole routing domain becomes 
   potentially vulnerable; if the attacker is in the position to obtain 
   even a single copy of any OSPF message then the authentication 
   provided by Simple Password is compromised and the security for the 
   entire routing domain falls immediately in the second scenario.  
     
   In the first scenario, Cryptographic Authentication being deployed, 
   there are two kinds of entities capable of attacking or posing 
   threats: insiders and outsiders. An attacking entity is considered 
   an insider if it is in possession of the secret key for any OSPF 
   Cryptographic Authentication session either through: cryptanalysis, 
   social engineering, coercion or access to a compromised/subverted 
   routing resource. This also includes threats arising from 
   malfunctioning or faulty-configured OSPF routers. An outsider is an 
   attacker that is not in possession of the secret key.  
     


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 3]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   In the second scenario, when the routing domain is not protected by 
   OSPF Cryptographic or Simple Password authentication there is no 
   distinction between insider and outsider entities. Any attacker can 
   successfully forge OSPF messages on behalf of any OSPF peer, 
   legitimate or not.  
     
    
1.2.  Attacker's Location 
   Since OSPF routers on broadcast, on Point-to-Multipoint, NBMA and on 
   virtual links will accept unicast packets that are destined directly 
   to them, no assumption is made on the location of the attacking 
   entity. This leads to a scenario where an attacker, in possession of 
   a secret key, if at all needed, can attack a router located in a 
   remote routing domain. The proper implementation of ingress 
   filtering and other mechanisms described by  RFC2827 [2] and 
   recently by the Internet Draft [3] should mitigate this situation,
   forcing insider and outsider attackers to at least have access to 
   one of the links in the routing domain target of their attack.  
     
1.3.  Vulnerabilities Damages and Consequences 
   Generally speaking attackers will be able to disrupt and manipulate 
   the routing domain, posing serious threats to the actual delivery of 
   data and control plane packets.   
     
   For instance, if the routing information creates loops in the 
   forwarding path some packets will never be delivered, denying 
   service to many destinations. Loops also create congestion by 
   leaving packets in the network longer than necessary and by 
   consuming resources without providing any useful service in the end. 
   The incorrect forwarding of large amounts of traffic over one link 
   may overwhelm the link and result in the delaying, or even 
   prevention, of traffic delivery. Moreover, incorrect routing 
   information could result in data traffic transiting networks that 
   otherwise would have never seen that data.     
    
   Finally, routing information that incorrectly reports OSPF Areas, or 
   any other portion of the domain, as unreachable will deny services 
   to all hosts connected to or exchanging traffic with said areas.  
     
   The damages [4] that might result from these attacks are:  
     
   starvation: data traffic destined for a node is forwarded to a part 
   of the network that cannot deliver it, 
    
   network congestion: more data traffic is forwarded through some 
   portion of the network than would otherwise need to carry the 
   traffic,  
     
   blackhole: large amounts of traffic are directed as to be forwarded 
   through one router that cannot handle the increased level of traffic 
   and drops many/most/all packets,  


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 4]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


     
   delay: data traffic destined for a node is forwarded along a path 
   that is in some way inferior to the path it would otherwise take,  
     
   looping: data traffic is forwarded along a path that loops, so that 
   the data is never delivered,  
     
   eavesdrop: data traffic is forwarded through some router or network 
   that would otherwise not see the traffic, affording an opportunity 
   to see the data,

   partition: some portion of the network believes that it is 
   partitioned from the rest of the network when it is not,  
     
   cut: some portion of the network believes that it has no route to 
   some network that is in fact connected,  
     
   churn: the forwarding in the network changes at a rapid pace, 
   resulting in large variations in the data delivery patterns (and 
   adversely affecting congestion control techniques),  
     
   instability: OSPF becomes unstable so that convergence on a global 
   forwarding state is not achieved,  
     
   overload: the OSPF messages themselves become a significant portion 
   of the traffic the network carries.  
     
   resource exhaustion: the OSPF messages themselves cause exhaustion 
   of critical router resources, such as table space and queues.  
     
   These consequences can fall exclusively on a single OSPF Area or may 
   effect the operation of the OSPF network domain as a whole.  
    
    
     
2.  Generic Attack Techniques 
    
   The OSPF protocol is subject to the following attacks (list taken 
   from the IAB Internet-Draft providing guideline for the security 
   considerations section of Internet-Drafts [5]).  
    
   Eavesdropping: The routing data carried in OSPF is carried in clear-
   text, so eavesdropping is a possible attack against routing data 
   confidentiality.   
     
   Message Replay: In general, OSPF with Cryptographic Authentication 
   provides a sufficient mechanism for replay protection of its 
   messages. Nonetheless, there are still some scenarios in which an 
   outsider attacker can successfully replay OSPF messages; these are 
   illustrated over the next sections.  
     


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 5]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   Message Insertion: OSPF with Cryptographic Authentication enabled is 
   not vulnerable to message insertion from outsiders. In the case of 
   an insider or in the absence of Cryptographic Authentication, 
   message insertion becomes a trivial operation even for a remote 
   attacker.  
   
   Message Deletion: OSPF provides a certain degree of protection 
   against message deletion. The receiver itself cannot detect if a 
   message has been deleted or not, but the sender will detect a 
   deleted Link State Update (LSU) message since it will not receive 
   any OSPF Link State Acknowledgment message for it. There is no 
   acknowledging mechanism for Hello messages, but the deletion of 
   some, generally four or more, consecutive Hello messages belonging 
   to the same router will cause "adjacency breaking" and thus be 
   easily detected by all the parties involved.  
     
   Message Modification: OSPF with Cryptographic Authentication 
   provides protection against modification of messages. In the case of 
   an insider or in the absence of Cryptographic Authentication message 
   modification becomes possible.  
     
   Man-In-The-Middle: OSPF with Cryptographic Authentication provides 
   protection against man-in-the-middle attacks. In the case of an 
   insider or in the absence of Cryptographic Authentication, the 
   protocol becomes exposed to man-in-the-middle attacks through the 
   lower network layers - such as ARP spoofing - on all OSPF peers that 
   are one hop apart; while OSPF peers connected over virtual links are 
   exposed to Layer 3 man-in-the-middle attacks too.  
     
   Denial-of-Service: While bogus routing information data can 
   represent a Denial of Service attack on the end systems that are 
   trying to transmit data through the network and on the network 
   infrastructure itself, certain bogus information can represent a 
   more specific Denial of Service on the OSPF routing protocol itself. 
   For example, it is possible to reach the limits of the Link State 
   Database of a victim with External LSAs or with bogus LSA headers 
   during the Link State Database Exchange phase.  
     
    
    
3.  Vulnerabilities and Risks  
     
3.1.  OSPF General Vulnerabilities   
   The risks in OSPF arise from the following fundamental 
   vulnerabilities:  
     
3.1.1.  Local Intrusion Global Impact  
   Compromising a single network equipment (router) or a link's 
   security has an obvious and immediate local impact (ability to 
   disable local links, to change properties, to stop routers etc...). 
   Unfortunately, due to the lack of end-to-end authentication 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 6]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   mechanisms - such as a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) - a breach in
   a single link has also a global impact since the attacker is now in 
   the position to tamper with information regarding any other remote 
   network equipment belonging to the same routing domain. 
     
3.1.2.  Remote Attacker  
   Even though OSPF is designed and deployed to be used as an intra-
   domain routing protocol, in most scenarios and situations an OSPF 
   router will still accept unicast IP packets directly addressed to 
   itself  as described in paragraph 8.1 of RFC2328 [1]. "On physical 
   point-to-point networks, the IP destination is always set to the 
   address AllOSPFRouters.  On all other network types (including 
   virtual links), the majority of OSPF packets are sent as unicasts, 
   i.e., sent directly to the other end of the adjacency." This opens 
   the door to attacks that may be originating from outside the OSPF 
   domain. Timing the stream of different packets needed for a given 
   attack poses a certain degree of difficulty if executed from a 
   remote AS, but it may not be enough to stop a skilled and motivated 
   attacker. This means that, for example, customers on the access 
   edges of a network can start attacking the routing domain in the 
   core, if said domain were not to be protected by Cryptographic 
   Authentication or if the malicious subscribers were to obtain the 
   secret key.  
     
3.1.3.  Attacker Disabling Fight Back 
   It is often the case while reading papers, or other literature 
   material, about OSPF to come across the concept of an OSPF "natural" 
   fight back mechanism, for example [6]. OSPF fight back can be 
   defined as follows: any router receiving an LSA that lists itself as 
   the advertising router and noticing that the content of this LSA is 
   not coherent with its status of resources will try to correct the 
   situation either by flushing or updating the erroneous LSA. The 
   following three scenarios show how the OSPF fight back mechanism can 
   be disabled clearing the way to stealthy attacks.  
     
3.1.3.1 Periodic Injection  
   This is a brief explanation on how a malicious LSA will succeed in 
   attacking a routing domain, overriding any fight back:  
     
   According to RFC2328 [1], a router will never emit (or update) its 
   LSAs faster than once every MinLSInterval (5 seconds). This allows 
   for almost permanent changes in the routing domain, if an attacker 
   is flooding the OSPF domain with malicious LSAs at a rate higher 
   than one every MinLSInterval. 
     
   On top of this, if an OSPF implementation behaves as described by 
   RFC2328 [1, paragraph 13], the router owner of the LSA may never
   fight back and it will collaborate in the flooding of malicious 
   routing information on its behalf. The flooding happens because the 
   malicious LSA is considered newer than the copy already present in 
   the legitimate owner's Link State Database - the malicious LSA will 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 7]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   have a higher sequence number - (check performed on Step 5) and 
   because the legitimate copy of the LSA already present in the Link 
   State Database was not received via flooding but installed by the 
   router itself (check performed in step 5.a). When step 5.f is 
   finally executed - after the malicious LSA has been already flooded 
   - a simple test reveals that the LSA was owned by the router and 
   that it contained erroneous information. Only at this stage action 
   is taken to correct it; but since any router must wait MinLSInterval 
   before updating any of its LSAs, the owner will fight back every 
   MinLSInterval while the flooding is in progress. We have also 
   observed a complete lack of fight back in implementations that 
   erroneously reset MinLSInterval when flooding LSAs. 
     
3.1.3.2 Partitioned Networks  
   If the flooding mechanism does not have a path to rely malicious 
   LSAs to the legitimate owner, said owner will never initiate a fight 
   back. An example of this could be a subverted router conveniently 
   located on a partitioning link. If said router is removed, the 
   entire network domain would be partitioned into two disconnected 
   portions. This subverted router could choose to inject a given 
   malicious LSA only into one part of the routing domain, claiming 
   that this LSA is coming from a legitimate router located on the 
   opposite portion of the network. The legitimate router will never be 
   made aware of the forged information on its behalf and thus will 
   never initiate a fight back. This will create fatal inconsistencies 
   between the Link State Databases of the various OSPF routers. 
     
3.1.3.3 Phantom Routers  
   All information injected in the routing domain on behalf of non-
   existing (phantom) OSPF routers will never trigger a fight back 
   reaction. Thus, this information will remain in the Link State 
   Databases of the legitimate routers for MaxAge (1 hour, by default). 
   It is important to underline that even if Link State Advertisements 
   (LSAs) crafted on behalf of phantom routers are kept in the Link 
   State Database, these are not taken into account by the Shortest 
   Path First (SPF) algorithm.   
     
3.1.4.  Attacker Leveraging Fight Back 
   The fight back mechanism can contribute to amplify certain Denial of 
   Service attacks. One single false LSA may unleash a significant 
   number of LSA updates that are trying to correct it. Even though 
   such a reaction is both efficient and desirable, it may be leveraged
   to amplify the effects of certain Denial of Service attacks, if 
   continuously triggered. 
     
3.1.5.  Dealing with External Routes  
   Every piece of routing information that is dealing with outside 
   routes, forged or real, that is introduced in the domain - by means 
   of route redistribution via BGP, RIP or any other routing protocol 
   including statically configured - cannot be verified and it is 
   propagated to all OSPF Areas of the domain that are not configured 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 8]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   as stub-areas or NSSA. Even though verification of routes that are 
   outside the routing domain is clearly beyond the scope of OSPF, the 
   current flooding mechanism of such information may be used as an 
   efficient intrinsic vector for conveying malicious/bogus messages. 
   Moreover, if an attacker manages to subvert an ASBR node, or 
   successfully masquerades as one, there will be no fight back from 
   any of the other ASBRs regarding ownership, validity and metric 
   advertisement for the External routes claimed by the subverted ASBR; 
   thus, the attacker could easily attract to itself big portions of 
   the traffic destined outside the AS. 
     
    
3.2.  Protocol-specific Vulnerabilities  
   There are two types of authentication mechanisms in OSPF: Simple 
   Password and Cryptographic. Simple Password authentication consists 
   of a plain text password carried in the header of each OSPF message; 
   the vulnerability of this Authentication method is obvious and will 
   not be discussed further. There are five different OSPF message 
   types: Hello, Database Description, Link State Request, Link State 
   Update, Link State Acknowledgement. The next sections discuss 
   general vulnerabilities for every field in the five OSPF messages as 
   well as the ones arising from Cryptographic Authentication. Each 
   section also defines the ability for outsiders, insiders or faulty 
   OSPF peers to exploit these weaknesses.  
     
3.2.1.  Packet Header with Cryptographic Authentication Enabled 
   IP Header  
   No field of the IP header is protected by the Message Authentication 
   Code (MAC) available when Cryptographic Authentication is enabled. 
   This poses a threat to OSPF any time the protocol relies on any IP 
   field. For example RFC2328 [1] states on paragraph 10.5: "When 
   receiving an Hello on a point-to-point network (but not on a virtual 
   link) set the neighbor structure's Neighbor IP address to the 
   packet's IP source address".  
     
   OSPF Header
   Neighbor OSPF routers may reset their Cryptographic Sequence Number 
   states when a peer reboots (if the "resetting" peer is not capable 
   of storing Cryptographic Sequence Numbers across reboots) or when 
   the peer's Cryptographic Sequence Number rolls over. At this point, 
   any previously logged packet can be maliciously replayed and will 
   look legitimate if the secret key has not changed in the mean time. 
   Moreover, if the replayed packet is chosen with a high enough 
   sequence number, it will block the communication between the 
   recently rebooted router and its peer(s) for RouterDeadInterval plus 
   the time needed to establish a new adjacency [7]. This vulnerability 
   is exploitable by any outsider that is able to log OSPF packets. It 
   is important to underline that this vulnerability could be used to 
   break adjacencies between OSPF peers.   
     
   Breaking an adjacency will cause an OSPF router to update its own 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                 [Page 9]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   Router LSA which in turn will force a new SPF calculation, this may 
   lead to changes in the routing table due to the loss of one peer. If 
   the router is also the Designated Router (DR) for the link, breaking 
   an adjacency also entails modifying the corresponding link's Network 
   LSA, potentially resulting in transit links being declared as stub 
   connections and/or partitioning of the domain.  
    
   Finally, even for an insider attacker (with or without the ability 
   to log packets) forging a single Hello message, with a high enough 
   sequence number, is an excellent and quick option to break any 
   established adjacency. In conclusion this vulnerability may be 
   appealing to both outsider and insider attackers.  
     
3.2.2.  Hello Message  
   In general errors in Hello message parameters such as incorrect 
   AreaID, RouterDeadInterval, HelloInterval and so on will cause the 
   Hello to be silently discarded with no further impact.  
    
   Other Hello parameters are analyzed next, and in order to modify the 
   following parameters, the attacker must be an insider, i.e. in 
   possession of the secret for the link to be attacked or the link 
   must be configured with the Null Authentication security option. 
    
3.2.2.1.  Neighbor  
   Omission of one or more adjacent neighbors in the neighbor list will 
   immediately break the adjacency and force a synchronization process 
   between the legitimate owner of the Hello message and all the 
   omitted neighbors.  
     
   Breaking an adjacency will cause an OSPF router to update its own 
   Router LSA which in turn will force a new SPF calculation, this may
   lead to changes in the routing table due to the loss of one peer. If 
   the router is also the Designated Router (DR) for the link, breaking 
   an adjacency also entails modifying the corresponding link's Network 
   LSA, potentially resulting in transit links being declared as stub 
   connections and/or partitioning of the domain.  
     
3.2.2.2.  DR and BDR 
   Tampering with these two fields can lead to several problematic 
   scenarios,(concerning broadcast and NBMA networks) each leading to 
   different consequences for the routing domain.  
    
   In order to be taken into account by the DR election process on a 
   victim router, the attacker must list the victim router ID into the 
   active neighbor list of its malicious Hello. Next some examples of 
   attacks are described.  
    
   In the Hello message, setting to null the DR and BDR fields, on 
   behalf of a legitimate router on the network, and listing all 
   neighbors in the malicious Hello, will force a full re-election of 
   the DR and BDR.  


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 10]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


    
   Bogus Hello messages from a non-existing router, with a Router 
   Priority and an IP address higher than any legitimate router on a 
   network, listing itself as DR will allow the attacker to 
   successfully convince all the routers present in the neighbor list 
   (of the malicious Hello) that the DR has changed. Any router 
   believing in the non-existing DR will update its Router LSA by 
   listing a link to a stub network instead of the transit network 
   (because it is not fully adjacent to the non-existing DR). Thus, 
   this router will not use this network anymore as a transit network; 
   this will lead to connectivity loss. 
    
   If the attacker is listing the current DR and BDR in the active 
   neighbors, then the current DR and BDR will also be deceived into 
   thinking that the non-existing router is the new DR. This will have 
   an impact on all the routers connected to the network at once. 
    
3.2.2.3.  Deletion of Hello Messages  
   If no Hello message is received from a given neighbor for a period 
   of time longer than RouterDeadInterval, then the adjacency with this 
   router is considered to be broken.  
     
   Breaking an adjacency will cause an OSPF router to update its own 
   Router LSA which in turn will force a new SPF calculation, this may 
   lead to changes in the routing table due to the loss of one peer. If 
   the router is also the Designated Router (DR) for the link, breaking
   an adjacency also entails modifying the corresponding link's Network 
   LSA, potentially resulting in transit links being declared as stub 
   connections and/or partitioning of the domain.  
     
3.2.2.4.  Hello Message Replay 
   The Hello Replay attack cannot be perpetrated by an outsider as 
   described by [7]. "The HELLO packet lists the recently seen routers, 
   so if an attacker replays a HELLO packet back to its source, the 
   source won't see itself in the list and will deduce the connection 
   isn't bidirectional. [...] On broadcast, NBMA or Point to Multipoint 
   networks, the neighbor is identified by its IP address, so both 
   attacks can be used." [7, paragraphs 3.2.2 and 3.2.3] This clashes 
   with what is stated by RFC2328 [1, paragraph 10.5]: "When receiving 
   a Hello Packet from a neighbor on a broadcast, Point-to-MultiPoint 
   or NBMA network, set the neighbor structure's Neighbor ID equal to 
   the Router ID found in the packet's OSPF header." Zebra seems to be 
   in agreement with the RFC's interpretation provided above and is not 
   vulnerable to the Hello Replay attack. 
    
   In conclusion, the RouterID field is covered by Cryptographic 
   Authentication and therefore it cannot be modified by an outsider 
   without infringing on the MAC (Message Authentication Code), and if 
   the Hello message is replayed to its owner without modifying 
   anything the RouterID will match the one of the owner and the 
   message will be ignored.  


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 11]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


     
3.2.3.  DB Description, Link State Request and Acknowledgment  
   There is no clear threat except for an insider attacker, or a faulty 
   router, that behaves as described in the resource consumption 
   section.  
     
3.2.4.  Link State Update  
   In order to modify the parameters described in the following 
   subsections, the attacker must be able to successfully inject 
   malicious LSUs. Hence, the attacker must either subvert, impersonate 
   or fake a router which is at least in the exchange state or higher. 
   In the two latter cases, the attacker must be an insider, i.e. in 
   possession of the secret key for a link or a link must be configured 
   with the Null Authentication security option. 
    
3.2.4.1  Link State Update Header 
   The Link State Update (LSU) Header does not appear to present any 
   vulnerability in and for itself. In the case of attacks involving 
   bogus LSAs, some fields of the LSU header may need to be maliciously 
   modified to be consistent with the bogus information carried by the 
   LSAs.     
   
   In general, errors in some LSU Header parameters such as incorrect 
   RouterID, AreaID and AuType will cause the LSU to be silently 
   discarded with no further impact.  
     
3.2.4.2.  Link State Advertisement Header 
   LS age (MaxAge Attack)  
   Setting the age field of an LSA to MaxAge will cause the LSA to be 
   flushed from all the routers reached by the flooding mechanism. The 
   owner of the LSA will fight back by issuing a new LSA with age set 
   to 0 and a higher sequence number. Any attack exploiting this 
   vulnerability could cause unnecessary flooding and refreshing of the 
   Link State Database, hence making the routing information 
   inconsistent. Routers that do not have a copy of the LSA in their 
   Link State Databases will not contribute to the flushing of it, this 
   can help the owner of the LSA in its fight back [8].  
     
   LS sequence number (Max Sequence Number Attack)  
   This is an implementation bug that has been published long ago [9] 
   and not a protocol vulnerability. Nonetheless it is listed in this 
   memo for historical reasons and because at least one recent 
   implementation of OSPF was still affected by it.  
    
   The bug concerns sequence numbers roll-over. When an LSA reaches its 
   maximum (0x7FFFFFFF) value it is not flushed by flooding it with its 
   age set to MaxAge; instead, the erroneous implementation will simply 
   re-issue the LSA with a rolled-over sequence number. Any newer 
   instance will always be considered outdated when compared to the old 
   one having the LS sequence number set to the maximum value. Thus, an 
   insider attacker could install a bogus LSA on all routers for a 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 12]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   MaxAge-long interval without any effective fight back from the owner 
   of the LSA [9].  
     
3.2.4.3.  Router Link State Advertisement  
   Remove, add routers to the domain  
   It is possible to tamper with the topology of a domain by 
   introducing phantom OSPF routers through bogus Router LSAs. 
   Depending on how said phantom OSPF nodes are claiming to be 
   interconnected with each other and with real OSPF peers, they may or 
   may not be utilized by the SPF algorithms present in other OSPF 
   peers. A similar situation applies when a Router LSA is maliciously 
   flushed impacting routes across the domain. Adding or deleting OSPF 
   routers through bogus existing router LSAs will trigger a fight back 
   reaction by the owner of the LSA, except under the circumstances 
   stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
      
   E Bit  
   A Router LSA carrying the E bit set to 1 automatically allows a 
   router to introduce External LSAs in the routing domain. This could 
   be exploited to escalate a normal router into an ASBR.  
     
   Setting the E bit to 1 on Router LSAs will trigger a fight back 
   reaction by the owner of the LSA, except under the circumstances 
   stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
   Link ID, Link data  
   Adding links (stub or transit) to any Router LSA will result in 
   adversely impacting the normal flow of data-traffic through the 
   domain.  The same applies in the case of a Router LSA omitting any 
   link previously present. More specifically: advertised stub networks 
   are not verifiable by the Shortest Path First algorithms running on 
   other routers present in the same Area. So, if a bogus Router LSA 
   lists a stub network matching the network address of any existing 
   remote network, other OSPF routers will actually consider the router 
   owner of this LSA as a possible path to said remote network. This 
   implies that a malicious or faulty entity advertising bogus stub 
   networks could attract traffic towards itself and/or deviate normal 
   routing across the domain.  
     
   Adding any kind of link to a Router LSA will trigger fight back by 
   the owner of the LSA, except under the circumstances stated in 
   paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
   Metric  
   The metric fields of an LSA can be modified in the attempt to affect 
   the SPF algorithm. Such operation could serve the purpose of 
   attracting traffic to a node for eavesdropping or overloading; on 
   the other hand, it could also be used for starving a given node.  
     
   Modifying the fields of a Router LSA regarding a link's metric will 
   trigger a fight back reaction by the owner of the LSA, except under 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 13]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   the circumstances stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
3.2.4.4.  Network Link State Advertisement  
   Remove or add links to a domain  
   It is possible to tamper with the topology of a domain by 
   introducing phantom transit links through bogus Network LSAs. 
   Depending on how said phantom transit links are connected to real or 
   phantom OSPF routers, the bogus nodes may or may not be utilized by 
   the SPF algorithms present in other OSPF peers. A similar situation 
   applies where an existing transit link is maliciously flushed 
   impacting routes across the domain.     
   
   Adding or subtracting transit links through bogus Network LSAs will 
   trigger a fight back reaction by the owner of the LSA, except under 
   the circumstances stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
   Attached Router  
   It is possible to add or eliminate nodes from a transit link by 
   tampering with the list of attached routers. If a legitimate node is 
   removed from this list, that router will be considered disconnected 
   by all the remaining OSPF peers in the domain, even though its 
   Router LSA will state the opposite. There must be consistency 
   between Network and Router LSAs for a router to be considered part 
   of a link.  
     
   Subtracting a router from the list of attached routers through a 
   bogus Network LSA will trigger a fight back reaction by the owner of 
   the LSA, the DR for the network link, except under the circumstances 
   stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
3.2.4.5.  Summary Link State Advertisement  
   It is possible to add or eliminate information contained in both 
   types of Summary Link State LSA affecting routes across different 
   Areas.  
     
   Forging bogus Summary Link State LSAs will trigger a fight back 
   reaction by the owner of the LSA, except under the circumstances 
   stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
     
3.2.4.6.  AS External Link State Advertisement  
   Every external route introduced by an ASBR is advertised by a single 
   External LSA. There is no way for OSPF routers to verify the 
   information carried by External LSA messages. Introduction of bogus 
   External LSAs will affect the domain's knowledge of the outside 
   world. Bogus External LSAs can be used to attract a portion of the 
   data traffic destined outside the domain to a specific node for 
   eavesdropping or overloading purposes. The same considerations apply 
   to any attempt to starve one or more nodes.  
     
   Introducing false External LSAs will trigger a fight back reaction 
   by the owner of the LSA and/or will not be recognized as legitimate 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 14]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   information by other routers if the LSA is forged on behalf of anon-
   ASBR router, except under the circumstances stated in paragraph 
   3.1.3.  
     
   Forward
   The Forward field of an External LSA specifies the host (OSPF router 
   or not) meant to be used as gateway for that external route; said 
   host can be located everywhere in the domain including Stub Areas. 
   If this field is forged and the forward host is not an OSPF router 
   then there will be no OSPF fight back from the host itself, but 
   there may be a fight back reaction from the ASBR owner of the LSA. 
   By exploiting this feature, an attacker could redirect traffic 
   destined outside the routing domain to any given host in the domain 
   which may, or may not, be under its control. For example, this can 
   be used to generate loops between an ABR and any of its neighbors 
   located in its Stub Area, simply by mentioning one of these 
   neighbors in the forward field of an External LSA advertisement for 
   traffic destined outside the domain.  
     
   Forging bogus AS External LSAs with modified Forward field 
   information will trigger a fight back reaction by the owner of the 
   LSA, except under the circumstances stated in paragraph 3.1.3.  
    
     
3.3.  Resource Consumption Vulnerabilities  
   Every resource may be exploited in the attempt to interfere with 
   traffic flows from legitimate users. In some cases the resource may 
   be so overwhelmed by malicious/illegitimate packets that legitimate 
   users will not only experience a drop in the performance of the 
   service, but they may be even prevented from accessing the service 
   itself.  If one, or more, critical resource of a router is busy 
   serving bogus traffic, or dropping malicious routing messages, then 
   the whole router will be impacted and enter a delicate and more 
   vulnerable state. Next is a list of possible weaknesses that can be 
   exploited to produce a resource consumption attack.   
     
3.3.1.  OSPF Cryptographic Authentication   
   With Cryptographic Authentication disabled both outsider and insider 
   entities - including attackers and faulty routers - can successfully 
   forge malicious/erroneous OSPF messages that will be in the position 
   to attack a router or exhaust its control plane resources, such as 
   queues and CPU cycles.  
    
   On the other hand, when Cryptographic Authentication is enabled, 
   only insiders may successfully force malicious OSPF messages to be 
   accepted by the victim's control plane. Unfortunately though, 
   outsider entities are still in the position to generate a powerful 
   resource consumption attack by intentionally exploiting the 
   Cryptographic Authentication mechanism itself as described in [3]. 
   These entities may inject OSPF packets with bogus cryptographic 
   information that will consume critical resources only to be


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 15]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


   discarded afterward. This will impact OSPF by delaying or even 
   preventing legitimate messages to be authenticated and used.  
     
3.3.2.  Hello Message 
   DR and BDR Election  
   Hello messages are used by OSPF also to carry out the DR and BDR 
   election process. The DR election process itself presents a possible 
   resource consumption vulnerability since it may be fooled into 
   electing a new DR at every run. When a new DR is elected all routers 
   on the network will have to use resources to establish adjacency 
   with this new DR; the same applies in the case of the BDR.    
    
   Number of Neighbors  
   OSPF routers create a neighbor data structure for each neighbor 
   discovered through the Hello protocol. The resources to store this 
   information could be exhausted on a broadcast or NBMA network with a 
   large host address range.  
    
   Message Size  
   Since a router must list all its current active neighbors in each of 
   its Hello messages, it may have to issue a Hello message bigger than 
   the Layer 2 media's MTU, e.g. bigger than the Ethernet frame's size. 
   Since this is usually a delicate area in implementation and design 
   all the necessary care should be exerted.  
    
3.3.3.  Link State Request Message  
   Any Link State Request message forces the destination router to 
   reply with a Link State Update message containing the requested LSA. 
   An insider attacker, or a faulty router, could mount a resource 
   consumption attack by continuously requesting Link State information 
   from its neighbors at any desired rate.  
     
3.3.4.  Link State Acknowledgment Message  
   Not acknowledging Link State Update messages forces the originating 
   peer to keep a copy of the LSU on the retransmission list; this 
   leads to re-transmission loops wasting resources on both sides.  
     
3.3.5.  Link State DB Overflow  
   Router/Network LSA  
   Router/Network LSAs received from non-existing OSPF peers will not 
   be used by the SPF algorithm and will not directly adverse the 
   routes nor the topology. Nonetheless, these LSAs will consume 
   resources in the Link State Database and will not be removed from 
   this database until they "naturally" expire after MaxAge (1 hour).  
   If the purpose of an attacker is to simply consume database 
   resources, then crafting LSAs on behalf of non-existing OSPF routers
   is a good option since it makes the effects of the attack last 
   longer and triggers no fight back reaction at all. Finally, it is 
   important to highlight that Link State Database overflows produced 
   by Router and Network LSAs will not be limited by the mitigation 
   mechanism detailed in RFC1765 [10].  


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 16]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


     
   External LSA 
   External LSAs may also be successfully exploited in the attempt to 
   fill Link State Database resources. If these LSAs are crafted on 
   behalf of non-existing ASBRs, their information will not be used by 
   any SPF algorithm; however they will be successfully installed in 
   the Link State Databases. Moreover, External LSAs are forwarded to 
   all routers in the domain (except routers located in Stub Areas), 
   expire only after MaxAge if no fight back is place, and are never 
   consolidated by OSPF.   
     
   Link State Database Description Messages  
   The Database Exchange process poses a resource consumption threat on 
   the slave router participating to the process. An insider attacker - 
   or a faulty router - capable of leading a victim into the Database 
   Exchange process could advertise a huge list of non-existing links 
   through Database Description messages. The victim will keep updating 
   this list and start asking for details via Link State Request 
   messages. The number of bogus links that the victim router will have 
   to store poses an immediate resource consumption threat, while the 
   prolonged request for details about the bogus LSAs will keep the 
   victim's retransmission list full and busy.   
     
   Retransmission List Exhaustion  
   Any LSU that is not acknowledged is put on a re-transmission list.  
   OSPF messages present in this list are sent over regular intervals 
   until they are acknowledged by the receivers. Failing to acknowledge 
   LSUs, accidentally or voluntarily, will trigger resource consumption 
   on the remote peer's retransmission mechanisms. 
      
3.3.6 Others  
   Routing table size/performance issue  
   Increasing the size of the routing table could potentially move a 
   router into a very delicate state and eventually reach the limits 
   assigned to some resources. This could be achieved by using Router, 
   Network or External LSAs from existing peers and somehow disabling 
   the fight back from the legitimate owners.  
     
   Fragmentation  
   Fragmentation of OSPF messages due to Layer 2 MTU is a crucial 
   factor for any given implementation; any situation involving such
   process should be carefully tested. For example in the case of a 
   router running the open source routing suite Zebra over Ethernet 
   links, receiving a forged Router LSA that claims to have more than 
   118 links will adversely impact the routing daemon. Even though the 
   LSA does not violate RFC2328, which states that a Router LSA must be 
   entirely contained into one single IP packet, a Router LSA listing 
   more than 118 links does exceed the Ethernet MTU and will be 
   fragmented over multiple Ethernet frames: this seems to have a 
   serious impact on the behavior of Zebra.  
     


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 17]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


    
3.4.  Vulnerabilities through Other Protocols  
     
3.4.1.  IP  
   OSPF runs directly over IP. Therefore, OSPF is subject to attack 
   through attacks on IP. Direct attacks against the IP stack of a 
   router, such as integrity and fragmentation attacks, will impact 
   OSPF but are clearly beyond the scope of this document.  
     
3.4.2.  Other Supporting Protocols (Management)   
   The security of OSPF is inherently dependent on the security of the 
   managing procedures. Critical examples are the configuration of the 
   state of any interface, the Manual Stop procedure and the Timer 
   Values. 
     
   Manual stop  
   A manual stop event causes the OSPF router to bring down all its 
   adjacencies, release all associated OSPF resources, and delete all 
   associated routes. If the mechanisms by which an OSPF router was 
   informed of a manual stop is not carefully protected, OSPF 
   connections could be destroyed by an attacker. Consequently, OSPF 
   security is secondarily dependent on the security of whatever 
   protocols are used to operate the platform.  
     
   Timer events  
   The RxmtInterval, InfTransDelay, RouterDeadInterval, HelloInterval 
   timers together with the RouterPriority parameter are critical to 
   OSPF operation.  For example, if the HelloInterval timer value is 
   changed, all remote peers will refuse Hello messages from that 
   router and after RouterDeadInterval bring the adjacency down. 
   Consequently, OSPF security is secondarily dependent on the security 
   of the protocols by which the platform is managed and configured.  
     
    
3.5.  Residual Risk
   OSPF Cryptographic Authentication assumes that the cryptographic 
   algorithms are secure, that the secrets used are protected from 
   exposure and are chosen well so as not to be guessable, that the 
   platforms are securely managed and operated to prevent break-ins, 
   etc.   
     
   Information theory states that the English language has about 1.3 
   bits of entropy for each 8-bit character. If an administrator were 
   to choose the secret key for the Cryptographic Authentication to be 
   any English word, the entropy associated to the secret key 
   protecting the session would be drastically reduced from 128 bits to 
   the point where it could be guessed in a matter of minutes or days. 
   On top of that, Common Line Interfaces (CLI) will generally limit 
   the key input to a specific subset of ASCII characters - letters and 
   number plus a few symbols - and will not accept a 128-bits number 
   value (for example in hexadecimal format).  


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 18]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


     
   This becomes crucial in all those cases where the secret defending 
   an OSPF adjacency is poorly chosen and changed once every three 
   months, or every year, or never. In all these scenarios an attacker 
   that somehow managed to obtain a copy of a single OSPF Hello message 
   may eventually be able to crack the secret key and attack the entire 
   routing domain for a prolonged period of time.  
    
    
    
4.  References  
     
   [1] J. Moy. "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC2328, April 1998.  
     
   [2] P. Ferguson, D. Senie. "Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating
       Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address 
       Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC2827, May 2000.  
     
   [3] A. Zinin. "Protecting Internet Routing Infrastructure from 
       Outsider CPU Attacks", work in progress, February 2003. 
       Available as <draft-zinin-rtg-dos-00.txt> at Internet-Draft 
       shadow sites.  
     
   [4] A. Babir, S. Murphy, Y. Yang. "Generic Threats to Routing 
       Protocols", work in progress, April 2004. Available as 
       <draft-ietf-rpsec-routing-threats-06.txt> at Internet-Draft 
       shadow sites. 
     
   [5] E. Rescorla, B. Korver. "Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on 
       Security Considerations", work in progress, January 2003. 
       Available as <draft-iab-sec-cons-03.txt> at Internet-Draft 
       shadow sites. 
     
   [6] F. Wang, S. Felix Wu. "On the Vulnerabilities and Protection of
       OSPF Routing Protocols" In Proceedings 7th International 
       Conference on Computer Communications and Networks: 148-152. Los
       Alamitos, CA: IEEE Comp. Soc., 1998.  
     
   [7] J. Etienne. "Flaws in Packet's Authentication of OSPFv2", work 
       in progress, November 2001. Available as 
       <draft-etienne-ospv2-auth-flaws-00.txt> at Internet-Draft shadow 
       sites. 
     
   [8] S. Murphy, et al. "Retrofitting Security into Internet 
       Infrastructure Protocols." Proceedings of DARPA Information 
       Survivability Conference and Exposition (DISCEX'00), 2000. 
     
   [9] B. Vetter, F. Wang and S. F. Wu. "An Experimental Study of 
       Insider Attacks for the OSPF Routing Protocol", in 5th IEEE 
       International Conference on Network Protocols, Atlanta, GA, 
       Oct 28-31, 1997. 


Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 19]
INTERNET DRAFT    OSPF Security Vulnerabilities Analysis        May 2004


     
   [10] J. Moy. "OSPF Database Overflow", Experimental, RFC1765, March 
        1995. 
    
    
    
Authors' Addresses  
     
   Emanuele Jones 
   Alcatel  
   600 March Road - Kanata, ON, Canada K2K 2E6   
   EMail: emanuele.jones@alcatel.com  
   
   Olivier Le Moigne 
   Alcatel  
   600 March Road - Kanata, ON, Canada K2K 2E6   
   EMail: olivier.le_moigne@alcatel.com  
     
    
     
Full Copyright Statement  
     
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
     
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This 
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 








Jones                     Expires: October 2004                [Page 20]

