


Network Working Group                                           B. Leiba
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Updates: 3777 (if approved)                                July 30, 2012
Intended status: BCP
Expires: January 31, 2013


 Update to RFC 3777 to Clarify Nominating Committee Eligibility of IETF
                               Leadership
                   draft-leiba-3777upd-eligibility-00

Abstract

   RFC 3777 specifies that "sitting members" of the IAB and IESG "may
   not volunteer to serve on the nominating commitee".  Since that
   document was written the IAOC was formed, and that body is not
   covered by RFC 3777.  There is also uncertainty about whether ex-
   officio members and liaisons are included as "sitting members".  This
   document clarifies those situations.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Leiba                   Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          NonCom Eligibility Update              July 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

   2.  Replacement of RFC 3777, Section 4, Paragraph 15  . . . . . . . 3

   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

       Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

































Leiba                   Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          NonCom Eligibility Update              July 2012


1.  Introduction

   RFC 3777 [RFC3777] defines the nominating committee process.  One of
   the key points in the process and in the selection of the NomCom is
   that the IETF wants to avoid having its top leadership be self-
   selecting: the leaders should not be the ones who choose the leaders.
   The selection of the NomCom, therefore, excludes those individuals
   who are in top leadership positions currently.

   That said, it would be bad to eliminate too many people who are in
   good positions to understand well the IETF process -- those
   individuals will give important perspective to the NomCom and will
   help ensure that the people it selects for the leadership roles will
   be qualified to do those jobs.  There's an advantage, then, to
   excluding only those necessary to achieve the "not self-selecting"
   goal, and no others.

   RFC 3777 specifies that "sitting members" of the IAB and IESG "may
   not volunteer to serve on the nominating committee".  Since that
   document was written the IAOC was formed, and that body is not
   covered by RFC 3777.  There is also uncertainty about whether ex-
   officio members liaisons, and such are included as "sitting members".
   This document clarifies those situations, with the understanding that
   the intent of RFC 3777 was to exclude those currently in IETF
   leadership positions, or who would otherwise have a conflict of
   interest, from voting on the selection of the new leadership.

   This document also excludes individuals who are directly paid for
   their work with the IETF, and who, therefore, have a direct personal
   financial incentive in the selection of the leadership boards.  In
   practice, those people are unlikely to volunteer for the NomCom
   anyway, so this addition makes little practical change.

   In order to allow the largest reasonable list of potential NomCom
   members, we do not want to exclude those at lower levels of IETF
   leadership.  In particular, this document does *not* exclude
   participation from working group chairs, IRTF research group chairs,
   members of directorates and special review teams, and members of
   other advisory bodies such as the RSOC.


2.  Replacement of RFC 3777, Section 4, Paragraph 15

   The following two paragraphs replace RFC 3777, Section 4, paragraph
   15 in its entirety.

   15.1 Members of the Internet Society Board of Trustees and sitting
   members of the IAB, the IESG, and the IAOC, including members in ex-



Leiba                   Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          NonCom Eligibility Update              July 2012


   officio positions, and not including liaisons, may not volunteer to
   serve as voting members of the nominating committee.

   15.2 People serving in the Secretariat and the RFC Editor may not
   volunteer to serve as voting members of the nominating committee.


3.  Security Considerations

   This is a procedural document, and is entirely unrelated to security.


4.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are requested by this document, and the RFC Editor is
   asked to remove this section before publication.


5.  Normative References

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.


Author's Address

   Barry Leiba
   Huawei Technologies

   Phone: +1 646 827 0648
   Email: barryleiba@computer.org
   URI:   http://internetmessagingtechnology.org/


















Leiba                   Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 4]

