


NETWORK WORKING GROUP                                        N. Williams
Internet-Draft                                                       Sun
Intended status: Informational                        September 12, 2006
Expires: March 16, 2007


            GSS-API Domain-Based Service Names and Name Type
           draft-ietf-kitten-gssapi-domain-based-names-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).














Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


Abstract

   This document describes domainname-based service principal names and
   the corresponding name type for the Generic Security Service
   Application Programming Interface (GSS-API).

   Domain-based service names are similar to host-based service names,
   but using a domain name (not necessarily an Internet domain name) in
   addition to a hostname.  The primary purpose of domain-based names is
   to provide a measure of protection to applications that utilize
   insecure service discovery protocols.  This is achieved by providing
   a way to name clustered services after the "domain" which they
   service, thereby allowing their clients to authorize the service's
   servers based on authentication of their service names.


Table of Contents

   1.    Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.    Name Type OID and Symbolic Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.    Query and Display Syntaxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.1.  Examples of domain-based names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.    Application protocol examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.1.  NFSv4 domain-wide namespace root server discovery  . . . . .  7
   5.2.  LDAP server discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.    References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 11



















Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


2.  Introduction

   Some applications need to discover the names of servers for a
   specific resource.  Some common methods for server discovery are
   insecure, e.g., queries for DNS [RFC1035] SRV resource records
   [RFC2782] without using DNSSEC [RFC4033] and subject to attacks
   whereby a client can be re-directed to incorrect and possibly
   malicious servers.  A client may even be re-directed to a server that
   has credentials for itself and may thus authenticate itself to the
   client, and yet it could be incorrect or malicious (because it has
   been compromised, say).

   Domain-based names allow for GSS-API [RFC2743] initiator applications
   (clients) to authorize acceptor principals (servers) to serve the
   resource for which the client used insecure server discovery without
   either securing the server discovery method nor requiring an
   additional protocol for server authorization -- either a discovered
   server has credentials for authenticating the domain-based service
   names that it is intended to respond to, or it does not.
   Availability of valid credentials for authenticating domain-based
   names embodies the authorization of a given server to a domain-wide
   service.

   A domain-based name consists of three required elements:

   o  a service name

   o  a domain name

   o  a hostname

   For the purposes of domain-based names a "domain" is defined by the
   applications that use domain-based names.  An application protocol
   might use a simple DNS domainname, such as "example.com" for naming,
   while another it might use the DNS domainname of the SRV RRs it
   queries (e.g., "_tcp._foo.example.com"), and yet another may use
   something that does not resemble a DNS domainname.  Application
   protocol specifications that provide for use of domain-based service
   names MUST define the domain-portion of their domain-based names.

   Note that domain-based naming isn't new.  According to a report to
   the KITTEN WG mailing list there exists at least one implementation
   of LDAP which uses domain-based service naming, and the DIGEST-MD5
   HTTP/SASL mechanism [RFC2831] describes a similar notion (see section
   2.1.2, description of the "serv-name" field of the digest-response).






Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


3.  Name Type OID and Symbolic Name

   The new name type has an OID of

      [NOTE: OID assignment to be made with IANA.]

      {iso(1) org(3) dod(6) internet(1) security(5) nametypes(6) gss-
      domain-based(5)}

   The recommended symbolic name for this GSS-API name type is
   "GSS_C_NT_DOMAINBASED_SERVICE".








































Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


4.  Query and Display Syntaxes

   There is a single name syntax for domain-based names.

   The syntax is:

      domain-based-name :=

         <service> '@' <domain> '@' <hostname>

   Note that for Internet domain names the trailing '.'  MUST NOT be
   included in the hostname part of the display form GSS-API domain-
   based MNs; hostnames MUST NOT contain '@'.

4.1.  Examples of domain-based names

   These examples are not normative:

   o  ldap@example.tld@ds1.example.tld

   o  nfs@example.tld@nfsroot1.example.tld






























Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


5.  Application protocol examples

   The following examples are not normative.  They describe how the
   author envisions two applications' use of domain-based names.

5.1.  NFSv4 domain-wide namespace root server discovery

   Work is ongoing to provide a method for constructing domain-wide
   NFSv4 [RFC3530] filesystem namespaces where there is a single "root"
   with one or more servers (replicas) and multiple filesystems glued
   into the namespace through use of "referrals."  Clients could then
   construct a "global" namespace through use of the DNS domain
   hierarchy.

   Here clients would always know, from context, when they need to find
   the root servers for a given DNS domain.  Root server discovery would
   be performed using DNS SRV RR lookups, without using DNSSEC where
   DNSSEC has not been deployed.

   When using RPCSEC_GSS [RFC2203] for security NFSv4 clients would then
   use domain-based names to ensure that that the servers named in the
   SRV RRs are in fact authorized to be the NFSv4 root servers for the
   target domain.

5.2.  LDAP server discovery

   LDAP clients using the GSS-API through SASL too would benefit from
   use of domain-based names to protect server discovery through
   insecure DNS SRV RR lookups, much as described above.

   Unlike NFSv4 clients, not all LDAP clients may always know from
   context when they should use domain-based names.  That's because
   existing clients may use host-based naming to authenticate servers
   discovered through SRV RR lookups.  Changing such clients to use
   domain-based naming when domain-based acceptor credentials have not
   been deployed to LDAP servers, or when LDAP servers have not been
   modified to allow use of domain-based naming, would break
   interoperability.  That is, there is a legacy server interoperability
   issue here.  Therefore LDAP clients may require additional
   configuration at deployment time to enable (or disable) use of
   domain-based naming.

   Note: whether SASL [RFC4422] or its GSS-API bridges
   [I-D.ietf-sasl-gssapi] [I-D.josefsson-sasl-gs2] require updates in
   order allow use of domain-based names is not relevant to the theory
   of how domain-based naming would protect LDAP clients' server
   discovery.




Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   Use of GSS-API domain-based names may not be negotiable by some GSS-
   API mechanisms, and some acceptors may not support GSS-API domain-
   based names.  In such cases initiators are left to fallback on the
   use of hostbased names, in which case the initiators MUST also verify
   that the acceptor's hostbased name is authorized to provide the given
   service for the domain that the initiator had wanted.

   The above security consideration also applies to all GSS-API
   initiators who lack support for domain-based service names.








































Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2743]  Linn, J., "Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface Version 2, Update 1", RFC 2743, January 2000.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC2831]  Leach, P. and C. Newman, "Using Digest Authentication as a
              SASL Mechanism", RFC 2831, May 2000.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sasl-gssapi]
              Melnikov, A., "The Kerberos V5 ("GSSAPI") SASL mechanism",
              draft-ietf-sasl-gssapi-06 (work in progress), June 2006.

   [I-D.josefsson-sasl-gs2]
              Josefsson, S., "Using GSS-API Mechanisms in SASL: The GS2
              Mechanism Family", draft-josefsson-sasl-gs2-00 (work in
              progress), November 2005.

   [RFC2203]  Eisler, M., Chiu, A., and L. Ling, "RPCSEC_GSS Protocol
              Specification", RFC 2203, September 1997.

   [RFC3530]  Shepler, S., Callaghan, B., Robinson, D., Thurlow, R.,
              Beame, C., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
              (NFS) version 4 Protocol", RFC 3530, April 2003.

   [RFC4422]  Melnikov, A. and K. Zeilenga, "Simple Authentication and
              Security Layer (SASL)", RFC 4422, June 2006.







Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


Author's Address

   Nicolas Williams
   Sun Microsystems
   5300 Riata Trace Ct
   Austin, TX  78727
   US

   Email: Nicolas.Williams@sun.com










































Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           GSS Domain Based Names           September 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Williams                 Expires March 16, 2007                [Page 11]


