

SIPPING Working Group                                     J. Bakker, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                  Research in Motion (RIM)
Intended status: Experimental                          February 12, 2008
Expires: August 15, 2008


        Specification of 3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling
           draft-bakker-sipping-3gpp-ims-xml-body-handling-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document registers new disposition-types for the Content-
   Disposition header that apply to the application/3gpp-ims+xml body
   used by 3GPP, since Release 5.  The applicability of these content-
   disposition values are limited to 3GPP IMS.  The application/
   3gpp-ims+xml body has the following two distinct uses: (1) for
   redirecting the emergency session to use a different domain (e.g.
   using a Circuit Switched call), and (2) for delivering user profile
   specific information from the SIP registrar to an Application Server.



Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Overall Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

   4.  Background for the new disposition-types for the
       Content-Disposition header  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  The application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME type with content
           disposition 3gpp-alternative-service  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
       4.1.1.  Example application/3gpp-ims+xml body . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  The application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME type with content
           disposition 3gpp-service-info . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
       4.2.1.  Example application/3gpp-ims+xml body . . . . . . . . . 5

   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8
























Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


1.  Overall Applicability

   This document makes certain assumptions regarding network topology
   and the existence of transitive trust.  These assumptions are
   generally NOT APPLICABLE in the Internet as a whole.  The mechanism
   specified here was designed to satisfy the requirements specified by
   the 3rd Generation Partnership Project for IP multimedia subsystem
   (IMS) for which either no general-purpose solution was found, where
   insufficient operational experience was available to understand if a
   general solution is needed, or where a more general solution is not
   yet mature.


2.  Introduction

   New disposition-types for the Content-Disposition header can only be
   registered with IANA according to procedures defined in Section 9 of
   [1].

   The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) (http://www.3gpp.org)
   is specifying the IP multimedia subsystem (IMS) where SIP is the
   protocol used to establish media sessions across different
   participants.

   This document registers new disposition-types for the Content-
   Disposition header: 3gpp-alternative-service and 3gpp-service-info,
   to address specific requirements of the IMS.  The new disposition-
   types may not be applicable to the general Internet.  The new
   disposition types are applicable to the application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME
   type [2].


3.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [3].

   The terms "Application Server" (AS), "Alternative Service", and
   "Service Info" are introduced in this document.

   An "Application Server" as referred to here is a SIP network server
   that performs network based functions.  The AS can act as a SIP Proxy
   as defined in [4] or a back-to-back UA (B2BUA) as defined in [4]
   based on the functions it needs to perform.  There can be one or more
   ASes involved in a SIP session.

   An "Alternative Service" is a MIME body included in a SIP 380



Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


   (Alternative Service) response with the Content-Type header value set
   to "application/3gpp-ims+xml", signalled from a SIP network server to
   SIP UAC, redirecting the emergency session to use different domain
   (e.g. using a Circuit Switched call).

   A "Service Info" is a MIME body included SIP request to an
   Application Server, with the Content-Type header value set to
   "application/3gpp-ims+xml" containing user profile specific data.
   Service Information is only included by the registrar in REGISTER
   requests where the registrar acts as a UAC [5].


4.  Background for the new disposition-types for the Content-Disposition
    header

4.1.  The application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME type with content disposition
      3gpp-alternative-service

   In the IMS it is possible that a UA attempts to place an emergency
   call when the IMS network does not support emergency services.  The
   edge proxy detects the emergency call and can redirect the UE using a
   SIP 380 (Alternative Service) to place the emergency call using
   another domain (e.g. using a Circuit Switched call).

   Section 21.3.5 of [4] specifies that, for the SIP 380 (Alternative
   Service) response, alternative services are described in the message
   body of the response

   The application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME type with content disposition 3gpp-
   alternative-service is applicable in the following circumstances:

      o Where the invitee UA originates a SIP request containing in the
      R-URI a URI that identifies this request as an emergency session
      request;

      o The network also contains intermediate network SIP servers that
      are trusted;

      o The edge proxy has knowledge of the network's capability or
      policy to handle the requested (type of) emergency session.

   Such configurations are generally not applicable to the internet as a
   whole where such trust relationships do not exist.

   In addition security issues have only been considered for networks
   which are trusted and use hop by hop security mechanisms with
   transitive trust and security issues with usage of this mechanism in
   the general internet have not been evaluated.



Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


4.1.1.  Example application/3gpp-ims+xml body

      <3gpp-ims version="1">
         <alternative-service>
            <type>
               <emergency/>
            </type>
         </alternative-service>
      </3gpp-ims>

4.2.  The application/3gpp-ims+xml MIME type with content disposition
      3gpp-service-info

   In 3GPP IMS the SIP registrar (S-CSCF) can perform a third party
   registration to an Application Server.  The SIP registrar downloads
   User Profile information and can transparently transfer User Profile
   specific information to the Application Server using a body of MIME
   type application/3gpp-ims+xml in a SIP REGISTER request.  In the
   example in Section 4.2.1, an International Mobile Subscriber Identity
   (IMSI) is transferred.

4.2.1.  Example application/3gpp-ims+xml body

      <3gpp-ims version="1">
         <service-info>
            262013564857956
         </service-info>
      </3gpp-ims>


5.  Security Considerations

   It is necessary to protect the messages between proxies;
   implementation SHOULD use a transport that provides integrity and
   confidentially between the signaling hops.  The Transport Layer
   Security (TLS) [6] based signaling in SIP can be used to provide this
   protection.

   Security issues have only been considered for networks which are
   trusted and use hop by hop security mechanisms with transitive trust
   and security issues with usage of this mechanism in the general
   internet have not been evaluated.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers new disposition-types for the Content-
   Disposition header that apply to the application/3gpp-ims+xml body



Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


   used by 3GPP and are to be registered in the IANA registry for Mail
   Content Disposition Values and Parameters:

      o 3gpp-alternative-service: the body contains 3GPP IM CN subsystem
      XML with the 'alternative-service' XML element as described in
      Section 4.1; and

      o 3gpp-service-info: the body contains 3GPP IM CN subsystem XML
      with the 'service-info' XML element as described in Section 4.2.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Andrew Allen, Dean Willis, Cullen
   Jennings for their guidance and comments that contributed to the
   progression of this work.


8.  References

   [1]  Troost, R., Dorner, S., and K. Moore, "Communicating
        Presentation Information in Internet Messages: The Content-
        Disposition Header Field", RFC 2183, August 1997.

   [2]  3GPP, "IP Multimedia Call Control Protocol based on Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Session Description Protocol
        (SDP); Stage 3 (Release 5)", 3GPP TS 24.229 V5.21.0,
        December 2007.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [5]  3GPP, "IP Multimedia (IM) session handling; IM call model; Stage
        2 (Release 5)", 3GPP TS 23.218 V5.9.0, June 2006.

   [6]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
        Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346, April 2006.










Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


Author's Address

   John-Luc Bakker (editor)
   Research in Motion (RIM)
   5000 Riverside Drive, building 6, suite 100
   Irving, Texas  75039
   USA

   Email: jbakker@rim.com










































Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   3GPP IM CN Subsystem XML body handling    February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Bakker                   Expires August 15, 2008                [Page 8]


