


ALTO                                                           S. Kiesel
Internet-Draft                                   University of Stuttgart
Intended status: Standards Track                               M. Scharf
Expires: August 17, 2014                        Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
                                                       February 13, 2014


         ALTO metrices for expressing availability information
               draft-kiesel-alto-availability-metrics-00

Abstract

   This document specifies new metrices to be used with the ALTO
   protocol.  The goal is to provide information about the availability
   of physical network, host, and storage infrastructures to management
   systems that orchestrate virtual infrastructures on top of them.



































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


Terminology and Requirements Language

   This document makes use of the ALTO terminology defined in [RFC5693]
   and [RFC6708].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.











Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Classification of availability-related parameters  . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Identification of physical resources . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Classification of cost types and properties  . . . . . . .  5
       2.2.1.  Static vs. dynamic facts vs. probabilites  . . . . . .  5
       2.2.2.  Causality and Correlation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Specification of new Endpoint Address types  . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Specification of new Cost and Property types . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Obtaining Availability Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


1.  Introduction

   Various virtualization technologies allow to instantiate virtual
   hosts, virtual storage, and virtual networks on top of their physical
   counterparts.  They can be combined to build complex virtual
   infrastructures.  Management systems automate the task of mapping
   virtual to physical resources, considering various optimization
   goals.  Mechanisms like live migration of virtual machines or re-
   shaping the topology of overlay networks allow to dynamically react
   on changing conditions, both in the virtual infrastructure (e.g.,
   change in demand) and in the underlying physical infrastructures
   (e.g., change in available resources).

   A typical example is, that in a cluster of several physical servers,
   in times of low demand, all virtual machines could be migrated away
   from one node.  This node would be powered down, in order to save
   precious energy.  If resource utilization is the only optimization
   goal, the input for the placement/scheduling manager can be gathered
   by measurements.

   If, however, other optimization goals have to be considered, the
   management system needs external information.  For example, if all
   but two nodes of the cluster are to be shut down, the remaining two
   nodes should be selected in a way that minimizes the risk of both
   nodes failing at the same time due to a single root cause.  This
   optimization problem becomes more difficult if not only hosts and
   storage but also network resources are considered.

   This document shows that the ALTO protocol [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
   offers the required base mechanisms for providing a standardized
   interface to virtual infrastructure orchestration managers, for
   conveying information about the availability / reliability of the
   underlying physical infrastructure, This document further defines
   appropriate metrices for this use case.

















Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


2.  Classification of availability-related parameters

   Important concepts of the ALTO protocol are Endpoints, which are
   identified by Endpoint Addresses.  Endpoints can be grouped in PIDs.
   Endpoints (and by means of protocol extensions
   [I-D.roome-alto-pid-properties] also PIDs) may have properties that
   can be queried using the ALTO protocol.  Paths between PIDs may have
   one or more path costs according to some cost metric.  These path
   costs can be queried for individual pairs of PIDs, or a whole cost
   map (i.e., a "PID x PID -> cost" matrix) can be downloaded.  The path
   cost concept can easily be generalized to a path property concept.

   This section discusses how these base mechanisms can be used to
   convey information related to availability of physical
   infrastructures to systems that manage virtual infrastructures on top
   of them.

2.1.  Identification of physical resources

   In order to identify physical resources within the ALTO protocol, an
   appropriate endpoint address type has to be used.  The ALTO base
   protocol specification [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] only defines IPv4 and
   IPv6 addresses, and establishes a process to register further types.
   In fact, IP addresses may be used to identify physical resources in
   many cases, e.g., the loopback address of a router, or the management
   address of a physical server, etc.  For a discussion of VPNs and ALTO
   see [I-D.scharf-alto-vpn-service].

   TBD: discussion of further options for endpoint addesses.

2.2.  Classification of cost types and properties

   Information related to availability of physical resources may be of
   different fundamental natures, requiring different encodings and
   different update intervals.  This section itemizes several criteria.

2.2.1.  Static vs. dynamic facts vs. probabilites

   Information may be static facts that change never or very
   infequently.  For example: "Electrical power outlets A and B are both
   connected to circuit breaker F1".

   Information may also be more frequently changing, e.g.,
   "Uninterruptible power supply UPS1 is now running on battery power,
   82% capacity left".  TBD: further investigation and guidance is
   needed on the maximum update frequency that can reasonably be done
   using ALTO.




Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


   Another type of information are statistical measures such as the
   average relative availability of a subsystem, e.g., the famous "five
   nines".

2.2.2.  Causality and Correlation

   Many initial incidents can cause a series of events, according to
   some kind of "failure propagation topology", which is independent of
   the IP network topology.  There may be even hierarchies.

   For example, "Servers S1 and S2 are connected via circuit breaker F1
   to uninterruptible power supply UPS1 while S3 and S4 are connected
   via F2 to UPS1" implies that a failure in S1 triggering F1 will also
   interrupt operation of S2.  Furhermore, shutting down S2, S3, and S4
   in case of a power grid failure could strech UPS1's battery lifetime
   and thereby prolong S1's survivability time.  Similar considerations
   can be made for different kinds of problems, e.g., the impact of a
   fire.

   Modeling diffent risk types (e.g., power outage, fire, flooding,
   physical intruders, etc.) in their respective terminology would
   require the definition of many new data types.

   A more generic approach is to use an ALTO cost map as a matrix, which
   indicates the level of isolation against "fate sharing" of any two
   PIDs with respect to a given (physical) risk.  In other words, for
   every specific risk R the coefficients of that matrix could be
   calculated as

   C_R(x,y) = 1 - P( y fails due to R | x fails due to R )

   For example, if the risk type is "fire", then a coefficient of 0
   could mean "these two physical resources are in the same rack.  If
   one is on fire for any reason, the other one will almost inevitably
   fail within seconds, too.", a value of 0.3 could mean "the resources
   are in adjacent buildings" and 0.99999 could mean "these two
   resources are on different continents and only a natural disaster
   causing global destruction could disable both of them in one single
   event".

   Note that these conditional properties only indicate how likely it is
   that the second resource will become unavailable due to the same
   event that disabled the first resource.  They do not indicate how
   likely it is that the event will actually occur.

   TBD: discuss to which extent a single "endpoint address to PID"
   network map is useful when considering different risk types.  The
   idea behind PIDs is to reduce map size by grouping topologically



Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


   close endpoints, but the "failure propagation topologies" may be very
   unalingned for different risk types.  We will probably end up with
   many very small PIDs.
















































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


3.  Specification of new Endpoint Address types

   TBD.
















































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


4.  Specification of new Cost and Property types

   TBD.

   We need: the "isolation level agains fate sharing" matrix, and a list
   of risk types, in order to give the absolute probability of that risk
   for a given resource.












































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


5.  Obtaining Availability Information

   For any ALTO information, it is important to consider whether the
   ALTO service realistically can discover that information, if the
   distribution of that information is allowed, if the data is useful,
   if a client can get that information without excessive privacy
   concerns, and if the information cannot be gathered easily be found
   in some other way.

   Availability-related parameters can both refer to properties of the
   network infrastructure (e.g., network resiliency mechanisms) as well
   as non-networking effects (e.g., redundancy of power supply).  In
   both cases, an application typically cannot measure that information,
   neither by passive monitoring nor by active probing.  Yet,
   availability information and insight into impact of incidents matters
   to many applications and can be an important criteria for resource
   selection decisions.  Since typical use cases would be limited to one
   administrative domain, privacy is not a major concern; in addition,
   the suggested correlation metrics provide an abstraction over the
   actual physical infrastructure.

   Gathering availability information may be more challenging than, for
   instance, IP routing topologies.  For instance, it may require access
   to inventory databases.  Yet, within one domain, the organization
   that is responsible for the physical network topology may also take
   care of other parts of the physical infrastructure, such as the power
   supply or hardware installation.  An organization that operates an
   ALTO server for exposing network topology information could therefore
   also have access to other inventory data.  Therefore, providing
   availability information to an ALTO server as described in this
   document is realistic.




















Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.
















































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


7.  Security Considerations

   TBD.
















































Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
              Alimi, R., Penno, R., and Y. Yang, "ALTO Protocol",
              draft-ietf-alto-protocol-25 (work in progress),
              January 2014.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.roome-alto-pid-properties]
              Roome, B. and Y. Yang, "PID Property Extension for ALTO
              Protocol", draft-roome-alto-pid-properties-00 (work in
              progress), October 2013.

   [I-D.scharf-alto-vpn-service]
              Scharf, M., Gurbani, V., Soprovich, G., and V. Hilt, "The
              Virtual Private Network (VPN) Service in ALTO: Use Cases,
              Requirements and Extensions",
              draft-scharf-alto-vpn-service-01 (work in progress),
              July 2013.

   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693,
              October 2009.

   [RFC6708]  Kiesel, S., Previdi, S., Stiemerling, M., Woundy, R., and
              Y. Yang, "Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
              Requirements", RFC 6708, September 2012.


















Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         ALTO availability metrices          February 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Sebastian Kiesel
   University of Stuttgart Information Center
   Networks and Communication Systems Department
   Allmandring 30
   Stuttgart  70550
   Germany

   Email: ietf-alto@skiesel.de
   URI:   http://www.rus.uni-stuttgart.de/nks/


   Michael Scharf
   Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
   Lorenzstrasse 10
   Stuttgart  70435
   Germany

   Email: michael.scharf@alcatel-lucent.com
   URI:   www.alcatel-lucent.com/bell-labs






























Kiesel & Scharf          Expires August 17, 2014               [Page 14]

