



Network Working Group                                         D. Crocker
Internet-Draft                               Brandenburg InternetWorking
Intended status: Experimental                           January 17, 2021
Expires: July 21, 2021


                       Email Author Header Field
                     draft-crocker-email-author-01

Abstract

   Internet mail defines the From: field to indicate the author of the
   message's content and the Sender: field to indicate who initially
   handled the message, on the author's behalf.  The Sender: field is
   optional, if it has the same information as the From: field.  That
   is, when the Sender: field is absent, the From: field has conflated
   semantics, as both a handling identifier and a content creator
   identifier.  This was not a problem, until development of stringent
   protections on use of the From: field.  It has prompted Mediators,
   such as mailing lists, to modify the From: field, to circumvent mail
   rejection caused by those protections.

   This affects end-to-end behavior of email, between the author and the
   final recipients, because mail from the same author is not treated
   the same, depending on what path it followed.  In effect, the From:
   field has become dominated by its role as a handling identifier.  The
   current specification augments the altered use of the From: field, by
   specifying the Author: field, which identifies the original author of
   the message and is not subject to modification by Mediators.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 21, 2021.





Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   Author                     January 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Author Header Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Experimental Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Internet mail conducts asynchronous communication from an author to
   one or more recipients, and is used for ongoing dialogue amongst
   them.  Email has a long history of serving a wide range of human uses
   and styles, within that simple framework, and the mechanisms for
   making email robust and safe serve that sole purpose.

   Internet mail defines the content header's From: field to indicate
   the author of the message and the Sender: field to indicate who
   initially handled the message, on the author's behalf.  [Mail-Fmt]
   The Sender: field is optional, if it has the same information as the
   From: field.  That is, when the Sender: field is absent, the From:
   field has conflated semantics, as both a handling identifier and a
   content creator identifier.  These fields were initially defined in
   [RFC733] and making the redundant Sender: field optional was a small,
   obvious optimization, in the days of slower communications, expensive
   storage and less powerful computers.





Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   Author                     January 2021


   The dual semantics was not a problem, until development of stringent
   protections on use of the From: field.  It has prompted Mediators,
   such as mailing lists, to modify the From: field, to circumvent mail
   rejection caused by those protections.  This affects end-to-end
   usability of email, between the author and the final recipients,
   because mail received from the same author is treated differently by
   the recipient's software, depending on what path the message
   followed.

   By way of example, mail from "Example User <user@example.com>" which
   is sent directly to a recipient, will show the user's display name
   correctly and can correctly analyze and aggregate mail from that
   user, based on their email address.  However if the user sends
   through a mailing list, and the mailing list conducts a common form
   of From: modification, needed to bypass enforcement of stringent
   authentication policies, then the received message might have a From:
   field along the lines of "Example User via Example List
   <listname@list.example.com>".  The change inserts an operational
   address, for the Mediator, into the From: field, and distorts the
   field's display-name, as a means of recording the modification.

      The result is that the recipient's software will see the message
      as being from an entirely different author and will handle it
      separately.  Mediators might create a Reply-To: field, with the
      original From: field email address, but this does nothing to aid
      other processing done by the recipient's MUA based on what it
      believes is the author's address or original display-name.

   In effect, the From: field has become dominated by its role as a
   handling identifier.  The current specification augments the current
   use of the From: field, by specifying the Author: field, which
   identifies the original author of the message and is not subject to
   modification by Mediators.

   While it might be cleanest to move towards more reliable use of the
   Sender: field and then to target it as the focus of authentication
   concerns, enhancement of standards works best with incremental
   additions, rather than efforts at replacement.  To that end, this
   specification provides a means of supplying author information that
   is not subject to modification by processes seeking to enforce
   stringent authentication.

   Terminology and architectural details in this document are
   incorporated from [Mail-Arch].

   Discussion of this draft is directed to the ietf-822@ietf.org mailing
   list.




Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   Author                     January 2021


2.  Author Header Field

   A new message header field is defined: Author:. It has the same
   syntax as From:. [Mail-Fmt] As with the original and primary intent
   for the From: header field, the Author: header field is to contain
   the email address and can contain the displayable human name of the
   author for the message content.

   The [ABNF] for the field's syntax is:

   author = "Author:" mailbox-list CRLF

   which echos the syntax for the From: field.

   This header field can be added as part of the original message create
   process, or it can be added later, to preserve the original author
   information from the From: field.

3.  Discussion

   The Author: header field, here, is intended for creation during
   message generation or during mediation.  It is intended for use by
   recipient MUAs, as they typically use the From: field.  In that
   regard, it would be reasonable for an MUA that would normally
   organize or display information based on the From: field to give the
   Author: header field priority.

   X-Original-From: is a similar header field, referenced in [rfc5703].
   However it is not actually defined.  Further, it is registered with
   IANA, but the registry cites RFC5703 as the controlling source for
   the entry.  Lastly, the field is solely intended for use by
   Mediators, to preserve information from a modified From:

   Obviously any security-related processing of a message needs to
   distinguish From: from Author: and treat their information
   accordingly.

4.  Security Considerations

   Any header field containing identification information is a source of
   security and privacy concerns, especially one pertaining to content
   authorship.  Generally, the handling of the Author: header field
   needs to receive scrutiny and care comparable to that given to the
   From: header field, but preferably not in a way that defeats its
   utility.

   Given the semantics of this field, it is easy to believe that use of
   this field will create a new attack vector for tricking end-users.



Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   Author                     January 2021


   However, for all of the real and serious demonstration of users'
   being tricked by deceptive or false content in a message, there is no
   evidence that problematic content in a field providing information
   about message's author directly contributes to differential and
   problematic behavior by the end user.

5.  IANA Considerations

   The Author header field is registered, per [RFC3864]

      Header field name: Author

      Applicable protocol: mail

      Status: Standard

      Author/Change controller: Dave Crocker <dcrocker@bbiw.net>

      Specification document(s): *** This document ***

6.  Experimental Goals

   Given that the semantics of this field echo the long-standing From:
   field, the basic mechanics of the field's creation and use are well
   understood.  Points of concern, therefore, are with possible
   interactions with the existing From: field, with anti-abuse systems,
   and with MUA behavior, along with basic market acceptance.  So the
   questions to answer, while the header field has experimental status
   are:

   o  Is there demonstrated interest by MUA developers?

   o  If MUA developers add this capability, is it used by authors?

   o  Does the presence of the Author field, in combination with the
      From field, create any operational problems, especially for
      recipients?

   o  Does the presence of the Author field demonstrate additional
      security issues?

   o  Does the presence of the Author field engender problematic
      behavior by anti-abuse softwere, such as defeating its utility?








Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   Author                     January 2021


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [ABNF]     Dave, D., Ed. and P. Paul, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [Mail-Arch]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", RFC 5598, July
              2009.

   [Mail-Fmt]
              Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.

   [RFC3864]  Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
              Procedures for Message Header Fields", BCP 90, RFC 3864,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3864, September 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3864>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [rfc5703]  Hansen, T. and C. Daboo, "Sieve Email Filtering: MIME Part
              Tests, Iteration, Extraction, Replacement, and Enclosure",
              RFC 5703, October 2009.

   [RFC733]   Crocker, D., Vittal, J., Pogran, K., and D. Henderson,
              "Standard for the Format of ARPA Network Text Messages",
              RFC 733, November 1977.

Author's Address

   Dave Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking

   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net















Crocker                   Expires July 21, 2021                 [Page 6]
