



MIP6                                                               F. Le
Internet-Draft                                                       CMU
Expires: April 20, 2006                                        S. Faccin
                                                                B. Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                        October 17, 2005


              Mobile IPv6 and Firewalls: Problem statement
                    draft-ietf-mip6-firewalls-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   Network elements such as firewalls are an integral aspect of a
   majority of IP networks today, given the state of security in the
   Internet, threats, and vulnerabilities to data networks.  Current IP
   networks are predominantly based on IPv4 technology and hence



Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


   firewalls have been designed for these networks.  Deployment of IPv6
   networks is currently progressing, albeit at a slower pace.
   Firewalls for IPv6 networks are still maturing and in development.

   Mobility support for IPv6 has been standardized as specified in RFC
   3775.  Given the fact that Mobile IPv6 is a recent standard, most
   firewalls available for IPv6 networks do not support Mobile IPv6.

   Unless firewalls are aware of Mobile IPv6 protocol details, these
   security devices will interfere in the smooth operation of the
   protocol and can be a detriment to deployment.  This document
   captures the issues that may arise in the deployment of IPv6 networks
   when they support Mobile IPv6 and firewalls.

   The issues are not only applicable to firewalls protecting enterprise
   networks, but are also applicable in 3G mobile networks such as GPRS/
   UMTS and cdma2000 networks.

   The goal of this Internet draft is to highlight the issues with
   firewalls and Mobile IPv6 and act as an enabler for further
   discussion.  Issues identified here can be solved by developing
   appropriate solutions in the MIP6 WG.





























Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Overview of firewalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Analysis of various scenarios involving MIP6 nodes and
       firewalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Scenario where the Mobile Node is in a network
           protected by firewall(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Scenario where the Correspondent Node is in a network
           protected by firewall(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Scenario where the HA is in a network protected by
           firewall(s)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.4.  Scenario where MN moves to a network protected by
           firewall(s)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Appendix A.  Applicability to 3G Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 23


























Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


1.  Introduction

   Mobile IPv6 enables IP mobility for IPv6 nodes.  It allows a mobile
   IPv6 node to be reachable via its home IPv6 address irrespective of
   any link that the mobile attaches to.  This is possible as a result
   of the extensions to IPv6 defined in the Mobile IPv6 specification
   [1].

   Mobile IPv6 protocol design also incorporates a feature termed as
   Route Optimization.  This set of extensions is a fundamental part of
   the protocol that enables optimized routing of packets between a
   Mobile Node and its correspondent node and therefore the performance
   of the communication.

   In most cases, current firewall technologies, however, do not support
   Mobile IPv6 or are even aware of Mobile IPv6 headers and and
   extensions.  Since most networks in the current business environment
   deploy firewalls, this may prevent future large-scale deployment of
   the Mobile IPv6 protocol.

   This document presents in detail some of the issues that firewalls
   present for Mobile IPv6 deployment, as well as the impact of each
   issue.




























Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


2.  Terminology

   Return Routability Test (RRT): The Return Routability Test is a
      procedure defined in RFC 3775 [1].  It is performed prior to the
      Route Optimization (RO), where a mobile node (MN) instructs a
      correspondent node (CN) to direct the mobile node's data traffic
      to its claimed care-of address (CoA).  The Return Routability
      procedure provides some security assurance and prevents the misuse
      of Mobile IPv6 signaling to maliciously redirect the traffic or to
      launch other attacks.









































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


3.  Abbreviations

   This document uses the following abbreviations:

   o  CN: Correspondent Node

   o  CoA: Care of Address

   o  CoTI: Care of Test Init

   o  HA: Home Agent

   o  HoA: Home Address

   o  HoTI: Home Test Init

   o  MN: Mobile Node

   o  RO: Route Optimization

   o  RRT: Return Routability Test






























Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


4.  Overview of firewalls

   The following section provides a brief overview of firewalls.  It is
   intended as background information so that issues with the Mobile
   IPv6 protocol can then be presented in detail in the following
   sections.

   There are different types of firewalls and state can be created in
   these firewalls through different methods.  Independent of the
   adopted method, firewalls typically look at five parameters of the
   traffic arriving at the firewalls:

   o  Source IP address

   o  Destination IP address

   o  Protocol type

   o  Source port number

   o  Destination port number

   Based on these parameters, firewalls usually decide whether to allow
   the traffic or to drop the packets.  Some firewalls may filter only
   incoming traffic while others may also filter outgoing traffic.

   According to Section 3.29 of RFC 2647 [2] stateful packet filtering
   refers to the process of forwarding or rejecting traffic based on the
   contents of a state table maintained by a firewall.  These types of
   firewalls are commonly deployed to protect networks from different
   threats, such as blocking unsolicited incoming traffic from the
   external networks.  The following briefly describes how these
   firewalls work since they can create additional problems with the
   Mobile IPv6 protocol as described in the subsequent sections.

   When a MN connects using TCP to another host in the Internet, it
   sends a TCP SYN message to set up the connection.  When that SYN
   packet is routed through the firewall, the firewall creates an entry
   in its state table containing the source IP address, the destination
   IP address, the Protocol type, the source port number and the
   destination port number indicated in that packet before forwarding
   the packet to the destination.  When an incoming message from the
   external networks reaches the firewall, it searches the packet's
   source IP address, destination IP address, Protocol type, source port
   number and destination port number in its state table to see if the
   packet matches the characteristics of a request sent previously.  If
   so, the firewall lets the packet pass.  Otherwise, the packet is
   dropped since it was not requested from inside the network.



Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


   The firewall removes the state table entries either when the TCP
   close session negotiation packets are routed through, or after some
   configurable timeout period.  This ensures that dropped connections
   do not leave holes in the table.

   For UDP, similar state is created.  However, since UDP is
   connectionless and the protocol does not have an indication of the
   beginning nor the end of a session, the state is based only on
   timers.










































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


5.  Analysis of various scenarios involving MIP6 nodes and firewalls

   The following section describes various scenarios involving MIP6
   nodes and firewalls and also presents the issues related to each
   scenario.

   The Mobile IPv6 specifications define three main entities: the Mobile
   Node (MN), the Correspondent Node (CN) and the Home Agent (HA).  Each
   of these entities may be in a network protected by one or many
   firewalls:

   o  Section 5.1 analyzes the issues when the MN is in a network
      protected by firewall(s)

   o  Section 5.2 analyzes the issues when the CN is in a network
      protected by firewall(s)

   o  Section 5.3 analyzes the issues when the HA is in a network
      protected by firewall(s)

   The MN may also be moving from an external network, to a network
   protected by firewall(s).  The issues of this case are described in
   Section 5.3.

   Some of the described issues (e.g.  Section 5.1 and Section 5.2) may
   require modifications to the protocols or to the firewalls, and
   others (e.g.  Section 5.3) may require only appropriate rules and
   configuration to be in place.

5.1.  Scenario where the Mobile Node is in a network protected by
      firewall(s)

   Let's consider a MN A, in a network protected by firewall(s).


















Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


     +----------------+       +----+
     |                |       | HA |
     |                |       +----+
     |                |      Home Agent
     |  +---+      +----+      of A               +---+
     |  | A |      | FW |                         | B |
     |  +---+      +----+                         +---+
     |Internal        |                         External
     |   MN           |                           Node
     |                |
     +----------------+
     Network protected

   Figure 1: Issues between MIP6 and firewalls when MN is in a network
   protected by firewalls

   A number of issues need to be considered:

   Issue 1: When the MN A connects to the network, it should acquire a
      local IP address (CoA), and send a Binding Update to its Home
      Agent to update the HA with its current point of attachment.  The
      Binding Updates and Acknowledgements should be protected by IPsec
      ESP according to the MIPv6 specifications [1].  However, as a
      default rule, many firewalls drop IPsec ESP packets because they
      cannot determine whether inbound ESP packets are legitimate.  It
      is difficult or impossible to create useful state by observing the
      outbound ESP packets.  This may cause the Binding Updates and
      Acknowledgements between the Mobile Nodes and their Home Agent to
      be dropped.


   Issue 2: Let's now consider a node in the external network, B, trying
      to establish a communication with MN A.


      *  B sends a packet to the Mobile Node's home address.

      *  The packet is intercepted by the MN's Home Agent which tunnels
         it to the MN's CoA [1].

      *  When arriving at the firewall(s) protecting MN A, the packet
         may be dropped since the incoming packet may not match any
         existing state.  As described in Section 4, stateful inspection
         packet filters e.g. typically drop unsolicited incoming
         traffic.

      *  B will thus not be able to contact the MN A and establish a
         communication.



Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


      Even though the HA is updated with the location of a MN, firewalls
      may prevent Correspondent nodes from establishing communications
      when the MN is in a network protected by firewall(s).


   Issue 3: Let's assume a communication between MN A and an external
      node B. MN A may want to use Route Optimization (RO) so that
      packets can be directly exchanged between the MN and the CN
      without passing through the HA.  However the firewalls protecting
      the MN might present issues with the Return Routability procedure
      that needs to be performed prior to using RO.

      According to the MIPv6 specifications, the Home Test message of
      the RRT must be protected by IPsec in tunnel mode.  However,
      firewalls might drop any packet protected by ESP, since the
      firewalls cannot analyze the packets encrypted by ESP (e.g. port
      numbers).  The firewalls may thus drop the Home Test messages and
      prevent the completion of the RRT procedure.


   Issue 4: Let's assume that MN A successfully sends a Binding Update
      to its Home Agent (resp. Correspondent nodes) - issues 1 (resp.
      issue 3) solved - the subsequent traffic is sent from the HA
      (resp. CN) to the MN's CoA.  However there may not be any
      corresponding state in the firewalls.  The firewalls protecting A
      may thus drop the incoming packets.

      The appropriate states for the traffic to the MN's CoA need to be
      created in the firewall(s).


   Issue 5: When the MN A moves, it may move to a link that is served by
      a different firewall.  MN A might be sending a BU to its CN,
      however incoming packets may be dropped at the firewall, since the
      firewall on the new link that the MN attaches to does not have any
      state that is associated with the MN.

   The issues described above result from the fact that the MN is behind
   the firewall.  Consequently, the MN's communication capability with
   other nodes is affected by the firewall rules.

5.2.  Scenario where the Correspondent Node is in a network protected by
      firewall(s)

   Let's consider a MN in a network, communicating with a Correspondent
   Node C in a network protected by firewall(s).  There are no issues
   with the presence of a firewall in the scenario where the MN is
   sending packets to the CN via a reverse tunnel that is setup between



Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


   the MN and HA.  However firewalls may present different issues to
   Route Optimization.


     +----------------+                +----+
     |                |                | HA |
     |                |                +----+
     |                |              Home Agent
     |  +---+      +----+               of B
     |  |CN |      | FW |
     |  | C |      +----+
     |  +---+         |                +---+
     |                |                | B |
     |                |                +---+
     +----------------+           External Mobile
     Network protected                  Node
       by a firewall

   Figure 2: Issues between MIP6 and firewalls when a CN is in a network
   protected by firewalls

   The following issues need to be considered:


   Issue 1: The MN, MN B, should use its Home Address, HoA B, when
      establishing the communication with the CN (CN C) if the MN (MN B)
      wants to take advantage of the mobility support provided by the
      Mobile IPv6 protocol, for its communication with CN C. The state
      created by the firewall protecting CN C is therefore created based
      on the IP address of C (IP C) and the home address of the node B
      (IP HoA B).  The states may be created via different means and the
      protocol type as well as the port numbers depend on the connection
      set up.


         Uplink packet filters (1)

            Source IP address: IP C

            Destination IP address: HoA B

            Protocol Type: TCP/UDP

            Source Port Number: #1

            Destination Port Number: #2





Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


         Downlink packet filters (2)

            Source IP address: HoA B

            Destination IP address: IP C

            Protocol Type: TCP/UDP

            Source Port Number: #2

            Destination Port Number: #1


      Nodes C and B might be topologically close to each other while B's
      Home Agent may be far away, resulting in a trombone effect that
      can create delay and degrade the performance.  The MN B may decide
      to initiate the route optimization procedure with Node C. Route
      optimization requires the MN B to send a Binding Update to Node C
      in order to create an entry in its binding cache that maps the MNs
      home address to its current care-of-address.  However, prior to
      sending the binding update, the Mobile Node must first execute a
      Return Routability Test:


      *  the Mobile Node B has to send a Home Test Init (HoTI) message
         via its Home Agent and

      *  a Care of Test Init (COTI) message directly to its
         Correspondent Node C.


      The Care of Test Init message is sent using the CoA of B as the
      source address.  Such a packet does not match any entry in the
      protecting firewall (2).  The CoTi message will thus be dropped by
      the firewall.

      The HoTI is a Mobility Header packet, and the protocol type
      differs from the existing states (2), the HoTI packet will also be
      dropped.

      As a consequence, the RRT cannot be completed and route
      optimization cannot be applied.  Every packet has to go through
      the node B's Home Agent and tunneled between B's Home Agent and B.








Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


             +----------------+
             |             +----+     HoTI (HoA)  +----+
             |             | FW |X<---------------|HA B|
             |             +----X                 +----+
             |  +------+      | ^ CoTI & HoTI        ^
             |  | CN C |      | |  dropped by FW     |
             |  +------+      | |                    | HoTI
             |                | |                    |
             |                | |        CoTI (CoA)+------+
             |                | +------------------| MN B |
             +----------------+                    +------+
             Network protected                External Mobile
               by a firewall                        Node

      Figure 3: Issues with Return Routability Test


   Issue 2: Let's assume that the Binding Update to the CN is
      successful, the firewall(s) might still drop packets


      1.  coming from the CoA, since these incoming packets are sent
          from the CoA and do not match the Downlink Packet filter (2)

      2.  sent from the CN to the CoA if uplink packet filters are
          implemented.  The uplink packets are sent to the MN's CoA and
          do not match the uplink packet filter (1).


      The packet filters for the traffic sent to (resp. from) the CoA
      need to be created in the firewall(s).

      Requiring the firewalls to update the connection state upon
      detecting Binding Update messages from a node outside the network
      protected by the firewall does not appear feasible nor desirable,
      since currently the firewall does not have any means to verify the
      validity of Binding Update messages and to therefore securely
      modify the state information.  Changing the firewall states
      without verifying the validity of the Binding Update messages
      could lead to denial of service attacks.  Malicious nodes may send
      fake binding updates, forcing the firewall to change its state
      information, and therefore leading the firewall to drop packets
      from the connections that use the legitimate addresses.  An
      adversary might also use an address update to enable its own
      traffic to pass through the firewall and enter the network.






Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


   Issue 3: Let's assume that the Binding Update to the CN is
      successful.  The CN may be protected by different firewalls and as
      a result of the MN's change of IP address, incoming and outgoing
      traffic may pass through a different firewall.  The new firewall
      may not have any state associated with the CN and incoming packets
      (and potentially outgoing traffic as well) may be dropped at the
      firewall.

      Firewall technology allows clusters of firewalls to share state
      [3].  This, for example, allows the support of routing asymmetry.
      However, if the previous and the new firewalls, where the packets
      are routed through after the Binding Update has been sent, do not
      share state, this may result in packets being dropped at the new
      firewall.  The new firewall not having any state associated with
      the CN, incoming packets (and potentially outgoing traffic as
      well) may be dropped at the new firewall.

5.3.  Scenario where the HA is in a network protected by firewall(s)

   In the scenarios where the Home Agent is in a network protected by
   firewall(s), the following issues may exist:


   Issue 1: If the firewall(s) protecting the Home Agent block ESP
      traffic, many of the MIPv6 signaling (e.g.  Binding Update, HoT)
      may be dropped at the firewall(s) preventing MN(s) from updating
      their binding cache and performing Route Optimization, since
      Binding Update, HoT and other MIPv6 signaling must be protected by
      IPsec ESP.


   Issue 2: If the firewall(s) protecting the Home Agent block
      unsolicited incoming traffic (e.g. as stateful inspection packet
      filters do), the firewall(s) may drop connection set up requests
      from CN, and packets from MN.


   Issue 3: If the Home Agent is in a network protected by several
      firewalls, a MN/CN's change of IP address may result in the
      traffic to and from the Home Agent passing through a different
      firewall that may not have the states corresponding to the flows.
      As a consequence, packets may be dropped at the firewall.

5.4.  Scenario where MN moves to a network protected by firewall(s)

   Let's consider a HA in a network protected by firewall(s).  The
   following issues need to be investigated:




Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


   Issue 1: Similarly to the issue 1 described in Section 5.1, the MN
      will send a Binding Update to its Home Agent after acquiring a
      local IP address (CoA).  The Binding Updates and Acknowledgements
      should be protected by IPsec ESP according to the MIPv6
      specifications [1].  However, as a default rule, many firewalls
      drop ESP packets.  This may cause the Binding Updates and
      Acknowledgements between the Mobile Nodes and their Home Agent to
      be dropped.


   Issue 2: The MN may be in a communication with a CN, or a CN may be
      attempting to establish a connection with the MN.  In both cases,
      packets sent from the CN will be forwarded by the MN's HA to the
      MN's CoA.  However when the packets arrive at the firewall(s), the
      incoming traffic may not match any existing state, and the
      firewall(s) may therefore drop it.


   Issue 3: If the MN is in a communication with a CN, the MN may
      attempt to execute a RRT for packets to be route optimized.
      Similarly to the issue 3, Section 5.1, the Home Test message which
      should be protected by ESP may be dropped by firewall(s)
      protecting the MN.  Firewall(s) may as a default rule drop any ESP
      traffic.  As a consequence, the RRT cannot be completed.


   Issue 4: If the MN is in a communication with a CN, and assuming that
      the MN successfully sent a Binding Update to its CN to use Route
      Optimization, packets will then be sent from the CN to the MN's
      CoA and from the MN's CoA to the CN.

      Packets sent from the CN to the MN's CoA may however not match any
      existing entry in the firewall(s) protecting the MN, and therefore
      be dropped by the firewall(s).

      If packet filtering is applied to uplink traffic (i.e. traffic
      sent by the MN), packets sent from the MN's CoA to the the CN may
      not match any entry in the firewall(s) either and may be dropped
      as well.












Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


6.  Conclusions

   Current firewalls may not only prevent route optimization but may
   also prevent regular TCP and UDP sessions from being established in
   some cases.  This document describes some of the issues between the
   Mobile IPv6 protocol and current firewall technologies.

   This document captures the various issues involved in the deployment
   of Mobile IPv6 in networks that would invariably include firewalls.
   A number of different scenarios are described which include
   configurations where the mobile node, correspondent node and home
   agent exist across various boundaries delimited by the firewalls.
   This enables a better understanding of the issues when deploying
   Mobile IPv6 as well as providing an understanding for firewall design
   and policies to be installed therein.




































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


7.  Security Considerations

   This document describes several issues that exist between the Mobile
   IPv6 protocol and firewalls.

   Firewalls may prevent Mobile IP6 signaling in addition to dropping
   incoming/outgoing traffic.

   If the firewall configuration is modified in order to support the
   Mobile IPv6 protocol but not properly configured, many attacks may be
   possible as outlined above: malicious nodes may be able to launch
   different types of denial of service attacks.







































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


8.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank James Kempf, Samita Chakrabarti, Giaretta
   Gerardo, Steve Bellovin, Henrik Levkowetz and Spencer Dawkins for
   their valuable comments.  Their suggestions have helped to improve
   both the presentation and the content of the document.













































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

9.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Newman, D., "Benchmarking Terminology for Firewall Performance",
        RFC 2647, August 1999.

   [3]  Noble, J., Doug, D., Hourihan, K., Hourihan, K., Stephens, R.,
        Stiefel, B., Amon, A., and C. Tobkin, "Check Point NG VPN-1/
        Firewall-1 Advanced Configuration and Troubleshooting", Syngress
        Publishing Inc.  , 2003.

   [4]  Chen, X., Watson, M., and M. Harris, "Problem Statement for
        MIPv6 Interactions with GPRS/UMTS Packet Filtering",
        draft-chen-mip6-gprs-03 (work in progress), February 2005.































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


Appendix A.  Applicability to 3G Networks

   In 3G networks, different packet filtering functionalities may be
   implemented to prevent malicious nodes from flooding or launching
   other attacks against the 3G subscribers.  The packet filtering
   functionality of 3G networks are further described in [4].  Packet
   filters are set up and applied to both uplink and downlink traffic:
   outgoing and incoming data not matching the packet filters is
   dropped.  The issues described in this document also apply to 3G
   networks.









































Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Franck Le
   Carnegie Mellon University
   5000 Forbes Avenue
   Pittsburgh, PA  15213
   USA

   Email: franckle@cmu.edu


   Stefano Faccin
   Nokia Research Center
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: stefano.faccin@nokia.com


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.com














Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                    mipv6                     October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Le, et al.               Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 23]


