



Internet Engineering Task Force                               Yimin Shen
Internet-Draft                                           Minto Jeyananth
Intended status: Informational                          Juniper Networks
Expires: January 2, 2017                                  Bruno Decraene
                                                                  Orange
                                                            July 1, 2016


                    MPLS Egress Protection Framework
             draft-shen-mpls-egress-protection-framework-02

Abstract

   This document specifies a fast reroute framework for protecting MPLS
   tunnels and IP/MPLS services against egress router failures.  In this
   framework, the penultimate-hop router of an MPLS tunnel pre-
   establishes a bypass tunnel to a protector, and performs local
   detection and local repair upon an egress router failure.  The router
   can restore service traffic in the order of tens of milliseconds, by
   rerouting the traffic through the bypass tunnel.  The protector in
   turn performs context label switching or IP forwarding to send the
   traffic towards service destination(s).  The mechanism can be used to
   reduce traffic loss before global repair reacts to the failure and
   control plane protocols converge on the topology changes due to the
   failure.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Theory of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  Reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Egress failure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Protector and PLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.4.  Protected egress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.5.  Egress-protected tunnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.6.  Egress-protected service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.7.  Egress-protected service to egress-protected tunnel
           mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.8.  Egress-protection bypass tunnel . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.9.  Context ID, context label, and context based forwarding .   9
     5.10. IGP advertisement and path computation for context ID . .  11
     5.11. Egress-protection bypass tunnel establishment . . . . . .  12
     5.12. Local Repair on PLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.13. Label distribution from egress router to protector  . . .  13
   6.  Global repair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  Example:  Layer-3 VPN egress protection . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   In MPLS networks, LSPs (label switched paths) are widely used as
   transport tunnels to carry IP and MPLS services across MPLS domains.
   Examples of MPLS services are layer-2 VPNs, layer-3 VPNs,
   hierarchical LSPs, etc.  In general, a tunnel may carry multiple
   services of one or multiple types, given that the tunnel can satisfy



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   both individual and aggregate requirements (e.g.  CoS, QoS) of these
   services.  The egress router of the tunnel must host corresponding
   service instances for the services.  An MPLS service instance
   forwards service packets to service destination based on service
   label.  An IP service instance forwards service packets to service
   destination based on IP header.

   Today, local repair based fast reroute mechanisms (RFC4090, RFC5286,
   RFC7490, RFC7812) have been widely deployed to protect MPLS tunnels
   against transit link and node failures.  They can achieve fast
   restoration in the order of tens of milliseconds.  Local repair
   refers to the scenario where the router (aka.  PLR, i.e. point of
   local repair) upstream adjacent to an anticipated failure pre-
   establishes a bypass tunnel to the router (aka.  MP, i.e. merge
   point) downstream of the failure, and pre-installs the forwarding
   state of the bypass tunnel in the data plane.  The PLR also uses a
   rapid mechanism to locally detect the failure in the data plane.
   When the failure occurs, the PLR reroutes traffic through the bypass
   tunnel to the MP, allowing the traffic to continue to flow to the
   tunnel's egress router.

   This document describes a fast reroute framework for egress router
   protection.  Similar to the transit link/node protection, this
   framework relies on local failure detection and local repair to be
   performed by a PLR, which is the penultimate hop router of a tunnel.
   However, there is no MP in this case, because the tunnel does not
   have a router downstream of the egress router.  Instead, this
   framework relies on a so-called "protector" to serve as the tailend
   of a bypass tunnel.  The protector is simply a backup router that
   hosts some backup service instances and has its own connectivity to
   service destinations.  It performs context label switching for
   rerouted MPLS service packets based on service labels assigned by the
   egress router, and performs context IP forwarding for rerouted IP
   service packets.

   This framework considers an egress router failure as a failure of a
   tunnel, as well as a failure of all the services carried by the
   tunnel for service packets not being able to reach the service
   instances on the egress router.  Hence, it addresses protection at
   both tunnel level and service level.

   This framework requires that the destination (a CE or site) of a
   service must be dual-homed or have dual paths to the MPLS network,
   normally via two LERs (label edge routers), one of which is the
   egress router of the service's transport tunnel, and the other is a
   backup.





Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   The framework is described by mainly referring to P2P (point-to-
   point) tunnels.  However, it is equally applicable to P2MP (point-to-
   multipoint), MP2P (multipoint-to-point) and MP2MP (multipoint-to-
   multipoint) tunnels, where a sub-LSP can be viewed as a P2P tunnel
   from traffic flow's perspective.

   The framework is generic to all existing and future types of MPLS
   tunnels and IP/MPLS services.  It does not require extensions for
   signaling or label distribution protocols of MPLS tunnels.  It may
   require extensions for IGPs and service label distribution protocols,
   to facilitate protection establishment and context label switching.
   This document provides guidelines for these extensions, but the
   details should be addressed in separate documents.

2.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119.

3.  Terminology

   EP - Egress protection.

   Egress-protected tunnel - A tunnel whose egress router is protected
   by this framework.

   Egress-protected service - An IP or MPLS service that is carried by
   an egress-protected tunnel and hence protected by this framework.

   Protector - A router that acts as a backup router for the egress
   router of an egress-protected tunnel, and hosts backup service
   instances for the egress-protected services carried by the tunnel.

   PLR - A router at point of local repair, which is the penultimate hop
   router on an egress-protected tunnel.

   Protected egress {E, P} - A virtual node consisting of an ordered
   pair of egress router E and protector P.  It serves as the virtual
   destination for an egress-protected tunnel.  It also serves as the
   virtual location of service instances for the egress-protected
   services carried by the tunnel.

   Context identifier (ID) - A globally unique IP address assigned to a
   protected egress {E, P}.

   Context label - A non-reserved label assigned to a context ID by a
   protector.



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   Egress-protection bypass tunnel - An tunnel established from a PLR to
   a protector, bypassing the egress router of an egress-protected
   tunnel.

   Backup service instance - A service instance hosted by a protector,
   acting as a backup for the corresponding service instance on an
   egress router.

   Context label switching - Label switching performed by a protector,
   in the label space of an egress router indicated by a context label.

   Context IP forwarding - IP forwarding performed by a protector, in
   the IP address space of an egress router indicated by a context
   label.

4.  Requirements

   This document considers the followings as requirements of the egress
   protection framework.

   o  The framework must be based on local failure detection and local
      repair, in a similar fashion to transit link and node protection.
      It must be able to achieve fast restoration in the order of tens
      of milliseconds.

   o  The framework must support P2P tunnels.  It should equally apply
      to P2MP, MP2P and MP2MP tunnels, by treating each sub-LSP as a P2P
      tunnel.

   o  The framework must be independent of existing and future signaling
      and label-distribution protocols of tunnels and bypass tunnels,
      including RSPV, LDP, BGP, IGP, segment routing, etc.

   o  The framework must be generic to support existing and future MPLS
      services, including layer-2 VPNs, layer-3 VPNs, etc.

   o  A PLR must be agnostic on services and service labels.  It must
      maintain bypass tunnels and bypass forwarding state on a per-
      transport-tunnel basis, rather than per-service or per-service-
      label basis.  It should support bypass tunnel sharing between
      transport tunnels.

   o  A PLR must be able to use its local routing or TE information
      database to compute or resolve path for a bypass tunnel.

   o  A protector must be able to perform context label switching for
      rerouted MPLS service packets, based on service label(s) assigned
      by an egress router.



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   o  A protector must be able to perform context IP forwarding for
      rerouted IP service packets, in the public or private IP address
      space used by an egress router.

   o  The framework must be able to work seamlessly with transit node
      protection mechanisms to achieve end-to-end node protection.

   o  The framework must be able to work in conjunction with global
      repair (aka. end-to-end repair) and control plane convergence.

5.  Theory of Operation

5.1.  Reference model

   This document refers to the following model when describing the
   framework.



                   services 1, ..., N
        ========================================> tunnel

      I ------ R1 ---------- PLR --------------- E           --
ingress router         penultimate hop     egress router       \
                              |       primary service instances \
                              |                                  \   service
                              |                                    destinations
                              |                                  / (CEs, sites)
                              |                                 /
                              |                                /
                              R2 --------------- P           --
                                             protector
                                       backup service instances


                                 Figure 1

5.2.  Egress failure

   An egress failure refers to the node failure of a tunnel's egress
   router.  It also means a service instance failure for each service
   carried by the tunnel.

   Failure detection mechanisms that are used by PLRs in transit link
   and node protection are applicable to egress failure detection.  In a
   case where a PLR does not have a fast and reliable mechanism to
   detect a node failure, it may treat a link failure as a node failure
   and trigger node protection.



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


5.3.  Protector and PLR

   A router is assigned to protect a tunnel and the services carried by
   the tunnel against egress failure.  This router is called a
   protector.  It hosts a backup service instance for each of the
   services.  The tunnel is called an egress-protected tunnel.  Each
   service is called an egress-protected service.

   A tunnel can be protected by only one protector at a given time.
   Tunnels to a given egress router may be protected by a common
   protector or different protectors.  A protector may protect multiple
   tunnels which may have a common egress router or different egress
   routers.

   The penultimate hop router of the tunnel acts as a PLR.  It pre-
   establishes a bypass tunnel to the protector, and pre-installs bypass
   forwarding state in the data plane.  Upon detection of an egress
   failure, the PLR reroutes all the traffic received on the tunnel
   though the bypass tunnel to the protector, with service label intact
   in MPLS service packets.  The protector (particularly the backup
   service instances) in turn forwards the service packets towards the
   ultimate service destinations.  Specifically, for MPLS service
   packets, the protector performs context label switching based on
   service labels assigned by the egress router of the protected tunnel.
   For IP service packets, the protector performs context IP forwarding
   based on the destination addresses.  The protector must have its own
   connectivity with the service destinations.  The connectivity may be
   via a direct link or a multi-hop path, which must not traverse the
   protected egress router or be affected by the egress failure.  This
   also means that the service destinations must be dual-homed or have
   dual paths to the egress router and the protector.

5.4.  Protected egress

   This document introduces the notion of "protected egress" as a
   virtual node consisting of the egress router E of a tunnel and a
   protector P.  It is denoted by an ordered pair of {E, P}, indicating
   the relationship between the two routers in the egress protection
   schema.  It serves as the virtual destination for a tunnel, and the
   virtual location of service instances for the services carried by the
   tunnel.  The tunnel and services are considered as being "associated"
   with the protected egress {E, P}.

   A given egress router E may be the tailend of multiple tunnels.  The
   tunnels may be protected by multiple protectors, i.e. P1, P2, etc,
   with each Pi protecting a subset of the tunnels.  Hence, these
   routers form multiple protected egress', i.e. {E, P1} , {E, P2}, etc.
   Each tunnel is associated with one and only one protected egress {E,



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   Pi}. All the services carried by the tunnel are also automatically
   associated with the protected egress {E, Pi}. Conversely, a service
   associated with a protected egress {E, Pi} must be carried by a
   tunnel associated with the protected egress {E, Pi}. This mapping
   must be ensured by the ingress router (Section 5.7).

   Two node X and Y may be protectors for each other's tunnels.  In this
   case, they form two distinct protected egress {X, Y} and {Y, X}.

5.5.  Egress-protected tunnel

   A tunnel, which is associated with a protected egress {E, P}, is
   called an egress-protected tunnel.  The tunnel is viewed as logically
   "destined" for the protected egress {E, P}, although it is physically
   destined for E.

   An egress-protected tunnel is associated with one and only one
   protected egress {E, P}. Multiple egress-protected tunnels may be
   associated with a given protected egress {E, P}. These tunnels share
   the common egress router and protector, but may not share a common
   ingress router.

5.6.  Egress-protected service

   A service, which is associated with a protected egress {E, P}, is
   called an egress-protected service.

   An egress-protected service is associated with one and only one
   protected egress {E, P}. Multiple egress-protected services may be
   associated with a given protected egress {E, P}. These services share
   the common egress router and protector, but may not share a common
   egress-protected tunnel or a common ingress router.

5.7.  Egress-protected service to egress-protected tunnel mapping

   An ingress router must map an egress-protected service to an egress-
   protected tunnel based on protected egress {E, P}. This is achieved
   by introducing the notion of "context ID" for protected egress {E,
   P}, as described in (Section 5.9).

5.8.  Egress-protection bypass tunnel

   An egress-protected tunnel destined for a protected egress {E, P}
   must have a bypass tunnel from its PLR to the protector P.  This
   bypass tunnel is called an egress-protection bypass tunnel.  An
   egress-protection bypass tunnel is associated with one and only one
   protected egress {E, P}. The bypass tunnel is viewed as logically




Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   "destined" for the protected egress {E, P}, while physically destined
   for P and bypassing E.

   A PLR may share an egress-protection bypass tunnel between multiple
   egress-protected tunnels, if they are associated with a common
   protected egress {E, P}. For a given protected egress {E, P}, there
   may be one or multiple egress-protection bypass tunnels from one or
   multiple PLRs to the protector P.

   An egress-protected tunnel and an egress-protection bypass tunnel may
   be established independently or in order.  In the latter case, the
   establishment of a tunnel may trigger a PLR to establish a new bypass
   tunnel, if the PLR cannot find an existing bypass tunnel to use.

   An egress-protection bypass tunnel MUST have the property that it is
   not affected by any topology change caused by an egress failure.

5.9.  Context ID, context label, and context based forwarding

   A context ID is a globally unique IPv4/v6 address assigned to a
   protected egress {E, P}. It is called context ID due to its usage in
   context label switching and context IP forwarding on the protector.
   It is an IP address logically owned by both the egress router and the
   protector.  For the egress node, it indicates the protector.  For the
   protector, it indicates the egress router, particularly the egress
   router's forwarding context.  For other routers in the network, it is
   an address reachable via both the egress router and the protector in
   routing domain and TE domain (Section 5.10).

   Given an egress-protected service associated with a protected egress
   {E, P} which is assigned a context ID, the context ID is used as
   below:

   o  If the service is an MPLS service, when E distributes the label
      binding message of the service to the ingress router, E attaches
      the context ID to the message.  If the service is an IP service,
      when E advertises the service destination address to the ingress
      router, E attaches the context ID as a virtual next-hop to the
      advertisement.  How the context ID is encoded in the messages is a
      choice of the service protocol, and may need protocol extensions.

   o  The ingress router uses the context ID as destination to establish
      or resolve an egress-protected tunnel.  The ingress router then
      maps the service to the tunnel for transportation.

   o  The context ID is conveyed to the PLR by the signaling protocol of
      the egress-protected tunnel or by an IGP or topology-driven label




Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


      distribution protocol.  The PLR uses the context ID as destination
      to establish or resolve an egress-protection bypass tunnel to P.

   o  P maintains a dedicated label space or a dedicated IP address
      space for E, depending on whether the service is MPLS or IP.  This
      is referred to as E's label space or E's IP address space,
      respectively.  P uses the context ID to identify the space.

   o  If the service is an MPLS service, E uses a label distribution
      protocol to advertise to P about the binding of the service FEC
      and the service label.  This is the same label binding that E
      advertises to the ingress router, attached with the context ID.
      Based on the context ID, P installs a route for the service label
      in a label table corresponding to E's label space.  If the service
      is an IP service, P installs an IP route in a routing table
      corresponding to E's IP address space.  In either case, the backup
      service instance on P constructs a nexthop for the route based on
      P's own connectivity to the service's destination.

   o  P assigns a non-reserved label to the context ID.  In the data
      plane, this label serves in the context ID's stead to indicate E's
      label space and IP address space.  Therefore, it is called a
      "context label".

   o  If the egress-protection bypass tunnel (from PLR to P) is signaled
      by RSVP, P binds the context label to the bypass tunnel based on
      the destination being the context ID.  If the bypass tunnel is
      established by LDP, P advertises the context label for the context
      ID as an IP prefix FEC.  If the bypass tunnel is established by
      the PLR in a hierarchical fashion, the PLR treats the context
      label as a one-hop LSP over a "regular" bypass tunnel to P (i.e. a
      bypass tunnel to P's IP address, e.g. loopback address).  If the
      bypass tunnel is constructed by the PLR using segment routing, the
      PLR pushes the context label as the inner-most label of label
      stack.  (Section 5.11)

   o  During local repair, all the service packets received by P on the
      bypass tunnel will have the context label as top label.  P will
      first pop the context label.  For MPLS service packets, P will
      further look up the service label in E's label space indicated by
      the context label.  This is called context label switching.  For
      IP service packets, P will look up the IP destination address in
      E's IP address space indicated by the context label.  This is
      called context IP forwarding.







Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


5.10.  IGP advertisement and path computation for context ID

   Given a protected egress {E, P} and its context ID, coordination must
   be done between E and P for IGP advertisement of the context ID in
   routing domain and TE domain.  The context ID must be advertised in
   such a way that all the egress-protected tunnels destined for the
   context ID MUST be established with E as tailend, and all the egress-
   protection bypass tunnels destined for the context ID MUST be
   established with P as tailend, while avoiding E.

   This document suggests two approaches:

   1.  The first approach is called "proxy mode".  It requires E and P,
       but not PLR, to have the knowledge of the egress protection
       schema.  E and P advertise the context ID as a virtual proxy node
       (i.e. a logical node) connected to the two routers, with the link
       between the proxy node and E having more preferable IGP and TE
       metrics than the link between the proxy node and P.  Therefore,
       all egress-protected tunnels destined for the context ID should
       automatically follow shortest IGP paths or TE paths to E.  Each
       PLR will no longer view itself as a penultimate hop, but rather
       two hops away from the proxy node, via E.  The PLR will be able
       to find a bypass path via P to the proxy node, while the bypass
       tunnel should actually be terminated by P.

   2.  The second approach is called "alias mode".  It requires P and
       PLR, but not E, to have the knowledge of the egress protection
       schema.  E simply advertises the context ID as a regular IP
       address.  P advertises the context ID and the context label by
       using a "context ID label binding" advertisement.  The
       advertisement must be understood by the PLR.  In both routing
       domain and TE domain, the context ID is only reachable via E.
       This ensures that all egress-protected tunnel destined for the
       context ID are terminated by E.  Based on the "context ID label
       binding" advertisement, the PLR may establish an egress-
       protection bypass tunnel in a hierarchical fashion, i.e. with a
       the context label as a one-hop LSP over a regular bypass tunnel
       to P.  The PLR may also establish the egress-protection bypass
       tunnel by using segment routing, with the context label as the
       inner-most label in label stack.  The "context ID label binding"
       advertisement may be achieved by using the IGP extensions for IGP
       mirroring context segment described in [SR-ARCH], [SR-OSPF] and
       [SR-ISIS].








Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


5.11.  Egress-protection bypass tunnel establishment

   In the control plane, an egress-protection bypass tunnel from a PLR
   to a protector and destined for a context ID may be established via
   several methods:

   [1] It may be established by a signaling protocol (e.g.  RSVP), with
   the context ID as destination.  The protector binds the context label
   to the tunnel.

   [2] It may be formed by a topology driven protocol (e.g.  LDP).  The
   protector binds the context label to the context ID as an IP prefix
   FEC.

   [3] It may be constructed as a hierarchical tunnel.  When the
   protector uses the alias mode (Section 5.10), the PLR will have the
   knowledge of the context ID, context label, and protector (i.e. the
   advertiser).  The PLR can then establish the bypass tunnel in a
   hierarchical fashion, with the context label as a one-hop LSP over a
   regular bypass tunnel to the protector's IP address (e.g. loopback
   address).

   [4] It may be constructed by segment routing.  In this case, the
   protector uses the alias mode (Section 5.10) to advertise the context
   ID and context label binding as an IGP mirroring context segment.
   The PLR can then construct the bypass tunnel as a stack of labels,
   with the context label as the inner-most label.

5.12.  Local Repair on PLR

   A PLR is agnostic on services and services labels carried by the
   egress-protected tunnel.  During local repair, it simply reroutes all
   service packets received on the tunnel to an egress-protection bypass
   tunnel.  For MPLS service packets, it keeps service labels intact in
   the packets.

   In the case where the IGP proxy mode is used and the bypass tunnel is
   established in a non-hierarchical manner, the rerouting involves
   swapping the in-label of the egress-protected tunnel to the out-label
   of the bypass tunnel.  In the case where the IGP alias mode is used
   and the bypass tunnel is established in a hierarchical manner, the
   rerouting involves swapping the in-label of the egress-protected
   tunnel to a context label, and pushing the out-label of a regular
   bypass tunnel.  In the case where the IGP alias mode is used and the
   bypass tunnel is constructed by segment routing, the rerouting
   involves swapping the in-label of the egress-protected tunnel to a
   context label, and pushing the stack of labels of a bypass tunnel.




Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   Keeping service labels intact in MPLS service packets obviates the
   need for the PLR to maintain bypass forwarding state on per-service
   basis, and allows the PLR to share bypass tunnels between egress-
   protected tunnels.

5.13.  Label distribution from egress router to protector

   When receiving a rerouted MPLS service packet, a protector performs
   context label switching for a service label assigned by an egress
   router.  The protector maintains such kind of service labels in
   dedicated label spaces on a per protected egress {E, P} basis, i.e.
   one label space for each egress router that it protects.

   There must be a service label distribution protocol running between
   each egress router and the protector.  Through this protocol, the
   protector learns the label binding of each egress-protected service
   FEC.  This is the same label binding that the egress router
   advertises to ingress router, attached with a context ID.  A backup
   service instance on the protector recognizes the service FEC, and
   resolves forwarding state based on its own connectivity to the
   service's destination.  It installs the service label with the
   forwarding state in the label space of the egress router, as
   indicated by the context ID (or context label).

   Protocol extensions may be needed for such kind of service label
   distribution between egress router and protector.

6.  Global repair

   The framework in this document provides fast but temporary repair for
   traffic upon an egress failure.  For permanent repair, it is
   RECOMMENDED that the traffic SHOULD be moved to an alternative tunnel
   or alternative services that are fully functional.  This is referred
   to as global repair.  Possible triggers of global repair include
   control plane notifications for tunnel and service status, OAM at
   tunnel and service levels, traffic marking in the reverse direction,
   etc.  These alternative tunnel and services may be pre-established
   backups, or newly established as a result of the triggers or network
   protocol convergence.

7.  Example: Layer-3 VPN egress protection

   This section shows an example of egress protection for a layer-3 VPN.








Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


                        ---------- R1 -------------- PE2 -
                       /          (PLR)                   \
(  site 1   )         /            |                       (  site 2   )
(           )        /             |                       (           )
(  subnet   )-- PE1 <              |                       (  subnet   )
( 8.0.0.0/8 )        \             |                       ( 9.0.0.0/8 )
(           )         \            |                       (           )
                       \           |                      /
                        ---------- R2 -------------- PE3 -
                                                   (protector)


                                 Figure 2

   In this example, the site 1 of a given VPN is attached to PE1, and
   site 2 is dual-homed to PE2 and PE3.  PE2 is the primary PE for site
   2, and PE3 is the backup PE.  Every PE hosts a VPN instance.  R1 and
   R2 are transit routers in the MPLS network.  The network uses OSPF as
   routing protocol, and RSVP-TE as tunnel signaling protocol.  The PEs
   use BGP to exchange VPN prefixes and VPN labels between each other.

   Using the framework in this document, the network assigns PE3 to be a
   protector for PE2 to protect the VPN traffic in the direction from
   site 1 to site 2.  Hence, PE2 and PE3 form a protected egress {PE2,
   PE3}. A context ID 1.1.1.1 is assigned to the protected egress {PE2,
   PE3}. The VPN instance on PE3 serves as a backup for the VPN instance
   on PE2.  On PE3, a context label 100 is assigned to the context ID,
   and a label table pe2.mpls is created to represent PE2's label space.
   PE3 installs the label 100 in its default MPLS forwarding table, with
   nexthop pointing to the label table pe2.mpls.  PE2 and PE3 are
   coordinated to use the proxy mode to advertise the context ID in
   routing domain and TE domain.

   PE2 uses per-VRF VPN label allocation mode (for clarity purpose in
   this example).  In particular, it assigns a single label 9000 for the
   VRF of the VPN.  For a given VPN prefix 9.0.0.0/8 in site 2, PE2
   advertises it along with the label 9000 and other attributes
   (including route targets and route distinguisher) to PE1 and PE3 via
   BGP.  In particular, PE2 sets the NEXT_HOP attribute to the context
   ID 1.1.1.1.

   Upon receipt and acceptance of the BGP advertisement, PE1 uses the
   context ID 1.1.1.1 as destination to compute a TE path for an egress-
   protected tunnel.  The resulted path is PE1->R1->PE2.  PE1 then uses
   RSVP to signal the tunnel, with the context ID 1.1.1.1 as
   destination, and with the "node protection desired" flag set in the
   SESSION_ATTRIBUTE of RSVP Path message.  Once the tunnel comes up,
   PE1 maps the VPN prefix 9.0.0.0/8 to the tunnel and installs a route



Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   for the prefix in the corresponding VRF.  The route's nexthop is a
   push with the VPN label 9000, followed by a push with the out-label
   of the egress-protected tunnel.

   Upon receipt of the above BGP advertisement from PE2, PE3 (i.e. the
   protector) installs a route for label 9000 in the label table
   pe2.mpls, based on the context ID 1.1.1.1 in the NEXT_HOP attribute.
   The VPN instance sets the route's nexthop to a "protection VRF".
   This protection VRF contains routes corresponding to the dual-homed
   prefixes in site 2, including 9.0.0.0/8.  The routes MUST use PE3's
   direct connectivity with site 2 as nexthops, and MUST NOT use any
   path via PE2 directly or indirectly.  Note that the protection VRF is
   a logical concept, and it may well be PE3's own VRF if the VRF
   satisfies the requirement.

   R1, i.e. the penultimate hop router of the egress-protected tunnel,
   acts as PLR.  Based on the "node protection desired" flag and the
   destination address (i.e. context ID 1.1.1.1) of the tunnel, R1
   computes a bypass path to 1.1.1.1 while avoiding PE2.  The resulted
   bypass path is R1->R2->PE3.  R1 then signals the path as an egress-
   protection bypass tunnel, with 1.1.1.1 as destination.

   Upon receipt of RSVP Path message of the egress-protection bypass
   tunnel, PE3 recognizes the context ID 1.1.1.1 as the destination, and
   hence responds with the context label 100 in RSVP Resv message.

   Once the egress-protection bypass tunnel comes up, R1 installs a
   bypass nexthop for the egress-protected tunnel.  The bypass nexthop
   is a swap from the in-label of the egress-protected tunnel to the
   out-label of the egress-protection bypass tunnel.

   When R1 detects a failure of PE2, it will invoke the above bypass
   nexthop to reroute VPN service packets.  The packets will have the
   label of the bypass tunnel as outer label, and the VPN label 9000 as
   inner label.  When the packets arrive at PE3, they will have the
   context label 100 as outer label, and the VPN label 9000 as inner
   label.  The context label will first be popped, and then the VPN
   label will be looked up in the label table pe2.mpls.  The lookup will
   cause the VPN label to be popped, and the IP packets will finally be
   forwarded to site 2 based on the protection VRF.

   Eventually, global repair will take effect, as control plane
   protocols (BGP, OSPF, RSVP) converge on the new topology.  PE1 will
   choose PE3 as new entrance to site 2.  Before that happens, the VPN
   traffic has been protected by the above local repair.






Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no request for new IANA allocation.

9.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any security issues.

   Note that the framework requires a label distribution protocol to run
   between an egress router and a protector, which is achievable in a
   secured fashion.

10.  Acknowledgements

   This document leverages work done by Hannes Gredler, Yakov Rekhter,
   Kevin Wang and several on MPLS egress protection.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [SR-ARCH]  Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Decraene, B., Litkowski, S.,
              and R. Shakir, "Segment Routing Architecture", draft-ietf-
              spring-segment-routing (work in progress), 2016.

   [SR-OSPF]  Psenak, P., Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Gredler, H.,
              Shakir, R., Henderickx, W., and J. Tantsura, "OSPF
              Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-ospf-segment-
              routing-extensions (work in progress), 2016.

   [SR-ISIS]  Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Bashandy, A., Gredler, H.,
              Litkowski, S., Decraene, B., and J. Tantsura, "IS-IS
              Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-isis-segment-
              routing-extensions (work in progress), 2016.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Ed., Swallow, G., Ed., and A. Atlas, Ed., "Fast
              Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4090, May 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4090>.

   [RFC5286]  Atlas, A., Ed. and A. Zinin, Ed., "Basic Specification for
              IP Fast Reroute: Loop-Free Alternates", RFC 5286,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5286, September 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5286>.





Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      MPLS Egress Protection Framework           July 2016


   [RFC7490]  Bryant, S., Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Shand, M., and N.
              So, "Remote Loop-Free Alternate (LFA) Fast Reroute (FRR)",
              RFC 7490, DOI 10.17487/RFC7490, April 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7490>.

   [RFC7812]  Atlas, A., Bowers, C., and G. Enyedi, "An Architecture for
              IP/LDP Fast Reroute Using Maximally Redundant Trees (MRT-
              FRR)", RFC 7812, DOI 10.17487/RFC7812, June 2016,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7812>.

Authors' Addresses

   Yimin Shen
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Phone: +1 9785890722
   Email: yshen@juniper.net


   Minto Jeyananth
   Juniper Networks
   1133 Innovation Way
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Phone: +1 4089367563
   Email: minto@juniper.net


   Bruno Decraene
   Orange

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange.com















Yimin Shen, et al.       Expires January 2, 2017               [Page 17]
