Network Working Group                                      F. Z. Yousaf 
Internet Draft                                              C. Wietfeld 
Intended status: Standards Track       Communication Networks Institute, 
Expires: October 2008                 Dortmund University of Technology, 
                                                               Germany. 
                                                         April 23, 2008 
                                      
         Multi-Hop Discovery of Candidate Access Routers (MHD-CAR)  
                  draft-yousaf-ietf-network-mhdcar-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any    
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 23, 2008. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   The Candidate Access Router Discovery (CARD) protocol specified in 
   [1] is aimed to enable seamless IP layer handover by aiding seamless 
   Layer 3 (L3) mobility management protocols like Fast Mobile IP (FMIP) 
   by providing identity and capabilities information of the candidate 
   access routers (CARs) to the mobile node (MN) prior to the initiation 
   of handover while the MN is still connected to its current AR. 
 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   The specifications as laid down in [1], however, specifies a very 
   generic mechanism of the CARD protocol effective only in specific 
   network architecture scenarios and it doesn't take into account the 
   stringent requirements of a fast moving MN and real time 
   communication sessions, especially when it comes to resolving 
   candidate access routers that my be adjacent geographically but not 
   topologically. 

   This draft addresses the expected shortcomings of the base CARD 
   protocol with respect to fast moving MNs and real time communication 
   sessions by proposing extensions that is expected to improve and/or 
   enhance the performance of the generic CARD protocol as specified in 
   [1]. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Requirements notation..........................................2 
   2. Introduction...................................................3 
   3. Terminology....................................................4 
   4. CARD Protocol Overview.........................................4 
      4.1. CARD Protocol Operation Summary...........................4 
         4.1.1. Centralized approach using a CARD Server.............6 
         4.1.2. Decentralized approach Using Mobile Node's Handover..6 
      4.2. Expected Issues Related to FMIPv6 with CARD...............7 
   5. Multi Hop Discovery of Candidate Access Router (MHD-CAR).......8 
      5.1. Access Router Operation...................................9 
         5.1.1. CAR Table Conceptual Design.........................10 
      5.2. Mobile Node Operation....................................11 
      5.3. New Access Network Cache Conceptual Design...............12 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................14 
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................14 
   8. Acknowledgments...............................................14 
   9. Normative References..........................................15 
   Author's Addresses...............................................16 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................16 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................17 
 

1. Requirements notation 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [9]. 

    


 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

2. Introduction 

   Next generation network (NGN) is envisaged to be IP based composed of 
   heterogeneous wireless access network architecture catering to a 
   large number of mobile users with varied quality and service 
   requirements.  

   To accommodate the expected increase in mobile users' population and 
   mobile applications, mobility management protocols, both at the data 
   link layer and network layer are being developed and enhanced to 
   provide and optimum seamless handover to mobile entities. 

   In this respect, Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [2] is a L3 mobility management 
   protocol specified for IPv6 networks, as IPv6 is expected to be the 
   internetworking technology of choice due to its various inherent 
   advantages over its predecessor IPv4, but the delay and packet losses 
   incurred by MIPv6 makes it unsuitable to provide seamless handover to 
   mobile users, especially in terms of the stringent quality of service 
   requirements and demands of the NGN. 

   Fast-MIPv6 (FMIPv6) is an extension to the base MIPv6 protocol and 
   specified in [3] that is designed to overcome the inherent functional 
   deficiencies of MIPv6 in terms of providing seamless handover to 
   mobile nodes (MNs). 

   The operational philosophy behind F-MIPv6 is to perform delay 
   incurring sub-processes, such as movement detection and Care-of-
   Address (CoA) configuration while the MN is still connected to its 
   current access router (AR) and just before it hands over its 
   connection the new AR (NAR). This is only possible if the MN is 
   provided with the identity (L2 and L3 addresses) and capabilities 
   (QoS and other related parameters) information of the candidate 
   access point (CAP) and its associated candidate AR (CAR) well in 
   advance and the degree of seamlessness provided by FMIPv6 is highly 
   dependent on the timely provisioning of the CAR information.   

   The protocol specifications of FMIPv6 does not specify the mechanics 
   of this advance retrieval of identity and capabilities information of 
   CAR(s)  and/or selection algorithm of target AR (TAR), but instead it 
   relies on external protocols/algorithms to achieve this performance 
   target. 

   Candidate Access Router Discovery (CARD) is one such protocol [1] 
   that enables a MN to discover and acquire the identity and/or 
   capabilities information of CAR(s) prior to the initiation of 
   handover while it is still connected to its current AR. The problem 
   statement of CAR discovery is documented in [4]. 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   Although specified as a separate protocol, the CARD protocol can be 
   easily integrated into the FMIPv6 protocol framework. 

   The CARD protocol is based on the exchange of a pair of Request/Reply 
   messages between the MN and AR and between AR and AR, every time a MN 
   detects a L2 ID(s) of new in-range AP(s) during link layer scan. 

   Although an effective strategy, but owing to the frequent exchange of 
   CARD messages during every handover instance, it is expected that the 
   base CARD protocol may not scale well for fast moving MNs (moving at 
   vehicular velocities) in terms of signaling load and timely provision 
   of CAR(s) information; thereby adversely impacting the degree of 
   seamlessness provided by mobility management protocols like FMIPv6 
   and any TAR selection algorithm(s). 

   This draft document specifies a mechanism by virtue of which a MN 
   will be able to discover and acquire the identity and capabilities 
   information of CAR(s) "multiple link-hops" away from the current AR 
   incurring minimum signaling load, especially over the wireless link 
   (MN-AR CARD Request/Reply Messages). This mechanism utilizes the 
   original CARD messages with minor modifications and is expected to 
   enhance the performance of the base CARD protocol and thus improve 
   the degree of seamlessness provided by fast handover protocols like 
   FMIPv6. 

   Although MHD-CAR does not introduce any new messages but it proposes 
   changes to the way the CAR Table information is managed and 
   exchanged, besides introducing a new data structure called "New 
   Access Network (NAN) Cache, which is managed and maintained inside 
   the MN. 

3. Terminology 

   This document refers to [1] and [3] for terminology.  The following 
   terms and abbreviations are additionally used in this document. 

   New Access Network (NAN) Cache: 

      A cache maintained by the MN containing identity and capabilities 
      and distance information of the candidate ARs and candidate APs. 

4. CARD Protocol Overview 

4.1. CARD Protocol Operation Summary 

   The CARD protocol specifications [1] provides a generic mechanism 
   that allows MNs to resolve the L2 IDs of one or more in-range APs, 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   typically discovered during a scan operation by the MN, to the IP 
   addresses, and additionally the capabilities, of the associated CARs. 

   This reverse address translation is carried out by the MN 
   transmitting a MN-AR CARD Request message towards its current AR, 
   which will resolve the L2 IDs of the discovered AP(s), carried by the 
   received request message, to the corresponding CAR's IP addresses by 
   consulting its local CAR Table.  

   The current AR, after performing reverse address translation and 
   capabilities discovery, will respond by sending a corresponding MN-AR 
   CARD Reply message back to the MN, informing the MN of the resolved 
   CAR(s) IP address(es) and its capabilities. This discovery and 
   acquisition of the CAR(s) identity and capabilities information may 
   be used by the MN to perform TAR selection and/or aid the MN to 
   execute some L3 related handover functions in advance. 

   The CARD protocol provides for the piggybacking of the CARD messages 
   on fast handover protocol messages. 

   The CAR Table is fundamental for performing reverse address 
   translation and capabilities discovery. The CAR Table is a L2-L3 
   address mapping table maintained by each AR. The CAR Table is also 
   provisioned to maintain the capability information of CARs, which is 
   updated periodically depending on the timeout expiry of a capability 
   parameter(s) lifetime or a change in its state and/or value. The CARs 
   also maintains their own AP-to-AR mappings and capability information 
   in the local CAR Tables, in order to aid newly booted MNs to obtain 
   AR'S certification path. The detailed description of the CAR Tables 
   and its entries are not given in the CARD protocol specifications. 

   The CARD specification also suggests and recommends that a MN SHOULD 
   also maintain discovered address and capability information of the 
   local CARs in a local cache to avoid requesting the same information 
   repeatedly and to select an appropriate TAR from the list of CARs as 
   quickly as possible when a handover is imminent. However the 
   conceptual design and management principle of such a local cache is 
   not part of the official CARD specifications. 

   The maintenance of the CAR Table and its efficient dissemination is 
   the key stone to CARD operational capabilities. The CAR Table can be 
   configured statically but that is most inefficient. In this respect 
   the CARD protocol proposes two approaches for the maintenance of the 
   CAR Tables in the ARs which are summarized below. 



 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

4.1.1. Centralized approach using a CARD Server 

   The centralized approach uses a CARD Server entity that assists the 
   current AR in performing reverse address translation. This 
   centralized approach requires the "neighboring ARs" to register their 
   identities with the CARD server to populate the reverse address 
   translation table prior to the initiation of any reverse address 
   translation, preferably during a CAR boot up time. When the current 
   AR is unable to resolve a L2 ID as requested by a MN, it will query 
   the CARD server using a AR-Server Request message. In response the 
   CARD server will return the IP address of the resolved CAR and the 
   current AR will also update its local CAR Table for subsequent 
   requests. The current AR will then directly contact the CAR and 
   perform capabilities discovery with it. The initial idea was 
   presented in [5] 

   The drawback of this approach however is that additional messages 
   (AR-Server Request and AR-Server Reply) are introduced and the CARD 
   server entity introduces a single point of failure in the network. 
   Also it may not be able to resolve CAR(s) which may belong to some 
   different administrator domain, in which case CARD will fail to 
   resolve the CAR and FMIPv6 protocol will not function. 

4.1.2. Decentralized approach Using Mobile Node's Handover 

   The decentralized approach makes use of a mobile terminal's handover. 
   The main idea behind this approach is to bootstrap and maintain the 
   association between two neighboring ARs, with overlapping coverage 
   area, by using the first handover of a MN occurring between them. 
   Subsequent handovers of other MNs will serve to refresh the 
   association between the neighboring ARs.  

   During the handover, the MN will send a "Router Identity message" to 
   its current AR containing the IP address of the previous AR. This 
   message will allow the current AR to add or update an entry for the 
   previous AR as its neighbor. As a security measure, a reception of a 
   Router Identity message will trigger the current AR to send an AR-AR 
   message to the previous AR containing the IP address of the MN in 
   order to verify its identity. Upon receiving a positive verification, 
   both the neighboring ARs will update their local CAR tables with each 
   others identity and capabilities information using the normal AR-AR 
   CARD Request/Reply messages. This approach was presented in [6] and 
   [7]. 

   The drawback of this approach however is the introduction of a new 
   message (router identity message) and increase in signaling load over 
   the air link and between ARs and the first MN missing on the 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   advantages offered by seamless handover protocol. Since Router 
   Identity Message is exchanged over the air link, in case of lossy air 
   links or collision the ARs will not be able to maintain credible 
   information. 

4.2. Expected Issues Related to FMIPv6 with CARD 

   FMIPv6 is designed to provide seamless and fast handover to MNs, but 
   the degree of seamlessness depends on the efficiency of CARD protocol 
   and its ability to resolve the CAR(s) identity and/or capabilities 
   information well in advance and with minimum delay and signaling 
   overhead.  

   FMIPv6 protocol provides two handover modes [3] depending on whether 
   the Fast Binding Acknowledgement (FBAck) message is received by the 
   MN on the previous/current AR's (PAR) link or next/new AR's (NAR) 
   link. In the former case the handover mode is termed "predictive" and 
   in the latter case the handover mode is termed "reactive". 

   Of the two handover modes the predictive mode is more relevant in 
   terms of the CARD protocol because in this mode the MN is able to 
   resolve the CAR information while it is still connected to PAR, but 
   for high speed MNs, it is highly likely that during the address 
   resolution and/or capabilities discovery delay incurred by CARD, the 
   MN may move out of the range of the current AR and perform L2 
   handover with NAR before the NAR identity and/or capabilities  gets 
   resolved, and the MN undergoes reactive handover mode, in which case 
   CARD protocol is rendered irrelevant. Reactive handover may account 
   for packet losses for the duration when the MN sends a Fast Binding 
   Update (FBU) towards its current AR from the NAR's link and till a 
   reverse tunnel is not established between PAR and NAR. 

   In case the PAR is unable to resolve the identity of the NAR, the MN 
   will not undergo FMIPv6 handover but revert to MIPv6 handover 
   incurring a higher handover delay associated with MIPv6. 

   Since the CARD protocol is triggered every time a MN receives L2 IDs 
   from in-range APs, this may not be feasible especially for fast 
   moving MNs, because the MN is usually able to listen to neighboring 
   APs when it is almost on the edge of the coverage area of its current 
   AP and, depending on the area of overlap region, it is possible that 
   the MN may move out of the coverage area of the current AP before it 
   has resolved the NAR identity. 

   Fast moving MNs undergo a higher frequency of handover and thus CARD 
   protocol is initiated every time a MN is about to handover to a CAR, 
   thus incurring higher signaling load, especially the MN-AR CARD 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   Request/Reply messages. Since the MN-AR CARD Request/Reply message 
   pair is exchanged over wireless link, they are more error prone than 
   the AR-AR CARD Request/Reply message pair. This may not be suitable 
   for fast moving MNs and/or real time communication sessions, as there 
   is not enough time for retransmissions before a MN moves out of the 
   coverage area of the current AP as explained above. 

   The evident shortcomings of the CARD protocol with respect to fast 
   moving MNs and real time applications are expected to be rectified by 
   empowering the MN to perform reverse address translation and/or 
   capabilities discovery of CAR(s) that may be multiple link-hops away 
   with minimum reliance on current AR and with minimum exchange of MN-
   AR CARD Request/Reply message pair. This is achieved by Multi Hop 
   Discovery of Candidate Access Router (MHD-CAR) protocol as discussed 
   and detailed in the next sections. 

5. Multi Hop Discovery of Candidate Access Router (MHD-CAR) 

   MHD-CAR is a protocol aimed at enabling a MN to resolve the identity 
   and capabilities information of CAR(s) that may be geographically 
   adjacent but topologically it may be multiple hops away from the 
   current AR. 

   One of the main feature of MHD-CAR is the ability of the AR's to 
   dynamically update their local CAR Table with the identity 
   information of not only the neighboring ARs but also CARs located 
   multiple hops away. The MHD-CAR operation does not require 
   maintaining and/or managing a CARD Server or using a MN's handover to 
   bootstrap and refresh the CAR Table of an AR. Instead each AR will 
   maintain a snap-shot of the network around it in its local CAR Table. 
   This CAR Table is dynamically configured at the initialization of the 
   AR and is refreshed routinely. 

   Also MHD-CAR requires a MN to maintain a local cache called "New 
   Access Network (NAN) Cache", the information content of which enables 
   a MN to resolve a CAR with minimum reliance on MN-AR CARD 
   Request/Reply messages, thereby decreasing the signaling load, 
   especially over the wireless link and attaining signaling and timing 
   efficiency that may contribute towards improving the probability of a 
   fast moving MN to undergo a Predictive FMIPv6 handover. 

   This distributed approach of MHD-CAR provides a highly scalable, 
   efficient and fault tolerant mechanism by overcoming the inherent 
   shortcomings of the CARD protocol as explained in the previous 
   sections. 


 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   The MHD-CAR does not introduce any new protocol messages and utilizes 
   the CARD Request/Reply messages. 

   It proposes changes to the way the CAR Table information is managed 
   and exchanged, besides introducing a new data structure called "New 
   Access Network (NAN) Cache, which is maintained inside the MN. 

   The combination of CAR Table and NAN Cache and their management 
   brings the main advantages of MHD-CAR. 

   The functional details of the MHD-CAR are discussed in the subsequent 
   sections. 

5.1. Access Router Operation 

   As specified in [1], the AR MUST maintain a CAR Table, which is a L2-
   L3 address mapping table. The arrangement and composition of the CAR 
   Table in MHD-CAR is different from what is suggested in [1] and the 
   details of the CAR Table are elaborated in section 3.1.1. 

   MHD-CAR introduces a parameter, besides many others discussed in 
   section 3.1.1, called 'Distance' in the CAR Table which is a measure 
   of the distance of a CAR, in terms of the number of link-hops, from 
   the local AR which is maintaining the CAR Table.  

   ARs exchange their CAR Table information with their neighboring ARs 
   using AR-AR CARD Request/Reply message pair [1]. Each AR-AR CARD 
   Reply message will carry the CAR Table information of the source AR 
   in the capability container message sub-option.  

   The exchange of CAR Table information with the neighboring ARs takes 
   place with the iterative exchange of unsolicited AR-AR Reply message, 
   where the number of iterations is equal to the specified maximum 
   distance for which the ARs are supposed to maintain the CAR Table. 

   At initialization, each AR will populate its CAR Table with its own 
   identity and capabilities information and set the 'Distance' 
   parameter to zero. The 'Distance' of zero indicates local AR 
   information. Each AR will then exchange its local CAR Table entries 
   with its neighboring ARs using unsolicited AR-AR CARD Reply Message. 

   In the first iteration, the ARs will exchange their local [AP-ID, AR-
   Information] tuples, and optionally capabilities information, with 
   their neighboring ARs, which will add this new information to their 
   local CAR Tables and increment the 'Distance' by 1. Now each AR will 
   have AR information about their neighboring ARs and this will be 

 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   indicated by the 'Distance' value of 1, meaning that the neighboring 
   ARs are at a distance of one link-hop away. 

   This new update of the local CAR Tables will prompt the ARs to start 
   the second iteration at random times of sending unsolicited AR-AR 
   Reply messages which will contain the updated new CAR Table 
   information in the capability container sub-option. The receiving ARs 
   will compare the new information with the present CAR Table entries 
   and if no match is found, will add the new CAR information to its 
   local CAR Table by incrementing the distance parameter of all 
   received entries by 1. This new entry will thus be stored in the 
   local CAR Table with the 'Distance' value of 2, indicating that the 
   relevant CAR is at distance of two link-hops away. 

   This new update of the local CAR Tables will prompt the ARs to start 
   the third iteration and this iterative exchange of local CAR Table 
   information with the neighboring ARs will continue until each AR has 
   the information about CAR which is MAXIMUM_DISTANCE_LIMIT away. The 
   value of the MAXIMUM_DISTANCE LIMIT is a constant that depends on the 
   network topology and can be specified by the administrator. How ever 
   the optimum value of the MAXIMUM_DISTANCE LIMIT constant is under 
   investigation. 

   After the MAXIMUM_DISTANCE_LIMIT iterative exchange of unsolicited 
   AR-AR Reply massages, the CAR Tables will converge. It should be 
   noted that the CAR information (identity and capabilities) are 
   carried in the capabilities container sub-option along with the 
   'Distance' information, and the AR-AR messages are only exchanged 
   with their neighbors and ARs are not supposed to forward this 
   message, or else the network can get flooded with these messages. 

   After the convergence of CAR Tables that happens during the ARs 
   initialization/bootup stage, the AR can send out an unsolicited AR-AR 
   Reply message if there is any change in its capabilities or identity 
   information or if a lifetime value of an entry expires, which will 
   again be iteratively distributed amongst ARs MAXIMUM_DISTANCE_LIMIT 
   away. It is expected that the CAR Tables will converge with minimum 
   time without producing excessive traffic on the network links, where 
   the time of convergence is a function of MAXIMUM_DIST_LIMIT. 

5.1.1. CAR Table Conceptual Design 

   As specified in [1] each AR must maintain a CAR Table which is a L2-
   L3 address mapping table maintaining a [AP-ID, AR-Info] tuple. The 
   AP-ID mainly contains the address of the AP connected to the router, 
   whereas the AR-Info is the router's valid L2 address, IP address and 
   prefix of the interface to which the AP is connected to. 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   However MHD-CAR proposes additional parameters to the CAR Table. 

   The parameters defined for the AP-ID field are as follows: 

   o  L2 ID: The L2 ID of the CAP associated with the corresponding CAR. 
      Usually the 6 Byte MAC Address of the CAP. 

   o  L2 Type: Determines the type of access technology (i.e, WiAMX, 
      WLAN, CDMA, UMTS, GPRS, etc,). 

   o  Channel Number: The channel/frequency of the CAP. 

   o  SNR (RSSI): The SNR (or RSSI) of the received beacon. 

   The parameters defined for the AR-Info field are as follows: 

   o  IP Address: The valid IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) of the interface 
      to which the AP is connected to. 

   o  IP Prefix: The prefix of the IP address of the interface to which 
      the AP is connected to. 

   o  Prefix Length: The prefix length of the IP address of the 
      interface to which the AP is connected to. 

   MHD-CAR introduces the capability container to the CAR Table and the 
   following parameters are defined for it: 

   o  Bitrate: The bit rate supported by the CAP. 

   o  SSID: The identity of the CAP. 

   o  Distance: The distance of the CAR/CAP from the current AR in terms 
      of link-hops. 

5.2. Mobile Node Operation 

   The CARD specification [1] proposes that a MN SHOULD maintain 
   discovered address and capability information of CARS in a local 
   cache to avoid requesting the same information repeatedly and to 
   select an appropriate target AR from list of CARs as quickly as 
   possible when a handover is imminent, but this proposal will only 
   quicken the CAR selection if the MN has visited that CAR domain 
   previously, whereas it is very much unlikely for a fast moving user 
   to revisit a previously visited CAR domain before the corresponding 
   entry times out. The conceptual design and arrangement of this local 
   cache however is not specified in [1]. 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   In MHD-CAR the MN MUST maintain a local cache, called "New Access 
   Network (NAN)" cache. The NAN cache maintains information of the CARs 
   that will aid the MN in selecting the appropriate CAR for handing 
   over its connection to, when the handover is imminent. The 
   information contents of the NAN cache is derived mostly from the CAR 
   Table that is either "pushed" in the MN by the current AR, or either 
   "pulled" by the MN from its current AR. The NAN cache also derives 
   some of the information contents from the beacon messages received 
   from the in-range wireless APs. 

   The MN can "Pull" the CARD Table from the current AR by sending a 
   wildcard MN-AR CARD Request Message, in response to which the current 
   AR will append the necessary CAR(s) information in the various sub-
   options of the MN-AR CARD Reply Message. On the other hand the 
   current AR upon sensing the connection of the MN to itself will send 
   an unsolicited MN-AR CARD Reply Message containing the CAR(s) 
   information appended as various sub-options. Whether the CAR 
   information is pulled by or pushed in the MN, the MN will add and/or 
   refresh the relevant entries of its NAN Cache based on the 
   information provided by the MN-AR CARD Reply Message.  

   The NAN Cache will contain the identity and capabilities information 
   of not only the neighboring CAR(s) but of CAR(s) 
   MAXIMUM_DISTANCE_LIMIT away from the current AR. This will allow the 
   MN to perform reverse address translation and capability discovery 
   without the exchange of MN-AR CARD Request/Reply message pair 
   whenever handover is imminent. This will not only reduce the 
   signaling load over the wireless link and improve the probability of 
   resolving a CAR but also reduce the delay incurred due to reverse 
   address translation and capability discovery procedure being carried 
   out locally within the MN without having to perform signal exchange 
   with the AR.  

   Besides relying on MN-AR Card Reply message for keeping it up to 
   date, the NAN Cache will also depend on the L2 information that it 
   receives periodically in the form of beacons from in-range wireless 
   APs. The NAN Cache in essence is a repository that maintains both L2 
   and L3 information regarding CAR(s). The information content of the 
   NAN Cache will be used by the MN to enhance the performance of both 
   L2 and L3 mobility management mechanisms and thus potentially lays 
   the foundation of a cross-layer mobility management schemes. 

5.3. New Access Network Cache Conceptual Design 

   The information in the NAN Cache is keyed by the L2 ID(s) that the MN 
   receives from the beacon signals of the in-range CAPs. The NAN Cache 

 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   entries provide information that can also potentially aid TAR 
   selection algorithms.   

   The proposed NAN Cache is composed, but not limited to, the following 
   parameters/fields for every CAR: 

   o  Reachability Status: Indicates whether a MN is reachable 
      (attached) to the AP signified by the particular NAN Cache entry. 

   o  Context ID: A context id used to match the information exchange 
      between correct CARD Request/Reply message pair. 

   o  L2 Type: Determines the type of access technology (i.e, WiMAX, 
      WLAN, CDMA, UMTS, GPRS, etc,). 

   o  L2 ID: The L2 ID of the CAP associated with the corresponding CAR. 
      Usually the 6 Byte MAC Address of the CAP. 

   o  SSID: SSID of the CAP  

   o  Bit Rate: The bit rate supported by the CAP.  

   o  Channel Number: The channel number/frequency of the CAP. This 
      entry can be used by selective frequency scanning algorithms to 
      reduce the latency due to scanning delay (For example Probe delay 
      in 802.11 networks). 

   o  SNR: The signal to Noise ratio of the CAP. This entry continues to 
      get updated with every received beacon. Can be potentially used to 
      determine the appropriate time of initiating handover with the 
      next CAP/CAR. 

   o  Receive Power: Receive power of the CAP. This entry continues to 
      get updated with every received beacon. Potentially used to 
      determine the direction of movement of the MN relative to the 
      "reachable" AP and/or CAP. Also aid in the decision to select the 
      appropriate Target AR (TAR) to handover to. 

   o  First Beacon Timestamp: The time a beacon was received from the AP 
      to which this entry belongs. 

   o  Last Beacon Timestamp: Records the time stamp of the latest beacon 
      received for the corresponding CAP/CAR. This entry continues to 
      get updated with every received beacon. The information for 
      maintaining the timestamp of the beacons for the corresponding CAP 
      will allow the MN to determine the dwell time and the period for 
      which it remains in the range of a particular CAP. 
 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

   o  IP Address Type: Indicates whether the CAR identity information is 
      based on IPv4 or IPv6. 

   o  IP Address:  The IP address of the interface of the CAR which is 
      connected to the CAP. Its size is 32 bits in case of IPv4 and 128 
      bits in case of IPv6. Used internally  

   o  IP Address Prefix: The prefix of the CAR's IP Address. 

   o  IP Address Prefix Length: The prefix length of the IP Address. 
      Stored as an integer. 

   o  Capability Container:   A data structure that contains the 
      capability information, such as QoS parameters and buffer size of 
      the corresponding CAR. 

   The information content of NAN Cache also improves the performance of 
   the L2 handover by aiding selective frequency scanning and thus 
   provides both L2 and L3 information for a combined efficient and a 
   true cross layer mobility management solution. 

   The AR receiving an unsolicited AR-AR CARD Reply message will add or 
   update its local CAR Table with the information contained in the 
   capability container sub-option, and will increment the 'Distance' 
   field for each new received entry by 1. The ARs will continue this 
   inter exchange of their CAR Table with  each other through 
   unsolicited AR-AR CARD Reply messages until the CAR Tables converge. 

   The CAR Tables will converge with several inter-exchanges of the 
   AR_AR Reply messages during boot up time as described previously. 

6. Security Considerations 

   Security issues for this document follow those for CARD protocol. 

7. IANA Considerations 

   See [8] for instructions on IANA allocation 

8. Acknowledgments 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

    



 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

9. Normative References 

   [1]   M. Liebsch, A. Singh, H. Chaskar, D. Funato, "Candidate Access 
         Router Discovery (CARD)", RFC 4066, July 2005.  

   [2]   Johnson, D., "Mobility Support in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004. 

   [3]   Koodli, R., Ed., "Fast Handover for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068, 
         July 2005. 

   [4]   Trossen, D., Krishanmurthi, G. Chaskar, H., Kempf, J., "Issues 
         in candidate access router discovery for seamless IP-level 
         handoffs", Work in Progress. 

   [5]   D. Funato et al., Geographically Adjacent Access Router 
         Discovery Protocol, Internet draft, draft-funato-seamoby-gaard-
         01.txt, June 2002.  

   [6]   Shim, E. and R. Gitlin, "Fast Handoff Using Neighbor 
         Information", Internet Draft, draft-shim-mobileip-neighbor-
         00.txt, November 2000. 

   [7]   Trossen, D., et al., "A Dynamic Protocol for Candidate Access-
         Router Discovery", Internet draft, draft-trossen-seamoby-
         dycard-01.txt, March 2003. 

   [8]   J. Kempf, ``Instructions for Seamoby and Experimental Mobility 
         Protocol IANA Allocations," RFC 4065, Internet Engineering Task         
         Force, June 2004. 

   [9]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

 

    

    









 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Faqir Zarrar Yousaf, 
   Communication Networks Institute 
   University of Dortmund  
   Otto-Hahn-Str. 6,  
   D-44227 Dortmund, Germany 
    
   Email: faqir.yousaf@tu-dortmund.de 
    

   Christian Wietfeld, 
   Communication Networks Institute 
   University of Dortmund 
   Otto-Hahn-Str. 6,  
   D-44227 Dortmund, Germany 
       
   Email: christian.wietfeld@tu-dortmund.de 
 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 




 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft        Multi-Hop Discovery of CARs            April 2008 
    

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

























 
 
Yousaf & Wietfeld      Expires October 23, 2008               [Page 17] 

