
 
 
   NSIS                                                                 
   Internet Draft                                         H. Tschofenig 
                                                                 Siemens 
                                                          H. Schulzrinne 
                                                             Columbia U. 
                                                              R. Hancock 
                                                             A. McDonald 
                                                      Siemens/Roke Manor 
                                                                   X. Fu 
                                                        Univ. Goettingen 
   Document: draft-tschofenig-nsis-sid-00.txt                           
   Expires: December 2003                                     June 2003 
    
    
              Security Implications of the Session Identifier  
                    <draft-tschofenig-nsis-sid-00.txt> 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions  
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering  
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that  
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents  
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
    
Abstract 
    
   As one result of the analysis activities in the NSIS group it was 
   realized that mobility and the ability to change the flow identifier 
   causes problems with existing QoS reservations. To be able to 
   associate a signaling message with existing state an identifier 
   other than the flow identifier had to be used. Such an abstraction 
   is achieved with the session identifier which allows identification 
   of established state independently of the flow characteristics.  
    
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 1] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   Although the introduction of a session identifier sounds simple and 
   beneficial, it introduces a problem which is subsequently referred 
   to as the session ownership problem.  
    
   This document describes the session ownership problem, the 
   implications for an NSIS protocol and summarizes already discussed 
   solutions. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Problem Description...........................................3 
      2.1 Mobility..................................................3 
      2.2 Local Repair Case.........................................4 
   3. Solution Discussion...........................................5 
      3.1 Local solutions...........................................6 
      3.1.1  Authorization Token...................................6 
      3.1.2  Context Transfer......................................6 
      3.1.3  Centralized Entity....................................7 
      3.2 Global Solutions..........................................7 
      3.2.1  Purpose Built Key Based Approach......................7 
      3.2.2  Hash Series Based Approach............................8 
      3.2.3  Confidentiality protection of session identifier......9 
   4. Pending Issues...............................................10 
   5. Summary......................................................10 
   6. Security Considerations......................................11 
   7. Open Issues..................................................11 
   8. References...................................................11 
   Acknowledgments.................................................12 
   Author's Addresses..............................................12 
    
1.    Introduction 
    
   As one result of the analysis activities in the NSIS group it was 
   realized that mobility and the ability to change the flow identifier 
   causes problems with existing QoS reservations. To be able to 
   associate a signaling message with existing state an identifier 
   other than the flow identifier had to be used. Such an abstraction 
   is achieved with the session identifier which allows identification 
   of established state independently of the flow characteristics.  
    
   Although the introduction of a session identifier sounds simple and 
   beneficial, it introduces a problem which is subsequently referred 
   to as the session ownership problem. Although the problem is known 
   for a very long time (discussion took place already at the 53rd IETF 
   and even proposals for solving the problem have been mentioned) the 
   topic still has some grey spots.   
    

 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 2] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   This document describes the session ownership problem, the 
   implications for an NSIS protocol and summarizes already discussed 
   solutions. 
    
2.    Problem Description 
    
   To allow signaling messages to refer to existing state some sort of 
   identifier is required. In RSVP this identifier is based on the flow 
   identifier.  
    
   To support mobility and to introduce the ability to change the flow 
   identifier mid-session and mid-path an additional identifier is 
   required. Throughout this text we call this additional identifier 
   the session identifier. Section 4.5.2 of [NSIS-FW] provides a 
   description of the different identifiers used in NSIS.  
    
   When a NSIS node receives a signaling message then it has to check 
   whether state information already exists, or whether new state has 
   to be established. The session identifier can quickly provide 
   information whether state information is already available.  
    
   Some of the described problems are less problematic in non-mobile 
   environments since the first NSIS-aware router (for example the edge 
   or access router) can associate authentication state with the 
   session identifier, and hence ownership can be verified. However, if 
   we assume a mobility scenario then the movement of a 
   node makes this verification step much more difficult since each 
   NSIS-aware node along the path could possibly be forced to do this 
   verification. 
    
2.1     Mobility 
    
   Figure 1 shows an NSIS Initiator which established state information 
   at NSIS nodes along the path as part of the signaling procedure. As 
   a result Access Router 1, Router 3 and Router 4 (and other nodes) 
   store state information including the Session Identifier SID-x. 
         












 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 3] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
                                            Session ID(SID-x) 
                                       +--------+ 
                     +-----------------+ Router +------------> 
    Session ID(SID-x)|                 |   4    | 
                 +---+----+            +--------+ 
                 | Router | 
          +------+   3    +******* 
          |      +---+----+      * 
          |                      * 
          | Session ID(SID-x)    * Session ID(SID-x) 
      +---+----+             +---+----+ 
      | Access |             | Access | 
      | Router |             | Router | 
      |   1    |             |   2    | 
      +---+----+             +---+----+ 
          |                      * 
          | Session ID(SID-x)    * Session ID(SID-x) 
     +----+------+          +----+------+ 
     |  NSIS     |          | Adversary | 
     | Initiator |          |           | 
     +-----------+          +-----------+ 
    
                        Figure 1: Mobility Scenario 
    
   The Session Identifier is included in signaling messages as a 
   reference to the established state.  
    
   If an adversary were able to obtain the Session Identifier for 
   example by eavesdropping signaling messages it would be able to add 
   the same Session Identifier SID-x to a new a signaling message. When 
   the signaling message hits Router3 (as shown in Figure 3) then 
   existing state information can be modified. The adversary can modify 
   or delete the established reservation causing unexpected behavior 
   for the legitimate user.  
    
   The source of the problem is that Router 3 (cross-over router) is 
   unable to decide whether the new signaling message was initiated 
   from the owner of the session/reservation.  
    
   In case that this threat is not addressed an adversary can launch 
   denial of service, theft of service, and various other attacks.  
    
   Note that the same problem might occur at the receiver side.  
    
2.2     Local Repair Case 
    
   In the above section an end host mobility scenario is described.  
    

 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 4] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   To make the situation more difficult it must be mentioned that not 
   only the initial signaling message originator is allowed to 
   authorize NSIS specific operations during the lifetime of an 
   established session. As part of the protocol any NSIS aware node 
   along the path (and the path might change over time) could be 
   involved in the signaling message exchange and it might be necessary 
   to provide mobility support or to trigger a local repair procedure. 
   Hence if only the initial signaling message originator is allowed to 
   trigger signaling message exchange some protocol behavior will not 
   be possible.  
    
                            - old path - 
    
                             +--------+ 
                             | Router | 
                       +....>|   2    +...+ 
                       .     +--------+   .      cross-over 
                       .                  .        router  
           +--------+  .                  .      +--------+ 
           | Router +..+                  +.....>| Router | 
    ------>|   1    +--+                  +----->|   4    +--------> 
           +--------+  |                  |      +--------+ 
                       |     +--------+   | 
                       +---->| Router +---+ 
                             |   3    | 
                             +--------+ 
                            
                            - new path - 
    
                      Figure 2: Route Change Scenario 
    
3.    Solution Discussion 
    
   Some possible means for verification and proofing ownership of a 
   session are given below. These examples should give the reader 
   information about the current state of the discussion.  
    
   This section is divided into two parts: First, there is a subsection 
   which proposes so-called "local solutions". These solutions are 
   characterized by the location where this verification is done. This 
   region is typically within the same administrative domain where the 
   user is authenticated for the purpose of authorization. Note that an 
   intra-domain handover does not necessarily mean that the cross-over 
   router where the old path hits the new path is also in the same 
   administrative domain. It could be external and therefore these 
   local solutions might not be applicable.  
    
   So-called "global solutions" work independently of the domain where 
   the end host is currently attached.  
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 5] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
    
   Note that local does not necessarily only refer to the first 
   administrative domain. If a trust relationship with other domains 
   also exist then verification is possible at other domains as well.  
    
3.1     Local solutions 
    
   The following solutions have one property in common which allows an 
   entity to verify that a signaling message is actually legitimate to 
   perform the indicated action: At the initial request some state is 
   created which allows subsequent requests to be associated with this 
   state.  
    
   The created state can either be in the network itself (e.g. at a 
   centralized entity) whereby the centralized entity needs to be 
   queried to perform verification or some information is shipped 
   around but allows local verification.  
    
3.1.1     Authorization Token 
    
   The authorization token approach requires that an entity in the 
   network produces a token during the initial signaling message 
   exchange. This token is cryptographically protected and must be 
   verifiable by entities in the local domain. The authorization token 
   must be protected to prevent an adversary at the wireless link to 
   intercept the token and to reuse it. The authorization token allows 
   link subsequent actions to an initial authorization (e.g. by 
   including the token into the signaling message after a handover). 
   The end host only forwards the authorization token. Hence the token 
   itself does not provide authentication.  
    
   This solution is referred as local since the token has to be granted 
   and verified within the same domain (or within domains with a pre-
   defined trust relationship). 
    
   A more sophisticated version would use a concept similar to Kerberos 
   tickets whereby the end host actively participates in the protocol 
   by showing the knowledge of the session key. As authorization 
   information the ticket could include the session identifier.  
    
3.1.2     Context Transfer 
    
   Context Transfer is another approach the network to associate a new 
   signaling message to a previous one. The Context Transfer protocol 
   allows to move state information from one access router to another. 
   The assumption thereby is that if state was create at one particular 
   access router then the forwarded state would also allow the new 
   access router to verify the incoming signaling message. Due to the 
   transitive trust provided by hop-by-hop security protection in 
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 6] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   intermediate router would trust that the signaling message have been 
   correctly verified and only the authorized entity issued the 
   signaling message.  
    
   A short discussion of context transfer in relationship with RSVP is 
   provided in Section 1.2.6 of [Tho02]. The same considerations are 
   also applicable to CT for NSIS. 
    
3.1.3     Centralized Entity 
    
   Using this approach a cross-over router where the new path hits the 
   old path and where authorization is desired information inside the 
   signaling message (e.g. a token which only points to state installed 
   at the centralized entity or user credentials) could be used to 
   perform this verification. For QoS signaling the Policy Decision 
   Point would be a possible centralized entity.  
    
   Different to authorization token approach the token does not need to 
   be verified at an individual node itself. For the authorization 
   token approach it is necessary to provide the necessary information 
   within the token itself. In case of a central entity only a 
   reference to the stored information needs to be provided. The 
   distinction between the authorization token and this approach is 
   therefore, from an NSIS protocol point of view, marginal. A solution 
   could possible support both mechanisms easily (e.g. [RFC3521] and 
   [RFC3520]).  
    
3.2     Global Solutions 
    
3.2.1     Purpose Built Key Based Approach 
    
   This approach makes use of a cryptographic session identifier and  
   follows the idea described in [PBK]. The identifier is created as:  
    
   Session ID = PRF(Public Key) 
    
   The output of the PRF function needs to be truncated if necessary to 
   fit the length requirements of the Session ID. As a PRF function MD5 
   or SHA-1 could be used.  
    
   The signaling initiator would therefore create a public / private 
   key pair before starting NSIS signaling for a specific session.  
    
   Every time the end host roams from one location to another the 
   following information is added to the NSIS signaling message:  
    
   - Session ID 
   - Public Key 

 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 7] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   - Digital Signature of some signaling message payloads including a 
   timestamp 
    
   A receiving entity (e.g. cross-over router) can verify that  
   - the Session ID matches the hash of the public key  
   - the private key, which was used to compute the digital signaling, 
   matches to the public key (by verifying the digital signature) 
   - the authorization indication is fresh (verifying the timestamp)  
    
   Note that this approach does not require a public key 
   infrastructure. It only makes use of the inability of an adversary 
   to later compute a key pair whereby the hash of public matches the 
   session identifier. Since the session identifier is stored at the 
   individual routers along the path it is not possible adversary to 
   masquerade the owner of the session id.  
    
   As described above replay protection is provided with the help of 
   timestamps.  
    
   The disadvantages of this approach are: 
   - Performance for the public key operation 
   - Size of the messages (the public key has to be included in 
   addition to other fields) 
   - Only the creator of the key pair is able to authorize actions (if 
   we ignore delegation approaches). This seems to be very restrictive.  
     
   [WC02] follows a similar approach by distributing a public key along 
   the path. Whenever an update is required then the message containing 
   the previous session identifier, the new session identifier, the 
   public key and a sequence number. The sequence number field is not 
   only a short random number; instead it is a digital signature 
   computed over the care-of address and the sequence number. A 
   successful verification at the cross-over router stores the new 
   values along the entire path.  
    
3.2.2     Hash Series Based Approach 
    
   The Hash Series approach provides better performance than the PBK-
   based approach. To set up the protocol a random T0 number is created 
   and hashed n times as shown below. The length of the hash series is 
   chosen by the creator with the value n: 
    
                                T1=hash(T0) 
                                T2=hash(T1) 
                                    ... 
                               Tn=hash(Tn-1) 
    
   The session identifier is chosen in such a way that it equals Tn.  
    
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 8] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   The hash values are then released in the reverse order. Every hash 
   value is used only once and the number of the latest hash value has 
   to be stored. Since the total number of hash values has to be set at 
   protocol startup it is necessary to "change" the hash series after 
   all values are exhausted. Since the hash series is associated to the 
   session identifier it is also necessary to change the session 
   identifier or to restart the protocol with a new session identifier.  
    
   A signaling message would therefore include: 
   - Session ID (=Tn) 
   - Total number of hash values (n) 
   - Current hash value (Ti) 
   - Index of current hash value (i) 
    
   A verifying entity would therefore recompute the hash chain to 
   verify that the session id is valid. Furthermore it is necessary to 
   compare the received hash value with the lasted one received (if no 
   hash value got lost) Tx+1 would have to equal hash(Tx). 
    
   To prevent reuse of a hash value by an adversary it is necessary 
   that all nodes along the path store the latest valid value.  
    
3.2.3     Confidentiality protection of session identifier 
    
   This approach is very simple and follows the following arguments: 
   - An adversary can only mount an attack if it knows the Session ID 
   - The end host has to trust the intermediate nodes and networks to 
   perform according to the expected behavior. Due to the flexible 
   protocol operation it is necessary for intermediate nodes to act on 
   behalf of the end host.  
    
   Providing confidentiality protection to protect the Session ID makes 
   it more very difficult for an adversary to eavesdrop the session 
   identifier and to reuse it for a subsequent attack. 
    
   Confidentiality protection of the session identifier therefore 
   addresses attacks from outsiders (entities which do not actively 
   participate in the NSIS signaling protocol). Hence it must be 
   assured that the session identifier is never transmitted in clear 
   between two signaling entities (e.g. in clear over the wireless 
   link). Adversaries along the path (i.e. an NSIS node which was 
   intercepted by an adversary) are not addressed by this approach.  
    
   It is obvious that the session identifier must be chosen in a way 
   which does not allow an adversary to guess it. One possibility is to 
   choose the value for the Session Identifier randomly with each 
   session. It must be ensured that the identifier is sufficient large 
   (e.g. 128 bits).  
    
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003               [Page 9] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   This approach was selected for CASP [CASP].  
    
4.    Pending Issues  
    
   - Replay protection 
    
   Replay protection for the solutions described in Section 3 is hard. 
   Assuming globally synchronized clocks for timestamp-based replay 
   protection is possibly hard to justify. 
    
   - Authorizing entity 
    
   To keep the NSIS protocol flexible it seems that it is undesirable 
   to restrict certain actions only to a single entity (e.g. to the 
   signaling initiator). Some solutions discussed in Section 3 tend to 
   force such an approach. The question therefore is: "Which entity is 
   allowed to authorize which actions?" 
    
   - Certain solutions discussed in Section 3 require the distribution 
   (and storage) of information along the path.  
    
   - Signaling message behavior 
    
   NSIS signaling messages do not always travel end-to-end. Instead, in 
   mobility scenarios it is sometimes desirable to start or to 
   terminate the signaling message exchange somewhere along the path. 
   Is this still valid or do all message have to travel end-to-end? 
    
   - Local or global solution 
    
   It is obviously much simpler to provide a solution which works 
   locally. Since the ownership problem could possibly require 
   verification at any node along the path it seems to be that a global 
   solution should be targeted.  
    
5.    Summary 
    
   To provide proper security for the session ownership problem a 
   solution has to face many challenges including performance, state 
   maintenance, replay protection and most important - the flexibility 
   of the NSIS protocol itself.  
    
   The above-described problem of authorization is not restricted to 
   communication at the edge as described above. The problem basically 
   occurs anywhere in the network whenever an old path becomes invalid 
   and a reservation along a new path has to be established. The merge 
   point (or cross-over router from the above mobility scenario) has to 
   make sure that only the legitimate owner of the reservation issued 
   this request.  
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003              [Page 10] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
    
   Introducing a session identifier for the purpose of more efficient 
   mobility handling needs to be carefully compared to the additionally 
   introduced complexity (for example by the corresponding security 
   mechanism). The benefits gained by this new concept can easily be 
   destroyed by heavy-weight security mechanisms or by introducing new 
   security vulnerabilities.  
 
6.    Security Considerations 
    
   This document addresses security issues of the Session ID. To 
   provide a more detailed threat analysis it is necessary to resolve 
   the pending issues listed in Section 4.  
    
   This threat is also briefly described in [THREATS]. 
    
   The solutions described in this document to not aim to provide 
   protection for signaling messages itself. 
    
7.    Open Issues 
    
   Adding multicast handling to an NSIS adds a number of further open 
   issues. In case of multicast it is possible that nodes join and 
   leave the multicast group. If sensitive information is transmitted 
   to the active signaling entities then a previously joined node can 
   later perform some actions even after leaving the multicast group.   
    
   Sooner or later it is necessary to come up with a definition of the 
   problem we are aiming to solve. Such a definition might look like: 
   "An NSIS message is authentic if it originates from the initiator 
   for a session, or from an NSIS node that has been authorized to act 
   on behalf of the initiator by virtue of taking part in the NSIS 
   signaling session."  
    
8.    References 
    
   [THREATS]  H. Tschofenig and D. Kroeselberg: "Security Threats for  
   NSIS", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, March 2003. 
   Work in progress.  
    
   [NSIS-FW]  R. Hancock, I. Freytsis, G. Karagiannis, J. Loughney and 
   S. Van den Bosch: "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework", Internet 
   Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, March 2003.  Work in 
   progress.  
    
   [PBK] S. Bradner, A. Mankin, and J. Schiller, "A framework for 
   purpose built keys (PBK)", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, November 2002. Work in progress. 
    
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003              [Page 11] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   [WC02]   C. Westphal and H. Chaskar: "QoS Signaling Framework for 
   Mobile IP", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 
   2002. Expired. 
    
   [CASP]   H. Schulzrinne, H. Tschofenig, X. Fu, and A. McDonald, 
   "CASP - Cross-Application Signaling Protocol", Internet Draft, 
   Internet Engineering Task Force, 2003. Work in progress. 
    
   [RFC3521]   L. Hamer, B. Gage, and H. Shieh, "Framework for session 
   set-up with media authorization," RFC 3521, Internet Engineering 
   Task Force, April 2003.  
    
   [RFC3520] L. Hamer, B. Gage, B. Kosinski, and H. Shieh, "Session 
   Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, April 2003. 
    
   [Tho02]  M. Thomas: "Analysis of Mobile IP and RSVP Interactions", 
   Internet Draft Internet Engineering Task Force, (work in progress), 
   October 2002. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   We would like to thank Rainer Falk for his comments to this draft.  
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Hannes Tschofenig 
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munich 
   Germany 
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com 
    
   Henning Schulzrinne 
   Dept. of Computer Science 
   Columbia University 
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue 
   New York, NY 10027 
   USA 
   EMail: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu 
    
   Robert Hancock  
   Roke Manor Research  
   Old Salisbury Lane  
   Romsey  
   Hampshire  
   SO51 0ZN  
   United Kingdom  
   Email: robert.hancock@roke.co.uk  
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003              [Page 12] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
    
   Andrew McDonald 
   Roke Manor Research 
   Old Salisbury Lane 
   Romsey, Hampshire 
   UK 
   EMail: andrew.mcdonald@roke.co.uk 
    
   Xiaoming Fu 
   Institute for Informatics 
   University of Goettingen 
   Lotzestrasse 16-18 
   37083 Goettinge 
   Germany EMail: fu@cs.uni-goettingen.de 
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003              [Page 13] 
           Security Implications of the Session Identifier  June 2003 
 
 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 



































 
 
Tschofenig et al.      Expires - December 2003              [Page 14] 