INTERNET-DRAFT          AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
   Internet Engineering Task Force                              W. Gong 
   Internet Draft                        University of Chinese Academy 
   Intended status: Proposed Standard                       of Sciences 
                                                                K. Tian 
                                            Great Wall Asset Management 
                                                    Corporation of China 
                                                                B. Zhang 
                                           University of Chinese Academy 
                                                             of Sciences 
                                                                K. Huang 
                                              Jiangsu Internet-of-Things 
                                         Research and Development Center 
                                                                         
   Expires: July 2014                                      January 2014 
                                       
                   Anchor-based Voronoi Routing Protocol 
                             draft-gong-avrp-00 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 10, 2014. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 
      This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 1] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
Abstract 
    
   The Anchor-based Voronoi Routing Protocol in this draft is an 
   efficient distributed routing protocol for wireless sensor networks 
   with mobile sinks. The design objective of the protocol is to reduce 
   the overall updating overhead caused by the movement of mobile sinks 
   and simultaneously build efficient data delivery structure. The 
   basic idea behind AVRP is to combine the ideas of Voronoi scoping 
   and dynamic anchor node selection. The designed protocol is simple, 
   efficient, and easy to implement in dynamic wireless sensor networks 
   with mobile sinks.  
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   "AVRP" indicates Anchor-based Voronoi Routing Protocol. 
    
   "mWSN" indicates Wireless sensor networks with mobile sinks. 
    
   "Anchor nodes" refers to sensor nodes collecting data from other 
   sensor nodes and forwarding packets to the sink. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    



















 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 2] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
   Status of This Memo 
   Abstract 
   1. Introduction...................................................4 
   2. Protocol Overview..............................................4 
      2.1 Overview of ODMRP..........................................4 
      2.2 Gradient establishment via interest dissemination..........4 
      2.3 Voronoi Scoping of Mobile Sinks............................5 
      2.4 Dynamic Selection of Anchor Nodes..........................5 
   Security Considerations...........................................5 
   IANA Considerations...............................................6 
   References........................................................6 
      Normative References...........................................6 
      Informative References.........................................6 
   Acknowledgments...................................................6 
   Author's Addresses................................................6 
    
                        




























 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 3] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   In this draft, we present an efficient data gathering protocols for 
   Wireless Sensor Networks with mobile sinks(mWSN). mWSN has many 
   advantages like alleviating hot-spot problem, providing longer 
   network lifetime and relaxing the constraints on network 
   connectivity. However, sink mobility can bring excessive protocol 
   overhead for route maintenance and may offset the benefit from using 
   mobile sinks. Our protocol (called AVRP) adopts Voronoi scoping and 
   dynamic anchor selection to suppress the protocol overhead caused by 
   mobile sinks while ensuring high data delivery performance. The 
   protocol is aimed for mWSNs with moderate or heavy traffic. 
    
   The AVRP protocol is a routing protocol designed for wireless sensor 
   networks with mobile sinks. A mobile sink is a node with dual 
   wireless interfaces, one for communicating with wireless sensor 
   nodes and another is for accessing remote networks like satellite 
   networks, cellular networks, and etc. Example applications for such 
   mobile sinks can be environment monitoring, public safety 
   surveillance, building safety monitoring, and security guards. When 
   a sensor node has data to report, it needs to send its sensed data 
   to a nearby mobile sink, via which the data can be sent to users 
   and/or administrator. 
    
2. Protocol Overview 
    
2.1 Overview of ODMRP  
    
   The AVRP protocol includes gradient establishment via interest 
   dissemination, Voronoi scoping of mobile sinks, and dynamic 
   selection of anchor nodes. The protocol has the following two 
   features. First, it introduces Voronoi scoping such that each sensor 
   always delivers its data packets to its closest sink in a dynamic 
   mWSN. Second, anchor nodes are used to absorb the small movement of 
   sinks while maintaining the good property of Voronoi scoping when 
   creating forwarding structure. 
    
2.2 Gradient establishment via interest dissemination 
    
   An interest message is a query that describes a sensing task for 
   gathering data in a wireless sensor network. Interest messages are 
   broadcasted from a sink along intermediate nodes to all the sensor 
   nodes in the sensor network. Each sensor node then stores the 
   interest entry in its cache which contains a timestamp field and 
   gradient information. The gradient information associated with a 
   node is the distance from the node to the sink initiating the 
   interest dissemination and its next hop to the sink. When the 
   interest is disseminated throughout the sensor network, the gradient 

 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 4] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
   for each sensor node in the network is established by recording the 
   distance from the sensor node to the sink. 
    
2.3 Voronoi Scoping of Mobile Sinks 
    
   We assume that there are multiple mobile sinks moving in a wireless 
   sensor network. Every sink selects an anchor node on behalf of 
   itself. Each sink disseminates its interest message through the 
   anchor node to the whole sensor network. The interest message 
   includes sink id, current sequence number, the hop distance to the 
   sink, and previous hop to the sink. A sensor node keeps at most one 
   entry in its routing table. When a node receives a non-duplicate 
   interest packet, if its current route table is empty, the sensor 
   creates an entry to record the route information mentioned above. If 
   the route table is not empty, the sensor node compares the interest 
   packet with its local route table. If the sequence number of the 
   interest message is higher or a nearer sink is found, the sensor 
   node updates its route table. Thus the whole areas in an mWSN are 
   divided into several Voronoi partitions (Here we consider hop count 
   as distance). The boundary of two neighboring Voronoi area is the 
   nodes which have same hop count to the sink of the adjacent Voronoi 
   partitions. By this means, every node transmits its data packets to 
   the closest sink along the shortest path. 
    
2.4 Dynamic Selection of Anchor Nodes 
    
   An anchor node is chosen as an agent of its corresponding sink to 
   reduce the routing update frequency caused by the mobility of sink 
   nodes. To choose an anchor node, a mobile sink broadcasts a request 
   message to its current neighbor sensor nodes. Each of its neighbor 
   sensor nodes replies with a response message that contains its ID. 
   The sink chooses the sensor node which has the highest received 
   signal strength among its neighbors as the anchor node. Then, the 
   mobile sink sends a request message that contains its own ID and its 
   current sequence number to the selected anchor node. The selected 
   sensor node responds if it has already been selected as an anchor 
   node by another sink. If it is, then the sink tries its second 
   closest neighbor sensor node. 
    
   As a sink node moves, the mobile sink periodically exchanges 
   signaling messages with its associated anchor node to monitor the 
   quality of the link between them by checking the RSS received from 
   the anchor node. When the RSS is lower than a predefined threshold, 
   the mobile sink will start a process to reselect a new anchor node 
   among its neighbor sensor nodes and then refresh the routing 
   delivery structure if a new anchor node is selected. 
    
Security Considerations 
    
 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 5] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
   Security is outside the scope of this document and not discussed. 
    
IANA Considerations 
    
   This document has no actions for IANA. 
    
References 
    
   Normative References 
    
   [1]   Bradner, S., Ed., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 
      3978, January 2005. 
   [2]   S. Bradner.  Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels.  RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   Informative References 
    
   [3]   K. Tian, B. Zhang, K. Huang, and J. Ma, "Data Gathering 
      Protocols for Wireless Ensor Networks with Mobile Sinks", in Proc. 
      IEEE Globecom, pp. 1-6, 2010. 
   [4]   C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, "Directed diffusion: 
      a scalable and robust communication paradigm for sensor networks", 
      in Proc. ACM MobiCom, pp. 56-67, 2000. 
   [5]   L. Shi, B. Zhang, Z. Yao, K. Huang, and J. Ma, "An Efficient 
      Multi-Stage Data Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks 
      with Mobile Sinks", in Proc. IEEE Globecom, pp. 5622-5627, 2011. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The protocol described in this draft was supported in part by the 
   National Science and Technology Major Project of China under Grant 
   No. 2012ZX03005019. 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Wei Gong 
   University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
   19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, China 
   Email: gongwei11@mails.ucas.ac.cn 
    
   Ke Tian 
   Department of Information Technology 
   Great Wall Asset Management Corporation of China, 
   2 Yuetan Bei Road, Beijing 100045, China  
   Email: ktian@gwamcc.com 
    
   Baoxian Zhang 
   University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
   19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, China 
 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 6] 
INTERNET-DRAFT              AVRP Routing                 January 2014 
 
 
   Email: bxzhang@ucas.ac.cn 
    
   Kui Huang 
   Jiangsu Internet-of-Things Research and Development Center 
   200 Linghu Big Road, New District, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214135, China 
   Email: huangkui@ciotc.org 
    










































 
 
Gong et al.               Expires: July 2014                  [Page 7] 

