Personal                                                M. Scott Corson 
                                                   Flarion Technologies 
Internet Draft                                                          
Title: draft-corson-triggered-00.txt                                    
Category: Informational                                        May 2002 
Expires : November 2002                                                 
 
    
                         A Triggered Interface 
                    <draft-corson-triggered-00.txt> 
                                                 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
Abstract 
    
   Layer 2 interfaces fundamentally operate as either broadcast or 
   point-to-point.  From these primitives, additional layer 3 interface 
   constructs such as non-broadcast multiple access and point-to-
   multipoint are created as necessary.  This approach has served the 
   wired Internet well.  However this memo argues that a third type of 
   layer 2 interface is necessary to seamlessly extend IP over dynamic 
   networks, principally wireless.  This interface, here termed a 
   "triggered" interface, combines traditional broadcast interface 
   addressing semantics (i.e. support for unicast, multicast and 
   broadcast link layer addresses) with layer 2 trigger support for the 
   dynamic creation of peer-to-peer interface associations within an 
   otherwise broadcast interface.  Its intended domain of applicability 
   covers cellular, WLAN, MANET, etc; in short all currently envisioned 
   forms of dynamic wireless networking. 
    
  
Corson                                                               1 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   IP networking has long been used in wireless communications 
   beginning with early work on packet radio networks.  Nowadays it is 
   common to send IP data over a variety of wireless technologies, both 
   fixed and mobile.  Traditionally this has consisted of "best effort" 
   data communications, with the accompanying assumptions on packet 
   loss and latency.  While voice and other forms of low-latency IP 
   data are also sometimes transported over wireless to end hosts, 
   these services are not yet widely available on a commercial basis. 
    
   Increasingly there is commercial interest in transporting all forms 
   of data over IP over wireless, especially voice.  The use of 
   wireless technologies is desirable due to the ubiquity of access 
   they enable as well as their ability to support mobility.  Meeting 
   the stringent requirements on packet loss and delivery latency for 
   voice traffic (and other forms of low latency data) places many 
   requirements on a wireless network; one of which is the ability to 
   quickly and efficiently determine the existence (or non-existence) 
   of a link, as this is central to determining IP reachability.   
    
   This capability is needed most commonly as a consequence of 
   movement-induced changes in network topology.  Mobile handoff, 
   whether in cellular or WLAN contexts, generally requires that the 
   entire process complete within 10's of milliseconds is seamless 
   voice service is to be maintained.  This requires very fast 
   detection of changes in link status.  Oftentimes the change in the 
   status of a link (its UP or DOWN status) is associated with movement 
   or variation in physical channel conditions, but this need not be 
   the case.  Other factors such as authentication and quality of 
   service considerations may impact the status of a link. 
    
   Two general approaches are available to detect changes in link 
   status at the IP layer: the direct use of layer 3 (L3 or IP layer) 
   mechanisms and the use of layer 2 (L2 or link layer) triggers to 
   inform IP.  Each approach has advantages and disadvantages. 
 
 
1.1. L3 Link Detection 
    
   The usage of L3 mechanisms is advantageous in that they are generic 
   and work across all link layers.  Their usage is also practically 
   expedient in that their standardization is only required in one 
   standards body, the IETF, as opposed to across both the IETF and 
   other link layer standards bodies such as the IEEE.  Consequently 
   their usage is generally preferred when practical.   
    
   Unfortunately in many instances a pure L3 approach may not work well 
   enough and thus, perversely, may not be generally applicable.  Link 
   layers vary greatly in both form and function.  Some are connection-
   oriented (e.g. Bluetooth) while others are not (e.g. 802.11).  Some 
   are bandwidth-constrained (e.g. cellular) while others are less so 
   (e.g. WLAN).  Some are continuously beaconing (e.g. HIPERLAN1) while 
  
Corson                                                               2 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   others may not (e.g. energy-constrained sensor networks).  In order 
   to quickly detect a link status change (in the low 10's of 
   milliseconds), frequent, periodic L3 messaging is required on the 
   order of 100-200 messages per second in each direction.  This may 
   not be practical for many bandwidth or energy-constrained wireless 
   technologies.  Such an algorithm may also need heuristic tuning for 
   each link layer given each technology's unique characteristics, 
   which then breaks the notion that the IP layer should be generic and 
   L2-agnostic. 
    
1.2 L2 Link Detection 
    
   An alternative to this is the use of L2 triggers.  A link layer best 
   knows its current link status.  It is a peer-to-peer relationship 
   between a pair of interfaces at the link layer.  The principle of 
   separation of concerns suggests that IP allow the link layer to 
   ascertain its own status (in many cases it will do this anyway) and 
   report this to IP.  It is true that not all link layers dynamically 
   ascertain link status between pairs of adjacent interfaces.  These 
   link layers are therefore best viewed as either traditional point-
   to-point or broadcast, and over these L2's IP should be configured 
   to detect link status via its own mechanisms as is commonly done. 
    
   However, for those link layers that do ascertain link status (the 
   majority), use of L2 trigger information is usually the only 
   feasible manner to quickly determine link status and, hence, IP 
   connectivity.  By necessity a pure L3 detection approach provides a 
   *lagging* indicator.  For IP messages to flow (or to stop flowing), 
   the link itself will *already* be UP (or DOWN), and the link layer 
   establishment processing has already added delay of its own. 
   Consequently IP can only begin to determine what has happened 
   *after* it has happened at the link layer.  In virtually all cases 
   this will be too late to support seamless voice and low latency data 
   service.  In cases where the link layer ascertains its own status, 
   the use of L2 triggers can inform the IP layer without ambiguity or 
   delay in the event of a link status change. 
    
   The observation that L2 trigger support is necessary for a variety 
   of link layers begs the question as to how this support should be 
   realized.   
    
1.3. Incorporating L2 Triggers into IP 
    
   Up to now, support for mobility within the Internet has been an 
   afterthought.  Standardized support for intra-domain, mobile, 
   prefix/host-based native routing does not exist.  The only present 
   standard alternative is to use tunneling with Mobile IP.   
    
   Mobile IP would perhaps have been better named "Portable IP", as its 
   original design was intended to support remote access-based 
   operation in support of inbound IP reachability for "road warriors" 
   equipped with portable devices connecting while *away* from their 
   home subnet.  Insufficient consideration was given to supporting 
  
Corson                                                               3 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   true mobility, resulting in the recent flurry of activity in the MIP 
   and other WGs to address these shortcomings.  These solutions cannot 
   function effectively for many link layers without the additional 
   support of L2 triggers. 
    
   Mobile Ad hoc Networking represents a dynamic form of IP networking 
   where the entire network infrastructure may potentially be mobile.  
   Many link layers exist from which MANETs may be formed.  Many of 
   these link layers dynamically detect the presence/absence of 
   neighbors within those link layers.  It is not only desirable to 
   make use of this information when known, it is typically required 
   for these link layers if seamless internetworking of voice and other 
   demanding applications is to be achieved.  
    
   Recognition of the limitations of the existing L2-oblivious IP 
   approach is essential before first class support for mobility can be 
   incorporated within IP's purview.  Currently IP does not give 
   mobility appropriate treatment and its performance over mobile 
   networks suffers without non-standard modifications.  In order a 
   fully integrate mobility support within IP, reconsideration is 
   required of the proper relationship between IP and the vast array of 
   dynamic link layer technologies that now exist and will exist going 
   forward.  Dynamic interfaces (principally wireless) require a modest 
   level of recognition from the IP stack for efficient internetworking 
   to occur.  Modification of IP kernels to support the minimal 
   functionality described here would fundamentally enhance the 
   Internet's capability going forward.   
    
   There are several ways one might consider adding support for L2 
   triggers into IP.  This memo now argues that definition of a new 
   "triggered" L2 interface type is the most appropriate architectural 
   solution.  This memo describes how this simple interface abstraction 
   can handle the case of network-level mobility within a fixed 
   infrastructure (e.g. Mobile IP-based connectivity) and mobility of 
   an infrastructure itself (e.g. MANET-based connectivity).   
 
 
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 
   [RFC2119].  
 
 
3. A Triggered Interface 
    
   Layer 2 interfaces fundamentally operate as either "broadcast" or 
   "point-to-point".  This holds true even for recent work on 
   unidirectional satellite links [RFC3077] wherein a broadcast link is 
   emulated through the use of link layer tunneling. From these two 
   primitives, additional layer 3 interface constructs such as non-
  
Corson                                                               4 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   broadcast multiple access (NBMA) and point-to-multipoint are created 
   as necessary.  This approach has served the existing Internet well.   
    
   However, to support many existing and emerging link layer 
   technologies, this memo argues that a third type of layer 2 
   interface is necessary to seamlessly extend IP over dynamic 
   networks.  This interface, here termed a "triggered" interface, 
   combines traditional broadcast interface addressing semantics with 
   layer 2 trigger support for the dynamic creation of peer-to-peer, 
   link layer interface associations within an otherwise broadcast 
   interface.   
    
   A triggered interface type would retain the addressing and 
   transmission behavior of a broadcast interface (i.e. support for 
   unicast, multicast and broadcast MAC addresses).  Thus behavior akin 
   if not equivalent to ARP/RARP would be required for resolving 
   unicast MAC addresses.  Also, a mapping of IP multicast to link 
   layer multicast addressing is required, as is support for MAC 
   broadcast. 
    
   A triggered interface would also support a dynamic set of link layer 
   associations.  An "association" or "link" is defined as a peer-to-
   peer relationship between two link layer interfaces that can 
   *directly* and *bi-directionally* communicate with each other.  The 
   status (i.e. the existence or non-existence) of these associations 
   (or links) would be determined by the link layer, and signaled by 
   the link layer thru the triggered interface to the IP stack using L2 
   triggers.   
    
   In a fixed infrastructure, from an IP Base Station's (BS) 
   perspective, the interface would generally have multiple Mobile 
   Node's (MN) associated with it at the link layer (1-to-N), while 
   from the MN's perspective it would oftentimes have only one link to 
   the BS (1-to-1) as shown in the following figure. 
 
 
                            BS                1-to-N (one BS to N MNs) 
                           / | \ 
                          /  |  \ 
                        MN  MN  MN            1-to-1 (one MN to one BS) 
    
        Figure 1: Typical Cellular/WLAN View (Base Stations and Mobile 
   Nodes) 
    
    
   In the future cellular/WLAN link layers will also likely exist that 
   permit a MN to simultaneously connect to multiple BSs as shown in 
   Figure 2, so this possibility should be considered as well. 
    
    
    
    
    
  
Corson                                                               5 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
    
    
                    BS      BS                1-to-N (one BS to N MNs) 
                   /  \    / | \ 
                  /    \  /  |  \ 
                 MN     MN  MN  MN            1-to-N (one MN to N BSs) 
    
        Figure 2: Future Cellular/WLAN View (Base Stations and Mobile 
   Nodes) 
    
    
   In an ad hoc network, Mobile Routers (MR) will generally have 
   multiple neighboring mobile routers, so the 1-to-N relation would 
   hold as well. 
    
    
    
                        MR    MR           
                          \  /   \        
                   MR------MR-----MR          1-to-N (one MR to N MRs) 
                          /      /  \ 
                        MR     MR    MR 
 
                 Figure 3: Ad hoc Network View (Mobile Routers) 
    
    
   So going forward the general case in both cellular, WLAN and MANET 
   contexts is 1-to-N, with 1-to-1 being a special case. 
    
   The exact composition of an L2 trigger is also not specified here.  
   An L2 trigger MUST contain the MAC address of the adjacent neighbor 
   interface. Its reception at the IP stack would signal that a bi-
   directional link layer communication capability exists (a link has 
   come UP) or ceases to exist (a link has gone DOWN) between two 
   adjacent interfaces.  The MAC address presented to IP MUST remain 
   constant while the link is UP.   
    
   The behavior of an IP stack to the reception of these triggers is 
   not specified here.  Whether any mandatory behaviors are required is 
   an open issue.  The potential exists for an IP stack to immediately 
   issue a Reverse ARP (RARP) request for the adjacent interface.  
    
   Additional IP stack behavior modification on top of the support for 
   L2 triggers may also be required.  The proper treatment of broadcast 
   and multicast traffic on this interface type should to be 
   reconsidered as well.  The traditional treatment of IP multicast 
   over broadcast interfaces is not appropriate for MANETs or future 
   cellular and WLAN contexts.  IP multicast traffic is typically not 
   rebroadcast out the broadcast interface over which it was received, 
   however this would often be required for triggered interfaces. 
    


  
Corson                                                               6 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   The triggered interface type would be useful for both IPv4 and IPv6.  
   However the commercial will to undertake the necessary IP stack 
   modifications may only be present for IPv6. 
    
   The intended usage of this interface type is straightforward.  It 
   appears that this simple interface abstraction can support many 
   existing and envisioned link layers.  It maps well onto cellular, 
   WLAN, PAN and MANET interfaces as we now illustrate with simple 
   examples. 
 
 
3.1. Cellular 
    
   Cellular communications occur between BSs and MNs.  Note that I am 
   now describing IP-based networks, where both base stations and 
   mobiles are IP elements. 
    
   Circuit-oriented air interfaces establish point-to-point links at 
   the physical layer, and typically run PPP or equivalent to establish 
   IP connectivity.  This approach is sensible for the delivery of 
   unicast data, but is very inefficient for the delivery of broadcast 
   and multicast traffic given that the base station's transmissions 
   are inherently broadcast at the physical layer.  To deliver these 
   forms of traffic, ATM-like NBMA or point-to-multipoint interfaces 
   are required at an IP base station (assuming IP is brought directly 
   to the base station, now also a router), and the triggered interface 
   discussion does not apply. 
    
   To deliver bandwidth-efficient services as well as high levels of 
   statistical multiplexing over the air, emerging packet-oriented 
   cellular technologies offer support for broadcast and multicast 
   addressing at the link layer in addition to unicast communications.  
   Consequently a broadcast-oriented interface is used. 
    
   In both cases (circuit or packet-orientation), cellular link layers 
   typically have the property that the establishment or loss of a link 
   is immediately known at both ends, and can be signaled to the IP 
   stacks on the MN and BS.  This is a typically consequence of their 
   physical and MAC layer designs as well as the general need to 
   perform link layer authentication. 
    
   The triggered interface is sufficiently generic to handle all 
   cellular air interfaces in terms of addressing and L2 trigger 
   support. 
    
    
3.2. 802.11 (Infrastructure mode) and HIPERLAN2 
    
   Both HIPERLAN2 and 802.11 in Infrastructure mode operate in a 
   fashion synonymous to emerging packet-based cellular technologies, 
   and would benefit from the use of triggered interfaces in hosts as 
   well as BS (integrated IP Access Router/Access Point) boxes. 
    
  
Corson                                                               7 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   802.11 interfaces are currently defined as broadcast interfaces.  
   Re-classification as triggered interfaces in end hosts would not 
   change addressing practice, but would enable cleaner support for L2 
   triggers by enabling existing link layer "association/de-
   association" signals to be passed up to the end host IP stack in a 
   generic fashion as standard L2 triggers.  These signals are 
   generated automatically at the BS and MN ends of a link when a BS is 
   operating in infrastructure mode.   
 
 
3.3. HIPERLAN1 
    
   HIPERLAN1 was originally developed as a 20Mbps multi-hop, ad hoc 
   networking technology employing broadcast transmissions with omni-
   directional antennas.  The MAC protocol was designed explicitly to 
   support neighbor detection and utilizes beaconing at the MAC layer.  
   Hence HIPERLAN1 (and any future similar MAC layers) would map well 
   into a triggered interface type. 
 
 
3.4. Bluetooth 
    
   The Bluetooth MAC is connection-oriented and TDMA-based.  Its 
   interfaces automatically detect each other and form peer-to-peer 
   associations at the MAC layer in addition to using broadcast and 
   unicast addressing while communicating.  Thus a triggered interface 
   classification suits Bluetooth quite well and L2 triggers can be 
   easily supported. 
    
    
3.5. 802.11 (Ad hoc mode) 
    
   802.11 nodes operating in ad hoc mode (in the absence of an Access 
   Point) do not automatically sense MAC layer neighbor adjacency.  
   Hence support is not readily available for L2 triggers in the 
   existing standard.  Explicit configuration (in the knowledge of no 
   L2 trigger support) would be required to then effectively treat this 
   interface as a broadcast interface. 
    
   In this case the triggered interface abstraction does not apply.  
   The MAC simply does not enable support of L2 triggers.  This is 
   principally because support for ad hoc networking is a *secondary* 
   mode in 802.11, and the standard is not optimized for this mode of 
   operation. It is possible that support for L2 triggers could be 
   added to future versions of the 802.11 MAC if support for them 
   exists at the IP layer.   
    
   Presently L3 messaging is required to detect neighbor adjacency in 
   MANET routing protocols operating over ad hoc 802.11.  Given the 
   increasing bandwidth of these standards (e.g. future 802.11 variants 
   intend to support much higher rates), L3 neighbor detection may be 
   feasible in these networks, although still at a cost. 
    
  
Corson                                                               8 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
    
3.6. MANET 
    
   In general, MANET interfaces would benefit from operating as 
   triggered interfaces rather than broadcast interfaces.  The ability 
   for a MANET router to dynamically learn about peer-to-peer MAC 
   associations thru accurate and timely L2 triggers would increase the 
   performance of MANET systems.   
    
    
3.7. Future Technologies 
    
   New wireless technologies will continue to appear.  Many of these 
   will require the use of L2 triggers to support seamless mobility.  
   Failure of the IP protocol stack to recognize and make use of L2 
   trigger support when available on these technologies fundamentally 
   hinders the ability to IP to effectively internetwork these 
   technologies, and thus runs contrary to IP's fundamental purpose.  
   Consequently, this memo recommends that minimally necessary 
   standards work be undertaken to build the support for a triggered 
   interface type into IP. 
 
 
4. Acknowledgement  
    
   I would like to acknowledge contributions herein from discussions 
   with my colleagues Vincent Park, George Tsirtsis, Michaela 
   Vanderveen and Alan O'Neill at Flarion Technologies. 
    
 
Author's Address 
 
   M. Scott Corson 
   Flarion Technologies 
   Bedminster One 
   135 Route 202/206 South 
   Bedminster, NJ 07921 
   Phone: +1 908 947 7033 
   Email: corson@flarion.com 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 

  
Corson                                                               9 
Internet Draft          A Triggered Interface                May 2002 
 
 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    




































  
Corson                                                              10 
