


OSPF Working Group                                            R. Ogier
Internet-Draft                                           June 19, 2006
Expires: December 19, 2006

            OSPF Database Exchange Summary List Optimization
                    draft-ogier-ospf-dbex-opt-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 19, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a backward compatible optimization for the
   Database Exchange process in OSPFv2 and OSPFv3.  In this
   optimization, a router does not list an LSA in Database Description
   packets sent to a neighbor, if the same or a more recent instance of
   the LSA was listed in a Database Description packet already received
   from the neighbor.  This optimization reduces Database Description
   overhead by about 50% in large networks.  This optimization does not
   affect synchronization, since it only omits unnecessary information
   from Database Description packets.





Ogier                   Expires December 19, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF               June 2006


1.  Introduction

   In OSPFv2 [RFC2328] and OSPFv3 [RFC2740], when two neighboring
   routers become adjacent, they synchronize their link-state databases
   via the Database Exchange process.  Each router sends the other
   router a set of Database Description (DD) packets that describes the
   router's link-state database for the area.  This is done by listing
   each LSA (i.e., including the header of each LSA) in one of the sent
   DD packets.  This procedure allows each router to determine whether
   the other router has newer LSA instances that should be requested via
   Link State Request packets.

   The proposed optimization simply observes that it is not necessary
   for a router (master or slave) to list an LSA in a DD packet if it
   knows the neighbor already has an instance of the LSA that is the
   same or more recent (and therefore will not request the LSA).  To
   avoid listing such LSAs in DD packets, when an LSA is listed in a DD
   packet received from the neighbor, and the Database summary list for
   the neighbor has an instance of the LSA that is the same or less
   recent than the one received, the LSA is removed from the summary
   list.

   The proposed optimization, called the Database Exchange summary list
   optimization, does not affect synchronization, since the LSAs that
   are omitted from DD packets are unnecessary.  The optimization is
   fully backward compatible with OSPF.  The optimization reduces
   Database Description overhead by about 50% in large networks, since
   it reduces the total number of LSA headers exchanged by about one-
   half when the two routers are already nearly synchronized.  The
   optimization is especially beneficially in large networks with
   limited bandwidth, such as large mobile ad hoc networks.


2.  Specification of Proposed Optimization

   The Database Exchange summary list optimization is defined by
   modifying Section 10.6 (Receiving Database Description Packets) of
   RFC 2328 as follows.  The second-to-last paragraph of Section 10.6 is
   replaced with the following augmented paragraph:

   When the router accepts a received Database Description Packet as the
   next in sequence the packet contents are processed as follows.  For
   each LSA listed, the LSA's LS type is checked for validity.  If the
   LS type is unknown (e.g., not one of the LS types 1-5 defined by this
   specification), or if this is an AS- external-LSA (LS type = 5) and
   the neighbor is associated with a stub area, generate the neighbor
   event SeqNumberMismatch and stop processing the packet.  Otherwise,
   the router looks up the LSA in its database to see whether it also



Ogier                   Expires December 19, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF               June 2006


   has an instance of the LSA.  If it does not, or if the database copy
   is less recent (see Section 13.1), the LSA is put on the Link state
   request list so that it can be requested (immediately or at some
   later time) in Link State Request Packets.  The router also looks up
   the LSA in the Database summary list for the neighbor.  If the
   Database summary list contains an instance of the LSA that is the
   same or less recent than the one listed in the received packet, the
   LSA is removed from the Database summary list.


3.  Security Considerations

   This document does not raise any new security concerns.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document proposes a simple backward compatible optimization for
   OSPFv2 and OSPFv3, which does not require any new number assignment.


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2328] J. Moy. "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2740] R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, and J. Moy. "OSPF for IPv6", RFC
        2740, December 1999.


Author's Address

   Richard G. Ogier
   Email: rich.ogier@earthlink.net


















Ogier                   Expires December 19, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           MANET Extension of OSPF               June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.












Ogier                   Expires December 19, 2006               [Page 4]
