





Network Working Group                                          B. Kovitz
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   Caltech
Category: Informational                                  14 October 2003
Title: draft-sbml-media-type-01.txt


     MIME Media Type for SBML, the Systems Biology Markup Language

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document registers the MIME sub-type application/sbml+xml, a
   media type for SBML, the Systems Biology Markup Language.  SBML is
   defined by The SBML Team at the California Institute of Technology
   and interested members of the systems biology community.

1. Introduction

   SBML is an XML format for representing and exchanging models of
   biochemical reaction networks used in systems biology.  SBML:

   o enables researchers in systems biology to use multiple tools, such
     as simulators, editors, differential-equation solvers, and visual-
     izers, on a single model without rewriting the model for each tool;



Kovitz                                                          [Page 1]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


   o enables researchers and publishers to make models available on-line
     to other researchers even if they use a different software environ-
     ment;

   o enables models, and the intellectual effort put into them, to sur-
     vive beyond the lifetime of the software tools used to create them.

   SBML is the standard model definition language for the DARPA BioSPICE
   project and the International E. coli Alliance (IECA).

   Currently, about 30 software applications use SBML, and researchers
   are using these applications to develop models, mostly in cell biol-
   ogy.  The SBML community hopes that a standardized MIME media type
   will help researchers share models on a larger scale, drawing more
   heavily on the capabilities of the world-wide web.

   A detailed exposition of SBML and its uses within the systems biology
   community is in [HUCKA2003].

2. IANA Registration

   This section registers application/sbml+xml as a MIME media type
   according to the parameters set forth in [RFC2048].

   MIME media type name: application

   MIME subtype name: sbml+xml

   Required parameters: none.

   Optional parameters: none.

     There is no charset parameter. Character handling has identical
     semantics to the case where the charset parameter of the "applica-
     tion/xml" media type is omitted, as described in section 3.2 of
     [RFC3023].  Note that SBML level 2 is defined to have UTF-8 encod-
     ing [SBML2-1, section 4.1].

   Encoding considerations:

     Same as described in section 3.2 of [RFC3023].

   Security considerations:

     The security considerations described in section 7 of [RFC3470] all
     potentially apply to sbml+xml documents.  In particular, sbml+xml
     documents might contain the results of proprietary biological
     research that their owner may wish to keep private.



Kovitz                                                          [Page 2]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


   Interoperability considerations:

     The information in an sbml+xml document describes an abstract model
     of biochemical reactions.  It is not tied to any particular soft-
     ware application, and indeed the primary purpose of SBML is to make
     these models readable and writable by many different software
     applications.

     This might seem to make sbml+xml more appropriate for the "Model"
     primary content type [RFC2077], but SBML models are not guaranteed
     to have the required three orthogonal dimensions.  SBML models,
     rather, involve interacting entities that exist within compart-
     ments.  However, ideally, browsers and other software that reads
     sbml+xml would give a human reader multiple choices of how to view
     the document: in a data-visualization tool, in a model editor, in a
     differential-equation analyzer, etc.

     The systems biology community has and will continue to release new
     levels and versions of the SBML schema and semantics.  New versions
     attempt to be backward compatible with old versions, but sometimes
     small incompatibilities are introduced.  Every sbml+xml document
     contains its level and version; programs that read sbml+xml should
     read this information to be sure they correctly interpret the
     remainder of the document.

   Published specification:

     A list of all current SBML specifications and related documents is
     maintained at:

     http://sbml.org/documents

     Current specifications are:

     SBML level 2, version 1
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-2-v1.ps
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-2-v1.pdf

     SBML level 1, version 2
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-1-v2.ps
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-1-v2.pdf

     SBML level 1, version 1
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-1-v1.ps
     http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-1-v1.pdf

     All specifications are authored by and available in hardcopy form
     from The SBML Team (see below for mailing information).



Kovitz                                                          [Page 3]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


   Applications which use this media type:

     The following application and database projects read and/or write
     models in sbml+xml format.  Currently, most do not encode or decode
     MIME-format messages.  Hopefully the registration of sbml+xml will
     make it easier for these projects to connect through a broader
     infrastructure, such as the creation of repositories of models on
     the world-wide web.

     BASIS
     Bio Sketch Pad
     BioSpreadsheet
     BioUML
     BSTLab
     CADLIVE
     CellDesigner
     Cellerator
     Cellware
     Cytoscape
     Dizzy
     ESS
     Gepasi
     Jarnac
     JDesigner
     JigCell
     JSIM
     libSBML
     MathSBML
     MicroCore
     MOMA
     Monod
     NetBuilder
     PathArt
     PathScout
     SigPath
     StochSim
     TeraSim  (planned)
     Trelis
     Virtual Cell
     WinSCAMP

     A list of SBML-enabled applications, along with URLs for more
     information about them, is maintained at http://sbml.org.








Kovitz                                                          [Page 4]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


   Additional information:

     For further information, contact:

      Michael Hucka
      mhucka@caltech.edu

      Andrew Finney
      afinney@cds.caltech.edu

      The SBML Team
      http://sbml.org
      sbml-team@caltech.edu
      Control and Dynamical Systems, MC 107-81
      California Institute of Technology
      Pasadena, CA  91125
      USA

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE

   Author/Change Controller:

      The SBML specification is a free, open, community effort organized
      and edited by The SBML Team.  The SBML Team has change control
      over the specification.

      The SBML Team and interested members of the systems biology commu-
      nity meet biannually at the "Workshops on Software Platforms for
      Systems Biology".  Information about past and planned workshops is
      maintained at:

      http://sbml.org/workshops

3. Author's Address

   Please direct questions about this memo to:

   Ben Kovitz
   Control and Dynamical Systems, MC 107-81
   California Institute of Technology
   Pasadena, CA  91125
   USA

   Phone: +1 626 395-6911

   Email: bkovitz@caltech.edu





Kovitz                                                          [Page 5]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


4. References

   [HUCKA2003]  M. Hucka, A. Finney, H.M. Sauro, H. Bolouri, J.C.
                Doyle, H. Kitano, A.P. Arkin, B.J. Bornstein, D.
                Bray, A.  Cornish-Bowden, A.A. Cuellar, S. Dronov,
                E.D. Gilles, M. Ginkel, V. Gor, I.I. Goryanin,
                W.J. Hedley, T.C. Hodgman, J.-H. Hofmeyr, P.J.
                Hunter, N.S. Juty, J.L. Kasberger, A. Kremling, U.
                Kummer, N. Le Novere, L.M. Loew, D. Lucio, P.
                Mendes, E. Minch, E.D. Mjolsness, Y. Nakayama, M.R.
                Nelson, P.F. Nielsen, T. Sakurada, J.C. Schaff,
                B.E. Shapiro, T.S. Shimizu, H.D. Spence, J.
                Stelling, K. Takahashi, M.  Tomita, J. Wagner, J.
                Wang., "The Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML):
                a Medium for Representation and Exchange of
                Biochemical Network Models", Bioinformatics
                19(4):524-531, 2003.

   [RFC2048]    N. Freed, J. Klensin, and J. Postel, "Multipurpose
                Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four:
                Registration Procedures", RFC 2048, November 1996

   [RFC2077]    S. Nelson and C. Parks, "The Model Primary Content
                Type for Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions",
                RFC 2077, January 1997.

   [RFC3023]    M. Murata, S. St. Laurent, and D. Kohn, "XML Media
                Types", RFC 3023, January 2001.

   [RFC3470]    S. Hollenbeck, M. Rose, and L. Masinter, "Guidelines
                for the Use of Extensible Markup Language (XML)
                within IETF Protocols", RFC 3470, January 2003.

   [SBML2-1]    A. Finney, M. Hucka, "Systems Biology Markup Language
                (SBML) Level 2: Structures and Facilities for Model
                Definitions", June 28, 2003.  Available from The
                SBML Team at:
                http://sbml.org/specifications/sbml-level-2-v1.pdf













Kovitz                                                          [Page 6]

Internet-draft-SBML  Systems Biology Markup Language     14 October 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and
   furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
   otherwise explain it or assist in its implmentation may be
   prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
   part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
   copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
   copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may
   not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
   notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
   organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of developing
   Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
   as required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
   assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE
   OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE."






















Kovitz                                                          [Page 7]

