


Individual Submission                                          G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                                     APNIC
Expires: May 18, 2006                                  November 14, 2005


        Administration of the IANA Special Purpose Address Block
                 draft-huston-ipv6-iana-specials-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 18, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This is a direction to IANA concerning the management of the IANA
   Special Purpose IPv6 address assignment registry.


1.  Introduction

   This is a direction to IANA concerning the management of the IANA
   Special Purpose IPv6 address assignment registry.




Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IANA IPv6 Registry              November 2005


2.  IANA IPv6 Special Purpose Address Block

   [RFC2928] specified the assignment of the IPv6 address prefix to
   IANA.  The rationale for this allocation is:
      "The block of Sub-TLA IDs assigned to the IANA (i.e., 2001:
      0000::/29 - 2001:01F8::/29) is for assignment for testing and
      experimental usage to support activities such as the 6bone, and
      for new approaches like exchanges."
      [RFC2928]

   This address allocation to IANA was intended to support testing and
   experimental activities.  A more general view of the roles of IANA
   with respect to address allocation functions is documented in
   [RFC2860]:
      "4.3. [...]  Note that [...] (b) assignments of specialised
      address blocks (such as multicast or anycast blocks), and (c)
      experimental assignments are not considered to be policy issues,
      and shall remain subject to the provisions of this Section 4.
      (For purposes of this MOU, the term "assignments" includes
      allocations.)"
      [RFC2860]

   The reference to section 4 here is to the general technical work for
   the IANA:
      "4.1.  The IANA will assign and register Internet protocol
      parameters only as directed by the criteria and procedures
      specified in RFCs, including Proposed, Draft and full Internet
      Standards and Best Current Practice documents, and any other RFC
      that calls for IANA assignment."
      [RFC2860]

   This document directs IANA to undertake designation of special
   purpose address blocks within the purview of direct assignments by
   the IANA under the terms of the assignment criteria specified in RFC
   2928.

   This document directs IANA to open a Special Purpose IPv6 address
   registry for the management of these IANA-designated address blocks.
   Special Purpose registrations to be made from this registry include
   addresses for experimental purposes, as described in [RFC2928], and
   other special purpose cases as documented in IESG-reviewed published
   RFCs, according to the provisions described in section 4.1. of
   [RFC2860].


3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is directed to maintain an "IANA IPv6 Address Special Purpose



Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IANA IPv6 Registry              November 2005


   Registry".  The registry is to record current IANA address
   designations from the IANA-managed Special Purpose IPv6 address pool.

   This recommendation concerns the management of the address pool
   assigned by the IETF to the IANA in July 1999 by [RFC2928], namely
   2001:0000::/23.  Further assignments of address space to IANA for
   subsequent designation of address prefixes for the purposes listed
   here shall be undertaken only in response to direction to IANA
   provided by the IETF in a IESG-reviewed RFC document.  Such
   directions for assignments of address space to augment the IANA-
   managed special purpose address pool should, in the general course of
   events, be consistent with prevailing IANA IPv6 address management
   policies [IPv6-Policies].

   The IANA may undertake IPv6 address designations in support of
   special purposes as requested in "IANA Considerations" sections in
   IESG-reviewed RFCs, where a unicast address is requested with an
   intended use of the designated address block for the purpose of
   testing or experimental usage activities initiated by IETF, or for
   specialised use of the address block within an anycast use context
   associated with an Internet Standards track protocol.

   The IANA IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry shall record for all
   current address designations undertaken by IANA:
   1.  The designated address prefix.
   2.  The RFC that called for the IANA address designation.
   3.  The date the designation was made.
   4.  The date the use designation is to be terminated (if specified as
       a limited-use designation).
   5.  The nature of the purpose of the designated address (unicast
       experiment or protocol service anycast).
   6.  If the purpose is an experimental unicast application, as
       distinct from an anycast service address, then the registry will
       also identify the entity and related contact details to whom the
       address designation has been made.
   7.  The registry will also note for each designation the intended
       routing scope of the address, indicating whether the address is
       intended to be routeable only in scoped, local or private
       contexts, or whether the address prefix is intended to be routed
       globally.

   The IANA registry shall note as a general comment that address
   prefixes listed in the Special Purpose Address Registry are not
   guaranteed routability in any particular local or global context.

   IANA will not maintain further sub-registries for any special purpose
   address block designated according to this direction.




Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             IANA IPv6 Registry              November 2005


4.  Security Considerations

   Security of the Internet's routing system relies on the ability to
   authenticate an assertion of unique control of an address block.
   Measures to authenticate such assertions rely on validation that the
   address block forms part of an existing allocated address block, and
   that there is a trustable and unique reference in the IANA address
   registries.

   The proposed registry is intended to provide an authoritative source
   of information regarding the currency and intended purpose of special
   use IPv6 address blocks that are designated from the IANA-
   administered Special Use registry.  This is a small step towards the
   creation of a comprehensive registry framework that can be used as a
   trust point for commencing a chain of address validation.
   Consideration should be given to IANA registry publication formats
   that are machine parseable, and also the use of file signatures and
   associated certificate mechanisms to allow applications to confirm
   that the registry contents are current, and that they have been
   published by the IANA.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The document was prepared with the assistance of Leslie Daigle, Brian
   Haberman, Bob Hinden, David Kessens, Kurt Lindqvist, Thomas Narten
   and Paul Wilson.

6.  References

   [IPv6-Policies]
              IANA, "IPv6 Allocation and Assignment Policy", June 2006.

   [RFC2860]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC2928]  Hinden, R., Deering, S., Fink, R., and T. Hain, "Initial
              IPv6 Sub-TLA ID Assignments", RFC 2928, September 2000.












Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             IANA IPv6 Registry              November 2005


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: gih@apnic.net
   URI:   http://www.apnic.net












































Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             IANA IPv6 Registry              November 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Huston                    Expires May 18, 2006                  [Page 6]

