


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                                S. Dawkins
Expires: August 8, 2004                                February 08, 2004


                  A model for IETF Process Experiments
                  draft-klensin-process-july14-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 7, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   In the last two years, the IETF has initiated a number of
   interrelated efforts to improve or fine-tune its standards process
   and its internal procedures using the procedures intended for
   development of protocol specifications.  None of these efforts has
   had an observable impact on the quality or timeliness of IETF
   outputs, and, based on the proposed charter milestones now under
   discussion, approval to try to improve things is still between six
   and eighteen months away. This document proposes a radically
   different approach to the system of making changes to IETF process,
   one that relies heavily on a "propose and carry out an experiment,
   evaluate the experiment, and then establish permanent procedures
   based on operational experience" model rather than the ones that have
   been attempted previously.



Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2. Not an Accident, Not a Coincidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3. Evidence We Are Headed in the Wrong Direction  . . . . . . . .   6
   4. Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5. Implications for the Present Paralysis . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   A. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  13








































Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


1. Introduction

   Starting with IETF 54 in Yokohama in July 2002, the IETF has been
   spending significant time and energy on analysis of actual and
   perceived problems that keep us from producing high quality standards
   on a timely and efficient basis.  Ironically, these reform activities
   have been impeded by some of the same difficulties that impact the
   standards process itself, e.g.,

   o  Seemingly interminable discussion about charter details that
      derails a focus on the work to be done and the problems to be
      solved.

   o  Discussion that doesn't converge, because it relies on logic and
      persuasion, instead of experiments and experience.

   o  Proposals for "improvements" based on intuition, not experience. A
      significant percentage of the postings about how the IETF
      standards process should work are coming from participants who
      have never authored an RFC. A large percentage of the MPOWR
      postings about what WG chairs should do is coming from people who
      have never had the experience of being WG chairs. An overwhelming
      percentage of the postings on several mailing lists about
      offloading the IESG is coming from people who are not present or
      former IESG members and have no other direct information about how
      the IESG functions internally.

   o  There has been uncertainty about the level of IESG enthusiasm for
      some of the proposals and doubts about whether they were worth the
      investment to develop if the IESG was not enthusiastic.

   In addition, these activities have shared two unfortunate
   characteristics with previous major process initiatives in the IETF:

   o  There is an inevitable time conflict -- whether in following and
      contributing to mailing lists, developing and evaluating documents
      and proposals, or scheduling face to face meetings -- between
      process efforts and actual IETF technical/ engineering work.
      Especially when process efforts drag out for many months, there is
      a tendency for people whose primary commitment is to the
      development of technical specifications to go back to doing that,
      leaving process efforts to those who are strongly interested in
      process issues and, to some measure, less inclined or able to do
      the technical work.  This creates a situation in which the process
      groups and efforts may be significantly unrepresentative of the
      range of IETF participants who are materially concerned with their
      outcomes.  The meeting time conflict portion of the problem is the
      reason why the then co-Chairs of POISSON tried to avoid face to



Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


      face meetings entirely: a situation in which IETF participants
      needed to choose between attending standards-oriented WGs and a
      process-oriented one would ultimately benefit no one.

   o  With protocol standards, the IETF understands, as a community, the
      dangers of standardization in the absence of implementation,
      deployment, and operational experience.  As a result, we have
      traditionally had Experimental RFCs, a standards track with
      multiple maturity levels, and even implementations from Internet
      Drafts that could then be evaluated as definition and
      standardization progressed. Except, possibly, when the IESG has
      initiated process changes on its own initiative without going
      through a community-wide review first, we have had no parallel for
      procedures.  We try to develop them (usually in Working Groups),
      instantiate them in BCPs, and then put them into effect.  This
      appears to be unwise.  It is certainly inefficient if efficiency
      is measured by the length of time between achievement of some
      level of community consensus and putting a procedure into effect.

   This document is specifically addressed to that set of problems with
   proposed modifications to procedures, especially the last one.






























Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


2. Not an Accident, Not a Coincidence

   To be very clear - the problems encountered using procedures intended
   for protocol specification development to fix procedural problems are
   systemic, and have existed since the POISED working group in the
   early 1990s. These problems will not go away.

   We recognize the efforts that have been made to make this work by a
   number of contributors, including current IESG members. At this time,
   the longest-serving Area Director the IETF has had is shepherding
   NEWTRK, and both ICAR and MPOWR are being shepherded by current Area
   Directors. The quality of these contributors argues strongly that
   it's just not possible to use the existing working group process to
   accomplish significant process improvements in the IETF.





































Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


3. Evidence We Are Headed in the Wrong Direction

   [[Note in draft: This section, and some other parts of the document,
   are very specific to observations about events in the year or two
   preceding its writing.  If the document evolves in the direction of
   an RFC, the sections will, at least, need to be recast to put the
   remarks in historical context.]]

   The authors observe that, in the year prior to the creation of this
   draft,

   o  The Senior Internet Reviewer effort fizzled out, largely due to a
      "chicken and egg problem".  It became clear that it was not
      possible to get an adequate number of volunteers and generate
      high-quality reviews unless there was a strong commitment to using
      the results, but it also became clear that there couldn't be a
      strong commitment to integrating the SIR reviews into the
      specification review process unless there were adequate volunteers
      and it had been demonstrated that reviews of sufficient quality
      were being produced.

   o  Proposals to create new process WGs [NEWTRK] and [ICAR] to try to
      devise and define solutions to particular problems became bogged
      down for extended periods in discussions of charter details,
      discussions that did nothing to either address the problems or to
      quickly generate alternatives for solving them. Five proposals to
      modify the existing standards track were under active discussion
      on [SOLUTIONS] before IETF 58, where they were presented at the
      NEWTRK BoF [NEWTRK58], but since IETF 58 the NEWTRK focus for an
      entire IETF meeting cycle has been on charter discussion, not on
      proposing changes that might improve document quality or
      timeliness. None of the existing proposals have been discussed on
      the mailing list or updated, no new proposals have been discussed
      on the mailing list or posted, and two-thirds of the NEWTRK
      postings have discussed the charter and planning for the upcoming
      IETF meeting.

   o  Other proposals for ways to address procedural issues, or to
      schedule BOFs to discuss some of them, have deteriorated into
      arguments (or whining) about boundaries, definitions, priorities,
      etc.

   o  We have not been successful in modularizing these efforts - taking
      SOLUTIONS, NEWTRK, and ICAR mailing lists as one example, only one
      active participant has stayed exclusively on one list. Anyone who
      cares about overall IETF process improvement is forced to
      subscribe to an increasingly large set of semi-connected mailing
      lists (SOLUTIONS, NEWTRK, ICAR, MPOWR, PROTO, EDU,...). We believe



Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


      there is already a "backlash" of people who have contributed
      previously, but don't think continued participation is worth the
      time and effort it takes to keep track of all the semi-independent
      proposals.

   o  Finally, and most damaging - the draft charters for all of these
      efforts feature schedules in which the first milestone that
      produces a possible improvement is six to eighteen months away.
      If the problems involved are important enough to need solving --
      keeping in mind that we have already been at the problem
      definition and evaluation process for eighteen months -- another
      six to eighteen months before we can start to do anything is far
      too long - and this assumes no slippages from the milestones as
      proposed.  If they are not that important, then we should stop
      wasting time on them.

   In some cases, these lengthy discussions about how to organize work
   (rather than about the work itself) may have been completely
   appropriate. But they are not an efficient way to improve document
   quality or timeliness. It cannot be overstated that no one,
   regardless of depth or breadth of experience, really "knows" the
   effect that these proposals will have on the IETF's ability to
   produce quality specifications in a timely manner. After all of the
   discussion is complete, we still will not know with certainty whether
   a proposal is a good idea, and we will still need experience to know
   whether we have improved anything at all.

























Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


4. Proposal

   Since the 1992 changes, the IESG has adopted a number of procedural
   changes on its own initiative and documented them informally,
   utilizing their wide discretion implicit in RFC 2026.  This document
   proposes to regularize and formalize that mechanism as a means of
   moving forward with procedural changes that might prove valuable.  We
   note that, if the procedures the IESG has adopted (and procedural
   exceptions it has made) over the last decade are legitimate, then the
   IESG has the authority to institute the changes proposed here by
   bootstrapping the proposed process.

   We propose to permit (and encourage) the IESG to adopt and institute
   "process experiments" using the following procedure:

   1.  An I-D is written that describes what the proposed new or altered
       procedure is about and how it works. A statement of what problem
       it is expected to solve would be desirable, but is not a
       requirement (the intent is to keep the firm requirements for such
       an experiment as lightweight as possible).  The I-D must state an
       explicit "sunset" timeout, typically not to exceed one year after
       adoption.

   2.  If the IESG believes the proposal is plausible and plausibly
       useful, a four week IETF Last Call is initiated.

   3.  At the conclusion of the Last Call, the IESG reevaluates the
       plausibility and appropriateness of the proposal.  If they
       conclude that the proposed experiment is appropriate, a second
       I-D is generated (either by the IESG or by the original authors
       with IESG advice) that cleans up any definitional issues exposed
       in the Last Call and that explicitly identifies and responds to
       issues raised during that Last Call.

   4.  The document and experiment are then announced, the experiment is
       begun, and the document is forwarded for RFC publication.

   The IESG could, of course, reach a "bad idea" conclusion at any stage
   in this process and abandon the experiment.  It might recommend
   publication of the experimental document, with a discussion of why it
   was a bad idea, but is not required to do so.  The list above is
   deliberately agnostic about where the I-Ds come from: a WG, design
   team, individual contribution, editing group, or other mechanism,
   could be used in the first and/or third steps, but no specific
   mechanisms are required and the IESG is explicitly permitted to
   generate such proposals internally.

   In each case, the IESG's making of the decisions to go forward (or



Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


   not) with a procedural experiment, or the steps leading up to one, is
   expected to reflect their judgment of the existence of rough
   consensus in the community.  That judgment may be appealed using the
   usual procedures, but the IESG and the community are reminded that an
   experimental attempt to try something for a fixed period is typically
   a better engineering approach than extended philosophical discussion
   without any experience to back it up.

   Nothing above is to be construed as a requirement that any given
   process experiment be attempted IETF-wide.  A proposal for such an
   experiment may specify selected areas, selected working groups,
   working groups meeting some specific criteria (such as those created
   after a particular time or more than a specified number of years
   old), or be specific in other ways.

   At or before the end of the "sunset" timeout, the IESG would either
   revise (or cause to be revised) the document into a BCP RFC or the
   procedure would expire and, presumably, not be tried again unless
   something changed radically.  A document describing why the
   experiment had succeeded or failed would be desirable but could not,
   realistically, be a requirement.  If the procedure went to BCP, the
   BCP would reflect what we would call "operational experience" in the
   real world.




























Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


5. Implications for the Present Paralysis

   On the basis of this model, if the IESG believes that ICAR is
   probably a useful idea and that the community is at least tentatively
   in favor of trying it, then the first steps are not community review
   and IESG approval of a charter for a WG to study the issue.  Instead,
   the first step is a proposal to do something and IESG consensus that
   the "something" is worth trying.  A year later, if it seems to have
   helped and not caused harm, it gets cast in concrete.  If not, we
   discard it and move on.    Similar comments apply to other proposed
   WGs (or BOFs) concerned with process, such as MPOWR: if the IESG is
   convinced that something is needed, and that there is community
   backing for that "something", then it should be documented and
   deployed experimentally, with formal procedural changes, if any,
   occurring only after experience had been accumulated, observed, and
   evaluated.

   This model can, and in the opinion of the authors, probably should,
   be applied to changes in the standards process as well. Specifically,
   we tune the standards process in place, experimentally, largely by
   changes in what IESG _does_, rather than the language used to
   describe things.  If those actions produce favorable results or
   directions, we _then_ go off and write up the details, rather than
   trying to make changes based on speculation about what might or might
   not work better (much less spending months on debates about the
   charter for considering those changes).

























Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


6. Security Considerations

   This document specifies a mechanism for evolving IETF procedures. It
   does not raise or consider any protocol-specific security issues. In
   considering experimental changes to procedures, the IESG should, of
   course, exercise due caution that such changes not reduce the quality
   of security review and consideration for protocols or, at least, that
   the process experiment proposals contain early detection and
   correction mechanisms should quality deterioration occur.


Authors' Addresses

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com


   Spencer Dawkins
   1547 Rivercrest Blvd.
   Allen, TX  75002
   USA

   Phone: +1 469 330 3616
   EMail: spencer@mcsr-labs.org






















Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


Appendix A. References

   [EDU]: Edu-Discuss Mailing List, https://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/
      working-groups/edu-discuss/current/threads.html

   [ICAR]: Improved Cross-Area Review, https://www1.ietf.org/mailman/
      listinfo/icar

   [MPOWR]: Management Positions -- Oversight, Work and Results, https:/
      /www1.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/mpowr

   [NEWTRK]: New IETF Standards Track mailing list, http://
      darkwing.uoregon.edu/~llynch/newtrk/threads.html

   [NEWTRK58]: New IETF Standards Track BoF at IETF 58, https://
      www1.ietf.org/proceedings/03nov/130.htm

   [SOLUTION]: Solutions Mailing List, http://eikenes.alvestrand.no/
      mailman/listinfo/solutions
































Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments              February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Klensin & Dawkins        Expires August 8, 2004                [Page 14]

