Internet-Draft                         Internet Architecture Board (IAB)
Expires November 21, 2001                              L. Daigle, editor
Category: Best Current Practice
draft-ietf-poisson-pso-appointments-00.txt
                                                            May 21, 2001

    IETF ICANN Protocol Support Organization Appointments Procedures

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Abstract

   This document specifies the process by which the IETF appoints its 2
   representatives to ICANN's Protocol Support Organization's Protocol
   Council (PSO-PC).  Additionally, mechanisms that the IETF will adopt
   for identifying candidates for the PSO's appointments to the ICANN
   Board of Directors are specified.  This process specification
   reflects 2 years of IETF experience with ICANN, the PSO-PC and the
   PSO organization, since their inception in 1999.

   Updates [RFC2282].

1.0 Introduction

   The ICANN Protocol Support Organization (PSO) is defined by a
   Memorandum of Understanding (PSO MoU), [RFC2691], which in turn
   defines the structure and requirements of a "Protocol Council" (PSO-
   PC) made up of representatives appointed by the PSO MoU signatory
   organizations.  The PSO MoU also stipulates that the PSO-PC will
   nominate an ICANN Director each year.



IAB                                                             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-poisson-pso-appointments-00.txt       May 2001


   Two separate selection/appointment roles are discussed here.  The
   reader is referred to the ICANN By-Laws (available from
   http://www.icann.org) and the PSO MoU for the precise definitions of
   the support organizations and roles.  In short, ICANN has a "Protocol
   Support Organization", which is an abstract entity made up of several
   signatory standards development organizations.  The IETF is one such.
   To coordinate the communications and activities of the PSO, the
   participating organizations appoint 2 people to the Protocol Council
   (PSO-PC), which then acts as the communications nexus between the
   participating organizations and ICANN.  The first process discussed
   here is for the selection of IETF members on the PSO-PC.

   Separately from that, the PSO, through the PSO-PC, is tasked with
   naming 3 members for the ICANN Board of Directors (1 per year, for 3
   year terms, staggered).  Individual participating organizations (such
   as the IETF) can propose candidates for consideration.  The second
   process described in this memo is for the selection of potential
   candidates for ICANN Board seats.

   Therefore, this document specifies the processes by which the IETF
   appoints its 2 PSO-PC representatives, and selects candidates for
   consideration for the PSO ICANN Board of Directors appointment.
   Insofar as the latter is seen as a task for the IETF Nominations
   Committee, this document is an update of the IETF NomCom procedure
   defined in [RFC2282].

2.0 Experience -- PSO-PC members and ICANN Board appointments

   Two years of experience with the PSO-PC as a functioning entity has
   made it clear that the primary role of PSO-PC members is to act as
   liaisons from their appointing organization.  The PSO-PC itself does
   not do technical deliberations or policy-making, beyond the actions
   specified in the RFC 2691 and acting as a clearing house for PSO MoU
   signatories' combined input and consensus.  The PSO-PC currently
   undertakes its activities through scheduled teleconferences, and
   holds an annual general assembly, normally scheduled in conjunction
   with one of the PSO signatories' meetings.

   Originally, one of the IETF's PSO-PC appointees was an IAB member,
   and the other was not.  Subsequently, the latter was selected by the
   IETF NomCom to serve on the IAB, which provided the opportunity to
   evaluate whether direct communication with the IAB improved the
   effectiveness in the PSO-PC role.  The conclusion is that it's best
   to have established communication links with the IAB/IAB members,
   though IAB membership itself is not a requirement.

   The role of a member of the ICANN Board of Directors is much the same
   as that of any corporation, with the associated statutory



IAB                                                             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-poisson-pso-appointments-00.txt       May 2001


   responsibilities.   Additionally, the PSO as a whole aims to ensure
   that ICANN has people with strong Internet technical knowledge on its
   Board, and any IETF-proposed candidate should be chosen with that in
   mind.  The IETF's standard process for selection, through its
   Nominations Committee ([RFC2282]), is considered the most appropriate
   for soliciting candidate proposals and selecting the best fit with
   these requirements.

3.0 IETF PSO-PC member appointment process

   The primary role of a PSO-PC appointee is to participate in the PSO-
   PC interactions with ICANN, as described in the PSO MoU.  In acting
   as a representative of the IETF's participation in the PSO,
   appointees are responsible for liaising with the IAB on technical
   matters requiring PSO input, and otherwise keeping the IAB up to date
   on the state of the PSO.

   As part of its mandate for appointing external liaisons for the IETF
   (see [RFC2850]), the IAB is tasked with appointing PSO-PC members for
   the IETF.

   Normally, the IAB will appoint PSO-PC members for a 2 year term, with
   each position coming up for renewal/replacement in alternate years.
   The IAB may recall/change an appointment at its discretion.  In
   accordance with the PSO MoU, the IAB will consider any candidates
   proposed as a result of the PSO-PC's/ICANN's call for nominations,
   posted concurrently with the posting of notice of the date of the
   annual meeting of the PSO General Assembly on the PSO Web Site.


4.0 IETF identification of potential ICANN Board member candidates

   As an addition to the responsibilities of the IETF Nominations
   Committee defined in RFC 2282, the NomCom shall also be responsible
   for selecting the IETF's proposals for Board candidates to be
   considered by the PSO-PC.  This shall be done by the usual NomCom
   procedure of a public call for nominations, discussion and selection
   of the best candidate(s) matching the requirements defined by the PSO
   MoU (e.g., geographic representation).  The NomCom will use as much
   as possible the procedures defined in RFC 2282.

   The IAB shall be responsible for confirming the selection(s) of the
   NomCom.  If any or all of the NomCom's selections are not accepted by
   the IAB, the NomCom shall select alternative(s).

   The PSO-PC chooses one ICANN Board candidate annually, for a 3 year
   term, in time for the candidate to take up their seat in October.
   The NomCom's selection should be scheduled to coordinate with the



IAB                                                             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-poisson-pso-appointments-00.txt       May 2001


   PSO-PC's call for candidates, typically in June of every year.
   Therefore, the IAB will inform the NomCom chair as to the number of
   candidates the IETF will put forward to the PSO-PC no later than
   March 1.

   If any PSO-appointed Board seat should be vacated early, the IAB may
   call upon the standing NomCom to select candidates for consideration
   as a replacement.


5.0 Security Considerations

   As this document deals strictly with appointments processes, it is
   not expected to have any impact on network security.


6.0 References


   [RFC2691] Bradner, S., "A Memorandum of Understanding for an ICANN
             Protocol Support Organization", RFC 2691, September 1999.

   [RFC2282] Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
             Recall Process:  Operation of the Nominating and Recall
             Committees", RFC 2282, February 1998.

   [RFC2850] IAB, B. Carpenter (ed), "Charter of the Internet
             Architecture Board (IAB)", RFC 2850, May 2000.

8.0 Authors' Addresses

   Leslie L. Daigle (editor)
   EMail:  leslie@thinkingcat.com

   Internet Architecture Board
   EMail:  iab@iab.org


   Membership at time this document was completed:

         Harald Alvestrand
         Ran Atkinson
         Rob Austein
         Fred Baker
         Brian Carpenter
         Steve Bellovin
         Jon Crowcroft
         Leslie Daigle



IAB                                                             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft draft-ietf-poisson-pso-appointments-00.txt       May 2001


         Steve Deering
         Sally Floyd
         Geoff Huston
         John Klensin
         Henning Schulzrinne














































IAB                                                             [Page 5]

