


6lowpan                                                      D. Cansever
Internet-Draft                                               G. Mulligan
Intended status: Informational                               C. Williams
Expires: May 14, 2008                                   SI International
                                                       November 11, 2007


                Integration of 6LoWPAN into IP networks
               draft-cansever-6lowpan-integration-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 14, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   The IETF 6LoWPAN working group was formed in 2004 to address the
   challenge of enabling wireless IPv6 communication over the newly
   standardized IEEE 802.15.4 low-power radio for devices with limited
   space, power and memory, such as sensor nodes [3].  IEEE 802.15.4
   radio links, coupled with the interoperability and ubiquity of IP,
   will lead to exciting new deployment scenarios for these low-power
   networks.  Sensor wireless networks will be integrated into wired



Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


   and/or wireless fixed infrastructure.  The integration of these
   sensor networks with the Internet and wireless infrastructure
   networks increases the network capacity, coverage area and
   application domains.  In this draft we provide various integration
   scenarios and discuss associated issues with such deployments.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Usage of Network Mobility for Sensor networks . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Usage of SEND to protect provide security access during
       change of the access network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Scurity Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Normative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9
































Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


1.  Introduction

   In the future interconnection framework for wireless sensor 6LoWPAN
   networks, internetworking will not necessarily be limited to a way to
   transport information from and to remote hosts.  The foreseen degree
   of integration between sensor networks may reach upper levels of the
   protocol stack, where one network may offer services to others
   (including communication services).  In such a setting, even 6LoWPAN
   sensor network components may be heterogeneous, consisting of sensors
   with varied functionalities, capabilities and interconnection
   requirements.  Currently, wireless sensor networks are beginning to
   be deployed at an accelerated pace.  It is not unreasonable to expect
   that in the near future, many segments of the world will be covered
   with wireless sensor networks that will be accessible via the
   Internet.  Integration of wireless sensor networks with wireless
   local area networks and the Internet, while being important, comes
   with connectivity and security issues.  This draft is an attempt to
   identify such issues, and to propose solutions towards their
   resolution.

   Sensor networks share several characteristics of ad-hoc scenarios in
   that sensor nodes are capable of reciving and forwarding packets to
   their peers.  However, tiny sensor devices may have more stringent
   processing power, memory and energy constraints than other types of
   ad hoc networks.  These constraints generally imply the need for a
   hierarchical ad-hoc network structure in which low-tier sensor nodes
   connect to the Internet via one or more levels of gateway devices.
   In this draft, we assume that each autonomous network of wireless
   sensor devices will have one gateway device.  This gateway device is
   responsible for media conversion (from 802.15.4 to another link layer
   technology, such as 802.11, and vice versa) and for route advertising
   to the outside world, which may be a wireless local area network
   connected to the Internet.

   There will be deployment scenarios where 6LoWPAN networks have
   persistent connectivity to the outside world via its gateway device.
   At the same time, there may be deployment scenarios that require that
   a 6LoWPAN network change its point of attachment to the outside world
   from an IP persepective.  This may occur, for example, when a sensor
   network is part of a moving vehicle which may roam from one wireless
   local area network to another wireless local area network with
   different IP network prefixes.  By the same token, an autonomous
   sensor network may be deployed in a location with no wireless (or
   wired) local area networks.  In this case, its connectivity to the
   outside world, when it exists, will be intermittent.  Also, the
   intermittent connectivity to the Internet may have different
   characteristics each time they occur.  For example, connectivity of
   the 6LoWPAN network to the internet may be realized via an agent



Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


   (e.g., a vehicle) which features a satellite interface.  At different
   points in time, different agents may provide connectivity functions;
   in which case the point of attachment of the sensor network may
   correspond to a different IP address prefix.  Note that the two
   scenarios depicted above are equivalent from an IP connectivity point
   of view.  In the first scenario, the sensor networ moves from one
   access network to another.  In the second scenario, agents with
   different IP addresses provide access functions to a stationary
   sensor network.  In either case, the IP address of the point of
   attachment will change over time.

   Here, the requirement is to provide global reachability to the
   6LoWPAN nodes no matter where the correspondent peers are located,
   and no matter what their point of attachment is.  The 6LoWPAN nodes
   must still be reachable with their orginally prescribed IPv6
   addresses.  This draft discusses these deployment scenarios and the
   associated issues, and proposes solutions which may be used in such
   deployments.


2.  Terminology

   See RFC3753 [1]for mobility terminology used in this document.


3.  Usage of Network Mobility for Sensor networks

   Mobility is a fundamental characteristic of a wireless network with
   mobile users, and it is therefore anticipated that future networks
   will provide mobility support as an integrated and ubiquitous
   service.  Mobility scenarios anticipated in future networks include
   simple end-user migration from one subnetwork to another (as in
   cellular or WLAN hot-spot services), as well as more complex mobility
   patterns involving movement of radio routers and sensor network
   clusters.  Collections of sensor networks must be reachable as they
   move across different wireless domains.  Scalable and accurate
   indirection schemes need to be devised to allow for this
   functionality.

   Mobile IPv6 network mobility (NEMO) [2] defines a process that
   enables Mobile Networks to attach to different points in the
   Internet.  The protocol is an extension of Mobile IPv6 and allows
   session continuity for every node in the Mobile Network as the
   network moves.  Use of NEMO will enable all 6LoWPAN nodes to be
   accessible, no matter what the current point of attachment to the
   wide area IP network is.





Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


   Diagram of NEMO and 6lowpan integration is provided. [3] , e.g.,


                               (Nodes in the 6lowpan network)
                                  *   *   *  ...  *  *  *

                                        6lowpan
                                        network
                                           |
                                           |
                                     +-------------+
                                     | NEMO Client |
                                     +-------------+
                                           |
                                           |
                                 +--------------------+
                                 |Access Network (AR) |
                                 +--------------------+
                                           |
                                 +-------------------+
                                 |     Internet      |
                                 +-------------------+
                                            |
                                            |
                                     +---------------+
                                     | Correspondent |
                                     | Node          |
                                     +---------------+




                                 Figure 1

   The NEMO client integration enables the sensor application residing
   on some correspondent node provides global reachability to the
   6lowpan nodes even when the access network for the 6lowpan network
   changes.


4.  Usage of SEND to protect provide security access during change of
    the access network

   IPv6 nodes use the Neighbor Discovery protocol (ND) [4] to discover
   other nodes on the link, to determine the link-layer addresses of
   other nodes on the link, to find routers, and to maintain
   reachability information about the paths to active neighbors.  If
   proper authentication mechanisms are not in place, straight use ND in



Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


   sensor networks may introduce security vulnerabilities.  The IETF has
   created the Secure Neighbor Discovery Protocol (SeND) [5] to provide
   authentication services for the ND.  SeND may be used as a solution
   between the NEMO client residing in the Sensor network and the access
   network which will have a SeND service for providing authenticated
   NEMO autoconfiguration.  In this solution, NEMO with SeND may provide
   a means by which the access network is properly authorized to connect
   to the sensor network.

   Diagram of NEMO, SEND and 6lowpan integration is provided. [5] ,
   e.g.,


                               (Nodes in the 6lowpan network)
                                  *   *   *  ...  *  *  *


                                        6lowpan
                                        network
                                           |
                                           |
                                     +---------+
                                     | NEMO &  |
                                     | SEND    |
                                     +---------+
                                           |
                                           |
                                 +--------------------+
                                 |Access Network (AR) |
                                 | With SEND          |
                                 +--------------------+
                                           |
                                 +-------------------+
                                 |     Internet      |
                                 +-------------------+
                                            |
                                            |
                                     +---------------+
                                     | Correspondent |
                                     | Node          |
                                     +---------------+




                                 Figure 2

   Authentication process specified in SeND may involve the use of



Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


   server infrastructure for certificate management purposes.  It may be
   impractical to have a server infrastrucure in place for
   authentication in the deployment scenarios discussed in this draft.
   Therefore, the Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA) [6] option
   of SeND may be a useful tool for 6LoWPAN networks in providing
   authentication services.


5.  Conclusion

   6LoWPAN networks may be deployed remotely in non-traditional
   scenarios.  Access networks for these 6LoWPAN networks may be
   intermittently available, and their IP address prefixes may change
   over time.  This means that the IP layer has new requirements to be
   able to provide access to these 6LoWPAN networks via changing access
   networks and to do so in a secure manner.  The usage of SeND and NEMO
   protocols allows 6LoWPAN networks to be fully integrated into a
   dynamic mobile hetergenous network for ensuring global reachability
   to the individual 6LoWPAN nodes.


6.  Scurity Considerations

   Remoteley deployed 6LoWPAN networks with changing points of
   atatchments are subject to multiple security risks.  In this draft we
   addresse the issue of authentication using the SeND protocol.  SeND
   does not provide privacy.  Privacy within the 6LoWPAN network is
   provided by 802.15.4 encryption services.  Privacy between the
   6LoWPAN network point of attachment and the local area access network
   may be established using IPsec.  Future versions of this draft will
   address security issues of 6LoWPAN deployment scenarios in more
   detail.


7.  Normative references

   [1]  Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
        RFC 3753, June 2004.

   [2]  Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
        "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
        January 2005.

   [3]  Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
        "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks",
        RFC 4944, September 2007.

   [4]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery



Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


        for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998.

   [5]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
        Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [6]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
        RFC 3972, March 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Derya Cansever
   SI International
   12012 Sunset Hills Road, Suite 800
   Reston, VA 20190
   USA

   Phone: 703.234.6960
   Email: derya.cansever@si-intl.com


   Geoff Mulligan
   SI International
   Consultant, Colarodo Springs, CO 80901
   USA

   Phone: 719.593.2992
   Email: geoff@proto6.com


   Carl Williams
   SI International
   Consultant, Palo Alto, CA 94306
   USA

   Phone: +1.650.279.5903
   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org














Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             6LoWPAN Integration             November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Cansever, et al.          Expires May 14, 2008                  [Page 9]

