


NEMO                                                       R. Baldessari
Internet-Draft                                                NEC Europe
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Festag
Expires: January 6, 2008                                     NEC Germany
                                                              M. Lenardi
                                                          Hitachi Europe
                                                           July 05, 2007


       C2C-C Consortium Requirements for NEMO Route Optimization
                   draft-baldessari-c2ccc-nemo-req-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Vehicular ad hoc Networks (VANETs), self-organized networks based on
   short-range wireless technologies, aim at improving road safety and
   providing comfort and entertainment applications.  The Car2Car
   Communication Consortium is defining a European standard for inter-
   vehicle communication that adopts VANETs principles.  This document



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   specifies requirements for Route Optimization techniques for usage of
   Network Mobility (NEMO) in VANETs as identified by the Consortium.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  C2C Communication Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  System Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Protocol Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  IPv6 Deployment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Intended NEMO Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Scope of NEMO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  Example Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.2.1.  Notification Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.2.2.  Peer-to-peer Applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.2.3.  Upload and Download Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  NEMO Route Optimization Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  NEMO Route Optimization Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.1.  Req 1 - Separability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.2.  Req 2 - MNN IPsec  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.3.  Req 3 - RO Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.4.  Req 4 - Privacy Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.5.  Req 5 - Multihoming  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     6.6.  Req 6 - Coexistence with Sub-IPv6 RO . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21

















Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


1.  Introduction

   In Vehicular ad hoc Networks (VANETs), cars are equipped with short-
   range wireless communication devices that operate at frequencies
   dedicated to safety and non-safety vehicular applications.  When
   entering the proximity of each other, vehicles form a self-organized
   network by means of a specialized routing protocol that allows for
   packet exchange through broadcast and unicast communications.
   Further, fixed communication devices are installed along roadsides
   and can either distribute local warnings or offer connectivity with a
   network infrastructure.  Due to its safety-oriented nature and
   extremely dynamic operational environment, this type of communication
   has lead research to consider specialized protocols and algorithms,
   especially concerning information dissemination, geographic
   distribution of packets and privacy/security issues.

   The Car2Car Communication Consortium [10] is an industry consortium
   of car manufacturers and electronics suppliers that focuses on the
   definition of an European standard for vehicular communication
   protocols.  The Consortium gathers results from research projects and
   aims at harmonizing their efforts.  The first technical document
   [11], to be released in the following months, gives an overview of
   the system and protocol architecture, as well as of the applications
   on which the Consortium has agreed so far.  In essence, this document
   defines a C2C-C protocol stack that offers specialized
   functionalities and interfaces to (primarily) safety-oriented
   applications and relies as a communication technology on a modified
   version of IEEE 802.11p [12].  This protocol stack is placed beside a
   traditional TCP/IP stack, based on IP version 6, which is used mainly
   for non-safety applications or potentially by any application that is
   not subject to strict delivery requirements, including Internet-based
   applications.  The interaction between these stacks is currently
   discussed and briefly overviewed in this document.

   As vehicles connecting to the Internet via dedicated access points
   (also termed Road Side Units, see Section 2 for terminology) change
   their attachment point while driving, the Consortium considers IP
   Mobility support as enhancing the system with session continuity and
   global reachability.  When considering that passenger devices can be
   plugged into car communication equipment, therefore turning a vehicle
   into an entire moving network, Network Mobility (NEMO) principles
   have clear benefits in the discussed scenario (i.e. passenger devices
   shielded from mobility, centralized mobility management).

   In NEMO Basic Support protocol [1] all data packets go through the
   IPv6-in-IPv6 tunnel established between the Mobile Router (MR) and
   the Home Agent (HA).  As already pointed out in various documents
   ([7], [6] and [9]) this can have severe consequences on the



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   communication performances, as it causes data packets to follow a
   path that can be very far from optimal and requires a double IPv6
   header for every packet exchanged with a Correspondent Node (CN) in
   the Internet.  Compared with a communication that uses the ideal
   packet routing and the normal IPv6 header size, these factors results
   in an increased delay and a reduced throughput, plus indirect
   consequences like increased packet fragmentation and overall less
   efficient usage of resources.  Even if, as described later, the C2C-C
   Consortium intends to adopt NEMO only for non-safety applications, a
   Route Optimization (RO) mechanism that alleviates or even eliminates
   this inefficiency is highly desirable.  Moreover, the actual
   deployment of NEMO as default IP mobility support in C2C-C
   communication systems strongly depends on the availability of RO
   techniques.

   The document is organized as follows: Section 2 defines terminology.
   Section 3 describes the technical approach of C2C-C Consortium that
   allows for usage of NEMO.  Section 4 describes the deployment of NEMO
   in vehicular applications as intended by the C2C-C Consortium.
   Section 5 introduces the RO scenario and finally Section 6 lists the
   requirements for NEMO RO.


2.  Terminology

   The following terms used in this document are defined in the Mobile
   IPv6 protocol specification [2]:

   o  Home Agent (HA)

   o  Home Address (HoA)

   The following terms used in this document are defined in the Mobile
   Network terminology document [8]:

   o  Network Mobility (NEMO)

   o  Mobile Network

   o  Mobile Router (MR)

   o  Mobile Network Prefix (MNP)

   o  Mobile Network Node (MNN)

   The following terms used in this document are defined in the NEMO
   Route Optimization Space Analysis document [6]:




Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   o  Correspondent Router (CR)

   o  Correspondent Entity (CE)

   The following new terms are used in this document:

   o  On Board Unit (OBU): a device installed in vehicles, implementing
      the communication protocols and algorithm and equipped with at
      least 1) a short-range wireless network interface operating at
      dedicated frequencies and 2) a wireless or wired network interface
      where Application Units (AU) can be attached to.  With respect to
      the NEMO terminology, the OBU is the physical machine acting as
      MR, 1) is used as egress interface and 2) as ingress.

   o  Application Unit (AU): a portable or built-in device connected
      temporarily or permanently to the vehicle OBU.  It is assumed that
      AUs support a standard TCP/IPv6 protocol stack, optionally
      enhanced with IP Mobility support.  With respect to the NEMO
      terminology, an AU is a generic MNN.

   o  Road Side Unit (RSU): a device installed along roadsides
      implementing the C2C-C communication protocols and algorithms.
      RSUs can either be isolated or connected to a network
      infrastructure.  In the latter case, RSUs are attachment points
      either acting themselves as IPv6 access routers or as network
      bridges directly connected to an access router.

   o  In-vehicle network: the wireless or wired network placed in a
      vehicle and composed by (potentially) several AUs and one OBU.

   o  Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) Communication Mode: a generic
      communication mode in which data packets are exchanged between two
      vehicles, either directly or by means of multi-hop routing,
      without involving any node in the infrastructure.

   o  Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) Communication Mode: a generic
      communication mode in which data packets sent or received by a
      vehicle traverse a network infrastructure.

   o  Vehicle-to-Infrastructure-to-Vehicle (V2I2V) Communication Mode: a
      generic communication mode in which data packets are exchanged
      between two vehicles, by means of multi-hop routing involving a
      RSU not connected to a network infrastructure.








Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


3.  C2C Communication Architecture

3.1.  System Architecture

   The current draft reference architecture of the C2C communication
   system is shown in Figure 1.

                        |       Internet        |
                        |                       |
                        +---+-----------------+-+
                            |                 |
                 Access  +--+-+            +--+-+  Access
                 Router  | AR |            | AR |  Router
                         +--+-+            +--+-+
                            |                 |
                      --+---+---            --+---+--
                        |                         |
         Road Side   +--+--+                   +--+--+   Public
           Unit      | RSU |                   | PHS |  Hot Spot
                     +---+-+                   +---+-+
                         |                         |
                        /\                        /\

                        \_                         \_
                          \_                         \_
                            \                          \

            Mandatory        \/
          Mod IEEE 802.11p    |       __               \/  Optional IEEE
            Interface     +---+--+      \__      \/     |   802.11a/b/g
                          | OBU1 |                |     |    Interface
                          +--+---+              +-+-----+---+
                   Vehicle1  |                  |   OBU2    |  On-Board
                        -+---+-+-               +--+--------+    Unit
                         |     |                   | Vehicle2
       Application    +--+-+ +-+--+           --+--+--
          Units       | AU | | AU |             |
                      +----+ +----+           +-+--+
                                              | AU |
                                              +----+

                  Figure 1: C2C-CC Reference Architecture

   Vehicles are equipped with networks logically composed of an OBU and
   potentially multiple AUs.  An AU is typically a dedicated device that
   executes a single or a set of applications and utilizes the OBU
   communication capabilities.  An AU can be an integrated part of a
   vehicle and be permanently connected to an OBU.  It can also be a



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   portable device such as laptop, PDA or game pad that can dynamically
   attach to (and detach from) an OBU.  AU and OBU are usually connected
   with wired connection, but the connection can also be wireless, such
   as Bluetooth.  The distinction between AU and OBU is logical, they
   can also reside in a single physical unit.

   Vehicles' OBUs and stationary units along the road, termed road-side
   units (RSUs), form an ad hoc network.  An OBU is at least equipped
   with a (short range) wireless communication device based on draft
   standard IEEE 802.11p [12] (adapted to European conditions and with
   specific C2C-C extensions) primarily dedicated for road safety, and
   potentially with other optional communication devices.  OBUs directly
   communicate if wireless connectivity exist among them.  In case of no
   direct connectivity, multi-hop communication is used, where data is
   forwarded from one OBU to another, until it reaches its destination.
   For example in Figure 1, RSU and OBU1 have direct connectivity,
   whereas OBU2 is out of RSU radio coverage but can communicate with it
   through multi-hop routing.

   The primary role of an RSU is improvement of road safety.  RSUs have
   two possible configuration modes: as isolated nodes, they execute
   applications and/or extend the coverage of the ad hoc network
   implementing routing functionalities.  As attachment point connected
   to an infrastructure network, RSUs distribute information originated
   in the infrastructure and offer connectivity to the vehicles.  As
   result, for example, the latter configuration allows AUs registered
   with an OBU to communicate with any host located in the Internet,
   when at least one RSU connected to a network infrastructure is
   available.

   An OBU may also be equipped with alternative wireless technologies
   for both, safety and non-safety.  For example, an OBU may also
   communicate with Internet nodes or servers via public wireless LAN
   hot spots (PHS) operated individually or by wireless Internet service
   providers.  While RSUs for Internet access are typically set up with
   a controlled process by a C2C-C key stake holder, such as road
   administrators or other public authorities, public hot spots are
   usually set up in a less controlled environment.  These two types of
   infrastructure access, RSU and PHS, also correspond to different
   applications types.  Other communication technology, such as wide
   coverage/cellular networks (e.g.  UMTS, GPRS) may also be optionally
   installed in OBUs, but their usage is currently considered out of
   scope of the C2C-CC Consortium.

   The C2C-CC commonly refers to two main communication modes:

   o  in Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) mode, data packets are exchanged
      directly between OBUs, either via multi-hop or not, without



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


      involving any RSU;

   o  in Vehicle-to-Infrastructure mode (V2I), an OBU exchanges data
      packets through a RSU with an arbitrary node connected to the
      infrastructure (potentially another vehicle not attached to the
      same RSU).

3.2.  Protocol Architecture

   The protocol stack currently considered by C2C-CC for OBUs is
   depicted in Figure 2.

               +--------------------+------------------+
               |                    |                  |
               |       C2C-CC       |     IP-based     |
               |    Applications    |   Applications   |
               |                    |                  |
               +--------------------+------------------+
               |                    |    TCP/UDP/...   |
               |  C2C-CC Transport  +------------------+
               |                    |                  |
               +--------------------+-----+    IPv6    |
               |                          |            |
               |      C2C-CC Network      |            |
               |                          |            |
               +--------------------+-----+------------+
               |      Modified      |  Standard WLAN   |
               |    IEEE 802.11p    | IEEE 802.11a/b/g |
               +--------------------+------------------+

                       Figure 2: OBU Protocol Stack

   Protocol blocks are explained in the following list:

   o  Modified IEEE 802.11p: this block represents MAC and PHY layers of
      a wireless technology based upon current draft standard IEEE
      802.11p [12] but modified for usage in Europe.  In Europe,
      allocation of dedicated frequencies around 5.9 GHz for safety and
      non-safety applications is in progress.  Expected communication
      range in line of sight is around 500m.  This network interface is
      mandatory.

   o  IEEE 802.11a/b/g: this block represents MAC and PHY layers
      provided by one ore more IEEE 802.11a/b/g network interfaces.
      This network interface is optional but C2C-C Consortium encourages
      its installation.





Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   o  C2C-CC Network: this block represents the network layer protocol
      currently defined by C2C-CC.  The protocol provides secure ad hoc
      routing and forwarding, as well as addressing, error handling,
      packet sequencing, congestion control and efficient information
      dissemination.  The specification of this protocol is currently
      under discussion.  Only the C2C-CC Network protocol can access the
      Modified IEEE 802.11p network interface.  The C2C-CC Network
      protocol can also access the IEEE 802.11a/b/g interface.  The
      C2C-CC Network protocol offers an interface to the IPv6 protocol.
      This interface allows IPv6 headers and payload to be encapsulated
      into C2C-CC Network datagrams and sent over the Modified IEEE
      802.11p or IEEE 802.11a/b/g network interface.  The specification
      of this interface is currently under discussion.  A primary goal
      of the C2C-CC Network layer is to provide geographic routing and
      addressing functionalities for cooperative safety applications.
      Through the mentioned interface to the IPv6 protocol, these
      functionalities are also available for IP-based applications.

   o  C2C-CC Transport: this block represents the transport layer
      protocol currently defined by C2C-CC.  This protocol provides a
      selected set of traditional transport layer functionalities (e.g.
      application data multiplexing/demultiplexing, connection
      establishment, reliability etc.).  The specification of this
      protocol is currently under discussion.

   o  C2C-CC Applications: this block represents the application layer
      protocol currently defined by C2C-CC and concerns Active Safety
      and Traffic Efficiency Applications.

3.3.  IPv6 Deployment

   As described in Section 3.2, the C2C-CC includes IPv6 as mandatory
   part of its specified protocol architecture.  Currently, three
   methods are discussed for transmission of IPv6 headers and their
   payload:

   o  On the Modified IEEE 802.11p interface via the C2C-CC Network
      layer: in this method, IPv6 headers are encapsulated into C2C-CC
      Network headers and sent using dedicated frequencies for inter-
      vehicle communications.  As the C2C-CC Network layer transparently
      provides ad hoc routing, from the IPv6 layer perspective other
      nodes (OBUs and RSU) are attached to the same link.  The real
      broadcast domain, where IPv6 multicast headers are distributed to,
      is chosen by the C2C-CC Network layer according to the packet
      type.  In particular, C2C-CC Network layer provides efficient
      flooding and geographically scoped broadcast mechanisms.  With
      respect to a currently adopted terminology, introduced in [13],
      the C2C-C Consortium approach for usage of NEMO on the Modified



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


      IEEE 802.11p is fully MANET-Centric, in the sense that the sub-
      IPv6 protocol layer provides routing and forwarding in the ad hoc
      network.  This results in the ad hoc nature of VANETs being hidden
      from IPv6 layer.  A comparison of approaches for VANETs can be
      found in [14].  The deployability of this method strongly depends
      on the future availability of dedicated frequencies for non-safety
      purposes in inter-vehicle communications.  If frequencies for this
      purpose will not be allocated, only the left part of the protocol
      stack of Figure 2 can access the Modified IEEE 802.11p interface.

   o  On the IEEE 802.11a/b/g interface via the C2C-CC Network layer: in
      this method, IPv6 headers are encapsulated into C2C-CC Network
      headers and sent using license-free ISM frequency bands (wireless
      LAN).  Except the network interface, this method is equivalent to
      the previous one.

   o  On the IEEE 802.11a/b/g interface directly: in this method, IPv6
      headers are sent directly to the wireless LAN interface as
      specified by [5].

   The following informational list briefly summarizes currently
   discussed design concepts:

   o  vehicles use only IPv6 addresses with as host part an EUI-64
      identifier derived from the MAC address.  Privacy issues described
      in [4] are strongly alleviated through the use of temporary,
      changing MAC addresses, which are assigned in a set to every
      vehicle (as part of their assigned "pseudonyms");

   o  when a RSU connected to a network infrastructure is available, an
      OBU configures a globally routable Care-of Address using stateless
      address configuration;

   o  when infrastructure access is not available, OBUs use addresses
      with as prefix part a predefined IPv6 prefix (either reserved for
      C2C-C communications or a general purpose one);

   o  RSU can either act as IPv6 Access Routers or as network bridges
      connected to external IPv6 Access Routers.  Different Access
      Routers are responsible for announcing different network prefixes
      with global validity.  As a consequence, when roaming between
      different Access Routers, vehicles experience layer 3 handovers.

   In all the methods for use of IPv6 in C2C-CC systems as described
   above, the IPv6 layer is meant to be enhanced with Mobility Support.
   As a vehicle includes a set of attached devices (AUs), Network
   Mobility seems the most appropriate solution, allowing for a
   centralized management of mobility to be executed in OBUs.



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


4.  Intended NEMO Deployment

4.1.  Scope of NEMO

   In VANETs based on IEEE 802.11 family, a limited amount of bandwidth
   is shared among a potentially high number of vehicles.  Additionally
   applications for safety purposes have strict requirements in terms of
   delay, information dissemination and aggregation and secure ad hoc
   routing.  This conflicting conditions have led research activities to
   consider different approaches compared with traditional, packet-
   centric network engineering.  In particular, only through a more
   information-centric approach it seems possible to achieve
   functionalities like geographic distribution, information
   dissemination according to relevance, information aggregation using
   cross-layer analysis, plausibility checks at different protocol
   layers.

   Taking these aspects into consideration, the C2C-C Consortium is
   defining a protocol stack mainly dedicated for vehicular safety
   communications.  Applications that are not subject to these
   particular requirements must use the right part of the protocol stack
   of Figure 2.  This implies that the usage of NEMO in vehicular
   communications does not target safety-of-life applications but rather
   less restrictive, non-safety applications.

   Another important aspect for deployability is related to costs.  A
   primary goal of the C2C-C Consortium is to achieve a spread diffusion
   in terms of vehicles equipped with communication devices and
   protocols.  This implies that vehicles of different brands and
   classes should be equipped by default with a basic communication
   system, whereas differentiation of products can be achieved by
   offering additional services.  NEMO, like any other solution based on
   IP Mobility support, relies on a service provider that guarantees
   global reachability at the Home Network Prefix by maintaining an Home
   Agent.  As it does not seem realistic that every car owner will also
   subscribe for such a service, a set of limited applications based on
   IPv6 should be available even without Mobility Support.  Therefore,
   NEMO modularity and interoperability with non-NEMO equipped vehicles
   has to be guaranteed.

4.2.  Example Use Cases

   In this section, the main use cases are listed that have been
   identified by the C2C-CC for usage of NEMO in inter-vehicle
   communications: notification services, peer-to-peer applications and
   upload/download services.





Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


4.2.1.  Notification Services

   A generic notification service delivers information to subscribers by
   means of the Internet.  After subscribing the service with a
   provider, a user is notified when updates are available.  Example
   services are weather, traffic or news reports, as well as commercial
   and technical information from the car producer or other companies.

   As the network address of a vehicle changes while the vehicle moves
   among different points of attachment, without NEMO each application
   should register the new address in order to receive information at
   the correct location.  Service providers would need to update
   continuously the subscription data and would be able to track the
   users.  Adopting NEMO, which provides global reachability at a
   reasonably constant identifier (e.g.  Mobile Network Prefix),
   efficiency and location privacy improve considerably.

4.2.2.  Peer-to-peer Applications

   A generic peer-to-peer application exchanges data directly between
   vehicles, without contacting any application server.  Data traffic
   goes through a network infrastructure (V2I or V2I2V) or directly
   between cars when the infrastructure is not available (V2V).  Example
   applications are vehicle-to-vehicle instant messaging (chat) and off-
   line messaging (peer-to-peer email), vehicle-to-vehicle voice over IP
   and file exchange.

   In this set of use cases, the same applications should be able to run
   in V2V and V2I mode.  As applications should not be aware of routing
   nor addressing issues, they should use the same identifier for
   sessions and users (e.g. cars/drivers/passengers) independently of
   the communications mode.  Possible approaches are either to adopt
   resolution mechanisms or actually maintain the same network
   identifier in both V2V and V2I modes.  This could be achieved for
   example generalizing the concept of Mobile Network Prefix (MNP) and
   allowing a Mobile Router (OBU) to use it for V2V communications in
   absence of attachment points.  By means of enforcing limited lifetime
   for IPv6 prefixes and due to the isolation of VANET clusters from the
   infrastructure (in V2V), this use of MNP should not introduce routing
   inconsistencies.

4.2.3.  Upload and Download Services

   A generic upload/download service via the Internet consists in simple
   file exchange procedures with servers located in the Internet.

   As in vehicular scenarios the connectivity to the infrastructure is
   highly intermittent, network address' changes cause applications to



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   re-establish sessions in order to resume the exchange, which implies
   considerable overhead.  Session re-establishment can be avoided
   adopting NEMO.


5.  NEMO Route Optimization Scenarios

   In this section, operational characteristics of the intended NEMO
   deployment are described that are relevant for the design of Route
   Optimization techniques.  In particular a restriction of the general
   solution space for RO and motivations for RO requirements described
   in Section 6 are provided.

   In most NEMO deployment scenarios, MRs have permanent connectivity to
   the infrastructure and Route Optimization techniques are mainly
   intended as extensions of MIPv6 RO, where communication assumes to
   take place always through a point of attachment (infrastructure-based
   RO).  In VANETs based on wireless LAN technologies, the connectivity
   of moving vehicles to the infrastructure is intermittent due to
   limited coverage of access points.  Nevertheless, direct
   communication among vehicles should be supported even when
   infrastructure access is not available.  Because this case is
   strictly a peculiarity of the considered scenario, a technique to
   allow direct communication (single- and multi-hop) by exposing the
   MNP associated to vehicles will be studied by the C2C-CC as part of
   the sub-IPv6 C2C-CC Network layer.  Once such a mechanism is
   available, it MAY also be used as RO technique between MRs located in
   their vicinity (infrastructure-less RO).  The sub-IPv6 layer is
   responsible for making sure that this mechanism is scalable,
   reasonably secure (i.e. compared with current Internet level of
   security) and protects users' privacy.  More details about
   infrastructure-less RO are out of the scope of this document.

   A C2C-CC OBU MUST be capable of both infrastructure-based and
   infrastructure-less NEMO RO.  When both techniques are simultaneously
   possible (e.g. two MRs that are reachable both via the infrastructure
   and directly in the ad hoc domain) the OBU should apply appropriate
   policies to choose one.  The definition of such policies is out of
   scope of this document.  Furthermore, the scope of this document is
   restricted to the specification of requirements for infrastructure-
   based NEMO RO techniques.

   With respect to the classification of NEMO Route Optimization
   scenarios described in [6], the non-nested NEMO RO case (Section 3.1)
   is considered as the most important for the C2C-CC deployment.  In
   fact, MIPv6-enabled AUs (i.e.  VMNs) and nested Network Mobility are
   not considered in the C2C-CC use cases.




Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   The requirements defined in this document refer to RO between MR and
   CR (Correspondent Router).  According to C2C-CC use cases, the CR can
   be:

   o  a NEMO MR.  For example the MR running on another vehicle or
      another mobile device connected to the Internet;

   o  a RO-enabled router, i.e. a router static or mobile that does not
      act as NEMO MR but is capable of establishing RO sessions with
      NEMO MRs.  For example the access router serving a CN in the
      infrastructure that offers services to vehicles, or the access
      router serving RSUs installed along the road;

   o  a RO-enabled router collapsed into the CN, i.e. performing
      internal routing.  For example RSUs installed along the road.

   As consequence of the fact that connectivity to the infrastructure
   strongly depends on vehicles' mobility, two opposite situations are
   here considered as RO scenarios: vehicles passing by points of
   attachment while driving and vehicles connecting to the
   infrastructure while stopped or parked.

   In the first case, the connectivity to the infrastructure is
   available only for short time intervals.  Vehicles' applications
   exchange data packets with nodes in the infrastructure in form of
   short bursts, containing for example traffic updates or information
   about local points of interests.  In this situation, providing prompt
   and reliable communication is more important than achieving optimal
   routing or highest available throughput.  In particular, the
   additional delay for RO establishment with every CRs can have a
   considerable negative impact.  Furthermore, in some situations the
   path through MR-HA tunnel might be considered more reliable and
   trustworthy than a direct one to the CR.  In particular, the tunnel
   allows the MR to hide its CoA from the CR which results in a location
   privacy protection.  Therefore:

   o  vehicles should be able to decide whether or not to switch to RO
      according to various criteria (e.g. speed, density and geographic
      location of attachment points, trustworthiness of CR etc.);

   o  a lightweight RO scheme providing some degree of optimization
      (e.g. direct MR-CR routing but with the same packet overhead due
      to tunneling) and requiring short establishment times is more
      likely to be selected.

   Another aspect of the vehicular dynamic scenario is that
   communication involving the infrastructure takes place mostly with
   nodes dedicated for vehicular communications, like control centers,



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   notification points, infotainment service providers.  In all of these
   cases, the Correspondent Router is a newly deployed device.
   Consequently, RO techniques for this scenario are not strictly
   required to be compatible with CNs implementing legacy MIPv6 RO.

   In the case of low mobile or static vehicles, the characteristics of
   the connectivity allow for classical internet-based applications,
   involving multiple nodes in the infrastructure.  This scenario
   presents less peculiarities than the dynamic one when compared with
   other NEMO deployments (considering that the sub-IPv6 C2C-CC layer
   presents a flat topology to NEMO).

   Other requirements for RO pointed out in Section 6 like multihoming,
   security and privacy, are fundamental and not related to the dynamics
   of the scenario.


6.  NEMO Route Optimization Requirements

   The C2C-C Consortium has identified the following requirements for
   NEMO RO techniques.

6.1.  Req 1 - Separability

   A RO technique, including its establishment procedure, MUST have the
   ability to be bypassed by applications that desire to use
   bidirectional tunnels through the HA.

   As explained in Section 5, in some scenarios due to the intermittent
   connectivity, it might not be beneficial to activate RO.  Therefore,
   applications or other management instances in the OBU should be able
   to trigger the switching to RO according to appropriate criteria.

   This requirement is also specified in [9].

6.2.  Req 2 - MNN IPsec

   A RO technique SHOULD allow MNNs connected to the MR to use IPsec as
   if they were connected to a regular access router.

   This requirement comes from the fact that no assumption can be made
   on pre-existing trust relationships between passenger devices and the
   OBU.  Therefore, passenger devices (assumed to run IPv6 without
   Mobility Support) should be able to use full IPsec functionalities
   when connecting to the infrastructure via a MR.






Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


6.3.  Req 3 - RO Security

   A RO technique MUST prevent malicious nodes to claim false MNP
   ownership.  In order to achieve this, a RO technique MAY make use of
   security features provided by the sub-IPv6 C2C-CC Network layer (e.g.
   cryptographic protection), but it MUST NOT introduce new security
   leaks for the C2C-CC applications or render their security measures
   ineffective.

   It is required that the security level of a RO scheme is comparable
   with today's Internet, which is the same goal of MIPv6 Return
   Routability procedure.  In addition to that, as data security is
   mandatory for safety applications targeted by the C2C-C Consortium
   and implemented in the left part of the protocol stack depicted in
   Figure 2, security features will be already implemented in a C2C-CC
   compliant OBU.  The presence of this features might facilitate the
   design of a lightweight, yet secure, RO technique.

   C2C-CC security mechanisms are currently discussed and further
   details are out of scope of this document.  As informational
   references, see [16], [17] and [18].

6.4.  Req 4 - Privacy Protection

   A RO technique MUST not require that the MNP is revealed to all nodes
   in the visited network.  Instead, a RO technique MUST allow for
   revealing the MNP only to selected nodes in the visited network.
   Furthermore, a RO technique SHOULD allow that MNP and HoA are not
   exchanged as clear text.

   Privacy of drivers and passengers is mandatory for safety
   applications targeted by the C2C-C Consortium.  Mechanisms to
   implement privacy in the left part of the protocol stack depicted in
   Figure 2 are currently discussed (e.g. "revocable pseudonimity",
   where pre-assigned, quasi-random and changing pseudonyms are used as
   MAC and sub-IPv6 layer identifiers).

   When using the right part of the stack depicted in Figure 2 to access
   the Internet using IPv6, users will be aware that the level of
   privacy protection is decreased.  Nevertheless, clear text
   information that could allow for linking changed pseudonyms by
   sending constant identifiers should be minimized or even prohibited.
   In particular, encryption of Home Address and Mobile Network Prefix
   in NEMO signaling should be considered (e.g. specified as optional
   mechanism in [3]).

   C2C-CC privacy protection mechanisms are currently discussed and
   further details are out of scope of this document.  As informational



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   reference, see [15].

6.5.  Req 5 - Multihoming

   A RO technique MUST allow a MR to be simultaneously connected to
   multiple access networks, having multiple prefixes and Care-Of
   Addresses in a MONAMI6 context.

   In other words, it is required that a RO technique can be used on
   multiple communication technologies.  Assuming that mechanisms for
   registering and handling multiple CoAs are provided from the MONAMI6
   work, NEMO RO should be usable for every available CoA.

   This requirement is also specified in [9].

6.6.  Req 6 - Coexistence with Sub-IPv6 RO

   A RO technique MUST allow for coexistence in the same OBU with a RO
   technique offered by the sub-IPv6 C2C-CC Network layer.  The OBU MUST
   be able to choose which technique to use when both are simultaneously
   available.

   The here mentioned sub-IPv6 RO technique is supposed to inject routes
   into the IPv6 routing table as result of a sub-IPv6 signaling between
   cars, without involving the infrastructure.  A NEMO RO technique
   should not be disturbed by the sub-IPv6 RO technique.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA action.


8.  Security Considerations

   This document does not specify any protocol therefore does not create
   any security threat.  However, it specifies requirements for a
   protocol that include security and privacy issues in VANETs as
   currently discussed in the C2C-C Consortium.


9.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the members of the work groups PHY/
   MAC/NET and APP of the C2C-C Consortium and in particular Tim
   Leinmueller, Bernd Bochow, Andras Kovacs and Matthias Roeckl.





Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
         "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
         January 2005.

   [2]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [3]   Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
         Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home
         Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.

   [4]   Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for Stateless
         Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 3041, January 2001.

   [5]   Crawford, M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet
         Networks", RFC 2464, December 1998.

   [6]   Ng, C., Zhao, F., Watari, M., and P. Thubert, "Network Mobility
         Route Optimization Solution Space Analysis",
         draft-ietf-nemo-ro-space-analysis (work in progress),
         September 2006.

   [7]   Ng, C., "Network Mobility Route Optimization Problem
         Statement", draft-ietf-nemo-ro-problem-statement-03 (work in
         progress), September 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [8]   Ernst, T. and H. Lach, "Network Mobility Support Terminology",
         draft-ietf-nemo-terminology-06 (work in progress),
         November 2006.

   [9]   Eddy, W., Ivancic, W., and T. Davis, "NEMO Route Optimization
         Requirements for Operational Use in Aeronautics and Space
         Exploration Mobile Networks", draft-eddy-nemo-aero-reqs-00
         (work in progress), April 2007.

   [10]  "Car2Car Communication Consortium Official Website",
         http://www.car-2-car.org/ .

   [11]  "Car2Car Communication Consortium Manifesto",
         http://www.car-2-car.org/index.php?id=570 , May 2007.

   [12]  "Draft Amendment to Standard for Information Technology .



Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


         Telecommunications and information exchange between systems .
         Local and Metropolitan networks . Specific requirements - Part
         11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
         (PHY) specifications: Amendment 3: Wireless Access in Vehicular
         Environments (WAVE)", IEEE P802.11p/D1.0, February 2006.

   [13]  McCarthy, B., Edwards, C., Dunmore, M., and R. Aguiar, "The
         Integration of Ad-hoc (MANET) and Mobile Networking (NEMO):
         Principles to Support Rescue Team Communication", Proc. of
         International Conference on Mobile           Computing and
         Ubiquitous Networking (ICMU 2006), October 2006.

   [14]  Baldessari, R., Festag, A., and J. Abeille, "NEMO meets VANET:
         A Deployability Analysis of Network Mobility in Vehicular
         Communication", Proc.of 7th International Conference on ITS
         Telecommunications (ITST2007), June 2007.

   [15]  Fonseca, E., Festag, A., Baldessari, R., and R. Aguiar,
         "Support of Anonymity in VANETs - Putting Pseudonymity into
         Practice", Proc.of IEEE Wireless Communication and Networking
         Conference (WCNC2007), March 2007.

   [16]  Raya, M. and J. Hubaux, "The Security of Vehicular Ad Hoc
         Networks", Proc.of Workshop on Security of Ad Hoc and
         Sensor Networks (SASN2005), November 2005.

   [17]  Aijaz, A., Bochow, B., Doetzer, F., Festag, A., Gerlach, M.,
         Leinmueller, T., and R. Kroh, "Attacks on Inter Vehicle
         Communication Systems - an Analysis", Proc.of International
         Workshop on            Intelligent Transportation (WIT2006),
         March 2006.

   [18]  Fonseca, E. and A. Festag, "A Survey of Existing Approaches for
         Secure Ad Hoc Routing and Their Applicability to VANETS", NEC
         Technical Report NLE-PR-2006-19, March 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Roberto Baldessari
   NEC Europe Network Laboratories
   Kurfuersten-anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342167
   Email: roberto.baldessari@netlab.nec.de




Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


   Andreas Festag
   NEC Deutschland GmbH
   Kurfuersten-anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342147
   Email: andreas.festag@netlab.nec.de


   Massimiliano Lenardi
   Hitachi Europe SAS Sophia Antipolis Laboratory
   Immeuble Le Theleme
   1503 Route des Dolines
   Valbonne  F-06560
   France

   Phone: +33 489 874168
   Email: massimiliano.lenardi@hitachi-eu.com
































Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         C2C-CC NEMO RO Requirements             July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Baldessari, et al.       Expires January 6, 2008               [Page 21]


