
Internet-Draft               Ncc in Mail Header              Arun Sankar      
						 Hewlett-Packard Company
Expires: September 11, 2004                                 March 11, 2004

			     Ncc in Mail Header
                           
Status of this Memo
    
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
    
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.
    
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
    
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>
    
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.
    
    
Copyright Notice
    
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.
                                                      
                
Abstract
        
    This draft presents a mechanism to simplify one of the 
    cumbersome aspects of mailing. The basic intention is to minimize
    the complication when a mail needs to be sent to n - m mail IDs 
    i.e. send it to a group Id of n and exclude m from the alias [ALIAS] 
    list. 

1.  Introduction

    The current situation is that when a mail is to be sent to an
    alias [ALIAS] list, there is no possible way of a negating a set of
    mail IDs from that list. The purpose of this draft is a solution
    by the addition of another field in the Mail  header. The intention 
    is to achieve this negation of a mail IDs from an alias [ALIAS].
    
2.  Conventions Used in this Document
    
    The key words "REQUIRED", "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD
    NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described
    in "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels"
    [KEYWORDS].


Arun Sankar       	   Expires September 11, 2004     [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   	   Ncc in Mail Header	    March 11 2003


3.  Requirement

    The requirement is to provide the user with a field, using which
    mails can be sent to a subset of an alias [ALIAS], i.e. a provision 
    "not" to deliver the mail to a set of mail IDs from the 
    alias [ALIAS].

4.  Header Updations

    A new field needs to be added into the  SMTP header 
    [RECEIVER FIELDS] called "Ncc". This would act as a negation
    to the To, Cc and Bcc fields and ensure the mail is not sent
    to the mail ID mentioned in the "Ncc" field. The Ncc field
    SHOULD be a part of the mail envelope directly or indirectly
    in the implementation.
    
5.  Format of the Field

    The format specification of this field should be treated as 
    a "Cc" field. This field would be a part of the header and 
    would be carried forward throughout the mail thread.

6.  The SMTP service extension for Ncc

    The Ncc option MAY not be implemented in all Mail Servers.
    This SHOULD not affect the servers that have implemented Ncc.
    The client can figure out if the server has Ncc implemented 
    using the EHLO command transaction. When the client sends the 
    EHLO command, the server responds with "NCC". 

    E.g.    
    S: 220 test1.example.com ESMTP server ready
    C: EHLO test2.example.com
    S: 250-test1.example.com
    S: 250 NCC
    
    If the server does not respond with an Ncc, the mail SHOULD
    not be processed further but a suitable error message like 
    "NCC" not supported should be sent back to the sender.

    
6.  Processing of the Ncc Field.
    
    The Ncc Field MUST be processed after the alias [ALIAS] has been
    expanded. The mail IDs in the Ncc field MUST be removed from the
    To, Cc and the Bcc fields during its processing. This field MUST
    be treated similar to the Cc field and processing has to be done
    in mail gateways, relays etc. The Ncc field has to be a part of 
    the mail envelope. Its existence in the envelope is necessary
    as the alias expansion can happen in any intermediate server. 
    This field can directly be a part of the envelope or it can exist 
    through a envelope flag that can mention that the Ncc field is 
    Non-Null. 
    


Arun Sankar       	   Expires September 11, 2004     [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   	   Ncc in Mail Header	    March 11 2003

7.  Example

    A needs to send a mail to a group but the intention is not to 
    send this to D.

    From: A				From: A
    To: B				To: B
    CC: C,E,F,G,H			CC: Team_ABCDEFGH
	    				nCC: D
    Subject: TEST			Subject: TEST

    On the continuation of the thread and D is still not a part of
    the list.

    From: B				From: B
    To: A				To: A
    CC: C,E,F,G,H			CC: Team_ABCDEFGH
					nCC: D
    Subject: TEST			Subject: TEST
   
Appendices

A. References

   The following documents contain definitions or specifications that
   are necessary to understand this document properly:
   
   [ALIAS]		J. Klensin, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", 
   			RFC: 2821, April 2001
      
   [RECEIVER FIELDS]    Crocker, D., "Standard of the Format of 
   			ARPA Internet Text Messages", RFC 822, 
   			August 1982.  
   
   [KEYWORDS]		Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs 
   			to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14,
   			RFC 2119, March 1997.

Author's Address

   Arun Sankar
   Hewlett-Packard,
   29, Cunningham road,
   Bangalore,
   India 560052
   sankar@hp.com
   +91-80-205-3107

Intellectual Property Statement
    
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it


Arun Sankar       	   Expires August 6, 2004     [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   	   Ncc in Mail Header	    March 11 2003

    has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
    IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances
    of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made
    to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
    proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification
    can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.
    
    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
    Director.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.
    
    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
    
    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



















Arun Sankar       	   Expires September 11, 2004     [Page 4]


