


SIPPING                                                   H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                               Columbia U.
Expires: January 11, 2006                                  July 10, 2005


               A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for Services
                  draft-schulzrinne-sipping-service-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The content of many communication services depend on the context,
   such as the user's location.  We describe a 'service' URN that allows
   to register such context-dependent services that can be resolved in a
   distributed manner.








Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Registration Template  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  7








































Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


1.  Introduction

   In existing telecommunications systems, there are many well-known
   communication and information services that are offered by loosely
   coordinated entities across a large geographic region, with well-
   known identifiers.  Some of the services are operated by governments
   or regulated monopolies, others by competing commercial enterprises.
   Examples include emergency services (reached by 911 in North America,
   112 in Europe), telephone directory and repair services (411 and 611
   in the United States and Canada), government information services
   (311 in some cities in the United States), lawyer referral services
   (1-800-LAWYER), car roadside assistance (automobile clubs) and pizza
   delivery services.  Unfortunately, almost all of them are limited in
   scope to a single country or possibly a group of countries, such as
   those belonging to the North American Numbering Plan or the European
   Union.  The same identifiers are often used for other purposes
   outside that region, making accessing such services difficult when
   users travel or use devices produced outside their home country.

   These services are characterized by long-term stability of user-
   visible identifiers, decentralized administration of the underlying
   service and a well-defined resolution mechanism.  (For example, there
   is no national coordination or call center for 911; rather, various
   local government organizations cooperate to provide this service,
   based on jurisdictions.)

   In this document, we propose a URN namespace that, together with
   resolution protocols beyond the scope of this document, allows to
   define such global, well-known services, while distributing the
   actual implementation across a large number of service-providing
   entities.  While there are many ways to divide provision of such
   services, we focus on geography as a common way to delineate service
   regions.  In addition, users can choose different directory providers
   that in turn manage how geographic locations are mapped to service
   providers.

   Availability of such service identifiers simplifies end system
   configuration.  For example, an IP phone could have a special set of
   short cuts or buttons that invoke emergency services, as it would not
   be practical to manually re-configure the device with local emergency
   contacts for each city or town a user visits with his or her mobile
   device.  Also, such identifiers allow to delegate routing decisions
   to third parties and mark certain requests as having special
   characteristics while preventing these characteristics to be
   accidentally invoked on inappropriate requests.

   Existing technologies address the mapping of service identifiers to a
   service for a particular DNS domain (DNS SRV [4], DNS NAPTR [5]) or a



Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


   local area network (SLP [3]).

   The tel URI [7] allows to express service codes such as 911 by adding
   a context parameter, but does not address the problem of global
   validity.

   LUMP [8] is a prototype resolution system for mapping URNs to URLs
   based on geographic location.  However, it is anticipated that there
   will be several such systems.

2.  Registration Template

   Below, we include the registration template for the URN scheme
   according to RFC 3406 [6].
   Namespace ID: service
   Registration Information: Registration version: 1; registration date:
      2005-07-10
   Declared registrant of the namespace: TBD
   Declaration of syntactic structure: The URN consists of a
      hierarchical service identifier, with a sequence of labels
      separated by periods.  The set of allowable characters is the same
      as that used for domain names.  Any string of service labels can
      be used to request services that are either more generic or more
      specific.  In other words, if a service 'x.y.z' exists, the URNs
      'x' and 'x.y' are also valid service URNs. [?]

         URN:service:<service-identifier>

   Relevant ancillary documentation: None
   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 'service' URNs identify one
      logical service, recognized by human users as such.  The service
      does not have to be provided by the same organization or to the
      same standards over time and space.  Unlike for other URNs, the
      content of the service is by nature dynamic.  While undesirable in
      many cases, two users making the same request for a service from
      the same place may not necessarily be directed to the same
      resource.
   Identifier persistence considerations: The 'service' URN for the same
      service is expected to be persisent, although there naturally
      cannot be a guarantee that a particular service will continue to
      be available globally or at all times.
   Process of identifier assignment: Details of the service assignment
      depend on the service and national regulations.  In general, it is
      assumed that providers of services can register through a service
      mapping mechanism for a particular service in a particular
      geographic area.  The provision of some services may be restricted
      by local or national regulations.  (As a hypothetical example,
      providing emergency services may be restricted to government-



Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


      authorized entities, which may limit the region where each entity
      can advertise its services.)  The rules for each service are
      described in a service-specific document.
   Process for identifier resolution: 'service' identifiers are resolved
      by the TBD mapping protocol, an instance of a Resolution Discovery
      System (RDS) as described in RFC 2276 [2].  (In theory, there
      could be several such mapping protocols in concurrent use, as long
      as there are reasonable guarantees that all services are available
      in all mapping protocols.)
   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 'service' identifiers are compared
      according to domain name comparison rules.  The use of homographic
      identifiers is NOT RECOMMENDED.
   Conformance with URN Syntax: There are no special considerations.
   Validation mechanism: The RDS mechanism is also used to validate the
      existence of a resource.  As noted, by its design, the
      availability of a resource may depend on where service is desired
      and there may not be service available in all or most locations.
      (For example, roadside assistance service is unlikely to be
      available on about 70% of the earth's surface.)
   Scope: The scope for this URN is public and global.

3.  Example

   For discussion and illustration purposes only, we include an example
   of a particular service.  We choose emergency services as an example.
   A possible list of identifiers might include:

   urn:service:sos
   urn:service:sos.fire
   urn:service:sos.police
   urn:service:sos.marine
   urn:service:sos.mountain
   urn:service:sos.rescue
   urn:service:sos.poison
   urn:service:sos.suicide
   urn:service:sos.mental-health


4.  References

4.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Sollins, K., "Architectural Principles of Uniform Resource Name
        Resolution", RFC 2276, January 1998.




Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


4.2  Informative References

   [3]  Guttman, E., Perkins, C., Veizades, J., and M. Day, "Service
        Location Protocol, Version 2", RFC 2608, June 1999.

   [4]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
        specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
        February 2000.

   [5]  Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer
        (NAPTR) DNS Resource Record", RFC 2915, September 2000.

   [6]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
        "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition Mechanisms",
        BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

   [7]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 3966,
        December 2004.

   [8]  Schulzrinne, H., "Location-to-URL Mapping Protocol (LUMP)",
        draft-schulzrinne-ecrit-lump-00 (work in progress), June 2005.


Author's Address

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs+simple@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   This document is based on discussions with Jonathan Rosenberg.












Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 Service URN                     July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schulzrinne             Expires January 11, 2006                [Page 7]

