


DTN Research Group                                          S. Symington
Internet-Draft                                     The MITRE Corporation
Intended status: Experimental                             August 3, 2007
Expires: February 4, 2008


         Delay-Tolerant Networking Previous Hop Insertion Block
             draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-previous-hop-block-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 4, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


Abstract

   This document defines an extension block that may be used with the
   Bundle Protocol [2] within the context of a Delay-Tolerant Network
   architecture [4].  This Previous Hop Insertion Block is designed to
   be inserted by a forwarding node to provide information to its next-
   hop receiving node.  This block is always removed from the bundle by
   the receiving node so that it's duration within the bundle lasts for
   exactly one hop.  It provides a general insertion capability to
   enable any node that forwards a bundle to insert an arbitrary record
   (or records) of information into the bundle.  While this block is
   defined to provide an arbitrary insertion capability, this
   specification also defines two specific, mandatory, information
   record formats for the information that may be carried in the
   Previous Hop Insertion block.  Using these mandatory information
   record formats, an insertion block may be used to indicate the
   inserting/forwarding node's endpoint ID (EID), which may be required
   in some circumstances to support certain routing protocols (e.g.,
   flood routing).  This document defines the format and processing of
   this Previous Hop Insertion Block.































Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Previous Hop Insertion Block Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Previous Hop Insertion Block Processing  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Bundle Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Bundle Forwarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Bundle Reception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Mandatory Information Record Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  EID-only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  EID-with-Timestamp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14

































Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


1.  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

   The DTN bundle protocol [2] defines the bundle as its protocol data
   unit.  A bundle consists of a primary bundle block, which is defined
   in the Bundle Protocol, followed by at least one other type of bundle
   block.  The Bundle Protocol defines a single other type of bundle
   block, called a Bundle Payload block.  This document defines an
   additional, optional, bundle block called a Previous Hop Insertion
   Block.  This block is designed to be used by a forwarding node to
   insert information into a bundle before forwarding that bundle.  The
   intent of this Previous Hop Insertion Block is to provide a general
   insertion mechanism such that an arbitrary record of information may
   be inserted into the bundle by a forwarding node for consumption by
   the next-hop receiving node.  The lifetime of the Previous Hop
   Insertion Block is always exactly one hop in the DTN, so if a bundle
   containing a Previous Hop Insertion Block is received, the receiving
   node is assured that the information in this block was inserted by
   the previous node; likewise, the information in this block is not
   retained with the bundle when the bundle is forwarded.

   The information record(s) to be inserted into the block may have any
   content and format, providing the content and format have been
   defined and documented in order to enable the information to be
   understood.  In this specification we define two specific information
   record formats for use in the insertion block that MUST be supported.
   Each of these formats includes a reference to the endpoint ID
   information of the inserting node in the bundle's dictionary.
   Insertion of a node's EID strings into the bundle dictionary (if not
   already there) and insertion of a reference to those strings in a
   bundle's Previous Hop Insertion Block enables the inserting/
   forwarding node to provide its EID to its next-hop receiving node.
   This previous-hop EID information may be required in some
   circumstances to support various routing protocols (e.g., flood
   routing).  Although there may be some situations in which a node that
   receives a bundle may be able to infer the EID of the node that
   forwarded the bundle to it, there are other situations in which the
   EID of the forwarding node will not be able to be inferred by the
   receiving node.  In these situations, if there is a requirement that
   the receiving node be able to determine the EID of the forwarding
   node, the forwarding node must provide this information in the
   bundle.  This specification defines a mechanism, i.e. the Previous
   Hop Insertion Block, used in conjunction with either an EID-only or
   an EID-with-timestamp information record format, whereby a node can
   insert its EID (and possibly other information) into a bundle before



Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


   forwarding it.

   Using the information record formats that are defined in this
   document, the information that is provided in the insertion blocks at
   each node may include not only the EID of the inserting/forwarding
   node, but also a time stamp.  This information may be further
   expanded or altered through the future definition of additional
   information record formats to provide an arbitrary information record
   insertion capability.  This document defines the format and
   processing of the Previous Hop Insertion Block.  It also defines two
   mandatory information record formats.

   The capabilities described in this document are OPTIONAL for
   deployment with the Bundle Protocol.  Bundle Protocol implementations
   claiming to support Previous Hop Insertion Blocks MUST be capable of:

      -Generating a Previous Hop Insertion Block and inserting it into a
      bundle,

      -Receiving bundles containing a Previous Hop Insertion Block and
      making the information contained in this Previous Hop Insertion
      Block available for use, e.g., in forwarding decisions.

      -Deleting a Previous Hop Insertion Block from a bundle

      -Adding strings to a bundle's dictionary, and references to those
      strings to the bundle's Previous Hop Insertion Block.

   as defined in this document.






















Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


2.  Previous Hop Insertion Block Format

   The Previous Hop Insertion Block uses the Canonical Bundle Block
   Format as defined in the bundle protocol [2].  That is, it is
   comprised of the following elements:

      -Block-type code (one byte) - defined as in all bundle protocol
      blocks except the primary bundle block (as described in the Bundle
      Protocol).  The block type code for the Previous Hop Insertion
      Block is 0x05.

      -Block processing control flags (SDNV) - defined as in all bundle
      protocol blocks except the primary bundle block (SDNV encoding is
      described in the Bundle Protocol).  The following block processing
      control flag MUST be set:

         -Discard block if it can't be processed.

      - Block EID reference count and EID reference (optional) -
      composite field defined in [2] containing a count of EID
      references (expressed as an SDNV) followed by one or more EID
      references (each of which is expressed as a pair of SDNVs).
      Whether or not this field must be present in the block is
      determined by the information record format (see Section 4) being
      used by the block.  Presence of this field is indicated by the
      setting of the "block contains an EID reference field" flag in the
      block processing control flags to 1.

      -Block data length (SDNV) - defined as in all bundle protocol
      blocks except the primary bundle block.  SDNV encoding is
      described in the Bundle Protocol.

      -Block-type-specific data field as follows:

         -Information Record Format ID (SDNV) - Its value identifies the
         format of the information record that comes later in the block.
         Some mandatory information record formats are specified in
         Section 4.  Additional information record formats MAY be
         defined in separate specifications.

         -Information Record (optional) - Contains the data being
         inserted by the forwarding node, formatted as identified by the
         value of the Information Record Format ID field.  Whether or
         not this field must be present in the block is determined by
         the information record format (see Section 4) being used by the
         block.

   The Structure of a Previous Hop Insertion Block is as follows:



Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


   Previous Hop Insertion Block Format:
   +------+--------------+------------------------------+--------------+
   |type  |flags (SDNV)  |EID ref count and list (comp) |length (SDNV) |
   +------+--------------+------------------------------+--------------+
   | Information Record Format ID (SDNV)| Information Record (optional)|
   +-------------------------------------------------------------------+

                                 Figure 1











































Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


3.  Previous Hop Insertion Block Processing

   The following are the processing steps that a bundle node must take
   relative to generation, reception, and processing of Previous Hop
   Insertion Blocks.

3.1.  Bundle Transmission

   When an outbound bundle is created per the parameters of the bundle
   transmission request, this bundle MAY (as influenced by local policy)
   include one or more Previous Hop Insertion Blocks (as defined in this
   specification).

3.2.  Bundle Forwarding

   Before forwarding a bundle, the node SHALL delete all of the Previous
   Hop Insertion Blocks that were in the bundle when it was received.
   The node MAY delete all strings (scheme names and scheme-specific
   parts--SSPs) in the bundle's dictionary to which no endpoint ID
   references in the bundle currently refer (if any).

   The node MAY insert one or more Previous Hop Insertion Blocks into
   the bundle before forwarding it, as dictated by local policy.  The
   node MAY insert strings into the bundle's dictionary (if needed) that
   are referenced by the Previous Hop Insertion Block.

3.3.  Bundle Reception

   If the bundle includes one or more Previous Hop Insertion Blocks, the
   information records in these blocks SHALL be made available for use
   at this node (e.g., in forwarding decisions).




















Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


4.  Mandatory Information Record Formats

   This section defines the mandatory information record formats for
   this specification.  Additional formats may be defined elsewhere.

4.1.  EID-only

   The EID-only record format has information record-format ID
   0x00000001.

   When the EID-only record format is being used, the "Block contains an
   EID-reference field" block processing control flag MUST be set,
   indicating that the Block EID reference count and EID references
   field is present in the block.  The count of EID references in this
   field MUST have a value of 1, and this count MUST be followed by a
   single EID reference (expressed as a pair of SDNVs).  This EID
   reference must be that of the node that is forwarding the bundle.

   The EID-only record format does not contain an information record
   field.

4.2.  EID-with-Timestamp

   The EID-with-Timestamp record format has record-format ID 0x00000002.

   When the EID-with-Timestamp record format is being used, the "Block
   contains an EID-reference field" block processing control flag MUST
   be set, indicating that the Block EID reference count and EID
   references field is present in the block.  The count of EID
   references in this field MUST have a value of 1, and this count MUST
   be followed by a single EID reference (expressed as a pair of SDNVs).
   This EID reference must be that of the node that is forwarding the
   bundle.

   The EID-with-Timestamp record format information record field
   consists of a single "Elapsed Time" field, which is expressed as an
   SDNV.  The value in the elapsed time field indicates the time at
   which the bundle is being processed by the forwarding node, encoded
   as a number of seconds past the bundle's creation time.












Symington               Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   The DTN Bundle Security Protocol [3] and the DTN Security Overview
   [5] define three security-related blocks to provide hop-by-hop
   authentication, end-to-end authentication, and end-to-end
   confidentiality of bundles or parts of bundles, as well as a set of
   mandatory ciphersuites that may be used to calculate security results
   carried in these security blocks.  All ciphersuites that use the
   strict canonicalisation algorithm [3] to calculate and verify
   security results (e.g., many hop-by-hop authentication ciphersuites)
   apply to all blocks in the bundle, and so would apply to bundles that
   include an optional Previous Hop Insertion Block and would include
   that block in the calculation of their security result.  In
   particular, bundles including the optional Previous Hop Insertion
   Block would be protected in their entirety for the duration of a
   single hop, from a forwarding node to an adjacent receiving node (but
   not from source to destination), using the mandatory BAH-HMAC
   ciphersuite defined in the Bundle Security Protocol.  Ciphersuites
   that use the mutable canonicalisation algorithm to calculate and
   verify security results (e.g., the mandatory PSH-RSA-SHA256
   ciphersuite and most end-to-end authentication ciphersuites) will
   (correctly) omit the Previous Hop Insertion Block from their
   calculation.  The fact that several different instantiations of this
   block may be present in the bundle as the bundle transits the network
   will not interfere with end-to-end security protection when using
   ciphersuites that use mutable canonicalisation.  Lastly, the Previous
   Hop Insertion Block will not be encrypted by the mandatory CH-RSA-
   AES-PAYLOAD-PSH end-to-end confidentiality ciphersuite, which only
   allows for payload and PSH encryption.  If encryption of this block
   is desired, a ciphersuite would need to be defined for this purpose.





















Symington               Expires February 4, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   If the bundle protocol becomes a standards track protocol, then we
   may want to consider having IANA establish a register of block types,
   of which the Previous Hop Insertion Block would be one.  In addition,
   we may want IANA to establish a separate register of information
   record formats specific to the Previous Hop Insertion Block.












































Symington               Expires February 4, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S. and J. Reynolds, "Key words for use in RFCs to
        Indicate Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, October 1997.

   [2]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol Specification",
        draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-spec-10.txt, work-in-progress,
        July 2007.

   [3]  Symington, S., Farrell, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell, "Bundle
        Security Protocol Specification",
        draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-security-03.txt, work-in-progress,
        April 2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [4]  Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., Durst, R.,
        Scott, K., Fall, K., and H. Weiss, "Delay-Tolerant Network
        Architecture", RFC 4838, April 2007.

   [5]  Farrell, S., Symington, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell, "Delay-
        Tolerant Network Security Overview",
        draft-irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview-03.txt, work-in-progress,
        July 2007.

























Symington               Expires February 4, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


Author's Address

   Susan Flynn Symington
   The MITRE Corporation
   7515 Colshire Drive
   McLean, VA  22102
   US

   Phone: +1 (703) 983-7209
   Email: susan@mitre.org
   URI:   http://mitre.org/








































Symington               Expires February 4, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      DTN Previous Hop Insertion Block         August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Symington               Expires February 4, 2008               [Page 14]

