





Network Working Group                                      Eric C. Rosen
Internet Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expiration Date: January 2001
                                                               July 2000


              OSPF as the PE/CE Protocol in BGP/MPLS VPNs


                 draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   [VPN] describes a method of providing a VPN service.  That method
   allows a variety of different protocols to be used as the routing
   protocol between the Customer Edge (CE) router and the Provider Edge
   (PE) router.  However, it does not fully specify the procedures which
   must be implemented within the Provider's network when OSPF is used
   as the PE/CE routing protocol.  This document provides that
   specification.










Rosen                                                           [Page 1]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000




Table of Contents

    1      Specification of Requirements  ..........................   2
    2      Introduction  ...........................................   2
    3      Requirements  ...........................................   3
    4      BGP/OSPF Interaction Procedures for PE routers  .........   5
    4.1    Overview  ...............................................   5
    4.2    Details  ................................................   7
    4.2.1  General  ................................................   7
    4.2.2  Handling LSAs from the CE  ..............................   8
    4.2.3  Automatic creation of sham links  .......................  10
    4.2.4  VPN-IP routes received via BGP  .........................  12
    5      Acknowledgments  ........................................  13
    6      Authors' Address  .......................................  14
    7      Bibliography  ...........................................  14





1. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


2. Introduction

   [VPN] describes a method by which a Service Provider (SP) can use its
   IP backbone to provide a VPN service to customers.  In that method, a
   customer's edge devices (CE devices) are connected to the provider's
   edge routers (PE routers).  If the CE device is a router, then the PE
   router may become a routing peer of the CE router (in some routing
   protocol), and may as a result learn the routes which lead to the
   CE's site and which need to be distributed to other PE routers that
   attach to the same VPN.

   The PE routers which attach to a common VPN use BGP to distribute the
   VPN's routes to each other.  A CE router can then learn the routes to
   other sites in the VPN by peering with its attached PE router in a
   routing protocol.  CE routers at different sites do not, however,
   peer with each other.

   It can be expected that many VPNs will use OSPF as their internal
   routing protocol.  This does not necessarily mean that the PE routers



Rosen                                                           [Page 2]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


   need to use OSPF to peer with the CE routers.  Each site in a VPN can
   use OSPF as its intra-site routing protocol, while using, e.g., BGP
   or RIP to distribute routes to a PE router.  However, it is certainly
   convenient, when OSPF is being used intra-site, to use it on the PE-
   CE link as well, and [VPN] explicitly allows this.

   Like anything else, the use of OSPF on the PE-CE link has advantages
   and disadvantages.  The disadvantage to using OSPF on the PE-CE link
   is that it gets the PE router involved in a VPN site's IGP, however
   peripherally.  The advantages though are:

     - The administrators of the CE router need not have any expertise
       in any routing algorithm other than OSPF.

     - The CE routers do not need to have support for any routing
       algorithms other than OSPF.

     - If a customer is transitioning his network from a traditional
       OSPF backbone to the VPN service described in [VPN], the use of
       OSPF on the PE-CE link eases the transitional issues.

   It seems likely that some SPs and their customers will resolve these
   trade-offs in favor of the use of OSPF on the PE-CE link.  Thus we
   need to specify the procedures which must be implemented by a PE
   router in order to make this possible.  (No special procedures are
   needed in the CE router though; CE routers just run whatever OSPF
   implementations they may have.)


3. Requirements

   Consider a set of VPN sites which are thought of as a common "OSPF
   domain".  These will almost certainly be a set of sites which
   together constitute an "intranet", and each of which runs OSPF as its
   intra-site routing protocol.

   Per [VPN], the VPN routes are distributed among the PE routers by
   BGP.  If the PE uses OSPF to distribute routes to the CE router, the
   standard procedures governing BGP/OSPF interactions [OSPF] would
   cause routes from one site to be delivered to another as AS-external
   routes (in type 5 LSAs).  This is undesirable; it would be much
   better to deliver such routes in type 3 LSAs (as inter-area routes),
   so that they can be distinguished from any "real" AS-external routes
   that may be circulating in the VPN. (That is, so that they can be
   distinguished by OSPF from routes which really do not come from
   within the VPN.)  Hence it is necessary for the PE routers to
   implement a modified version of the BGP/OSPF interaction procedures.




Rosen                                                           [Page 3]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


   In fact, we would like to have a very general set of procedures which
   allows a customer to easily replace a legacy private OSPF backbone
   with the VPN service.  We would like this procedure to meet the
   following set of requirements:

     - The procedures should not make assumptions about the OSPF
       topology.  In particular, it should not be assumed that customer
       sites are OSPF stub sites or NSSA sites.  Nor should it be
       assumed that a customer site contains only one OSPF area, or that
       it has no area 0 routers.

     - If VPN sites A and B are in the same OSPF domain, then routes
       from one should be presented to the other as OSPF intra-network
       routes.  In general, this can be done by presenting such routes
       in type 3 LSAs.

       Note that this allows two VPN sites to be connected via an "OSPF
       backdoor link".  That is, one can have an OSPF link between the
       two sites which is used only when the VPN backbone is
       unavailable.   (This would not be possible with the ordinary
       BGP/OSPF interaction procedures.  The ordinary procedures would
       present routes via the VPN backbone as AS-external routes, and
       these could never be preferred to intra-network routes.)  This
       may be very useful during a period of transition from a legacy
       OSPF backbone to a VPN backbone.

     - It should be possible to make use of an "OSPF backdoor link"
       between two sites, even if the two sites are in the same OSPF
       area, and neither of the routers attached to the inter-site
       backdoor link is an area 0 router.  This can also be very useful
       during a transition period, and eliminates any need to
       reconfigure the sites' routers to be ABRs.

       Assuming that it is desired to have the route via the VPN
       backbone be preferred to the backdoor route, the VPN backbone
       itself must be presented to the CE routers at each site as a link
       between the two PE routers to which the CE routers are
       respectively attached.

     - CE routers, connected to PE routers of the VPN service, may
       themselves function as OSPF backbone (area 0) routers.  An OSPF
       backbone may even consist of several "segments" which are
       interconnected themselves only via the VPN service. In such a
       scenario, full intercommunication between sites connected to
       different segments of the OSPF backbone should still be possible.






Rosen                                                           [Page 4]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


     - The transition from the legacy private OSPF backbone to the VPN
       service must be simple and straightforward.  The transition is
       likely to be phased, such that customer sites are migrated one by
       one from the legacy private OSPF backbone to the VPN service.
       During the transition, any given site might be connected to the
       VPN service, to the legacy OSPF backbone, or to both. Complete
       connectivity among all such sites must be maintained.

       Since the VPN service is to replace the legacy backbone, it must
       be possible, by suitable adjustment of the OSPF metrics, to make
       OSPF prefer routes which traverse the SP's VPN backbone to
       alternative routes which do not.

     - The OSPF metric assigned to a given route should be carried
       transparently over the VPN backbone.

   Routes from sites which are not in the same OSPF domain will appear
   as AS-external routes.

   We presuppose familiarity with the contents of [OSPF], including the
   OSPF LSA types, and will refer without further exegesis to type 1, 2,
   3, etc., LSAs.  Familiarity with [VPN] is also presupposed.


4. BGP/OSPF Interaction Procedures for PE routers

4.1. Overview

   [VPN] defines the notion of a Per-Site Routing and Forwarding Table,
   or VRF. A PE router must be capable of running multiple instances of
   OSPF, where each instance is associated with a particular VRF.
   (Whether these instances are realized as separate processes, or
   merely as separate contexts of a common process, is an implementation
   matter.)

   BGP is used to distribute routes among the set of PE routers that
   attach to a single OSPF domain.  Per [VPN], these routes are
   distributed as VPN-IP routes.  Import/export to/from particular VRFs
   is governed via Route Targets.  To meet the above requirements, a PE
   which imports a particular route into a particular VRF needs to know
   whether that route comes from the same OSPF domain and the same OSPF
   area as the CEs to which it is attached.  Our procedure is to encode
   this information as BGP Extended Communities attributes [EXT], and
   have BGP distribute it along with the VPN-IP route.  The OSPF metric
   of a route is also carried as a BGP attribute of the route.

   If two PEs attach to different VPN sites that are in the same OSPF
   area (as indicated by the OSPF area number), the PE/CE links to those



Rosen                                                           [Page 5]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


   site SHOULD be treated as links within that area. In addition, each
   PE SHOULD flood, into that area, a type 1 LSA advertising a link to
   the other PE.

   If this procedure is followed, two VPN sites in the same OSPF area
   will see the VPN backbone as a link within that area, a link between
   two PE routers.  We refer to this link as a "sham link".  Section
   4.2.3 specifies the procedures by which a PE determines when to
   "create" and advertise a sham link.

   Every PE attached to a particular OSPF network MUST be an OSPF area 0
   router. This allows it to distribute inter-area routes to the CE via
   Type 3 LSAs.  The CE router might or might not be an area 0 router,
   and the PE/CE link might or might not be an area 0 link.

   If the OSPF network contains area 0 routers (other than the PE
   routers), at least one PE router must have an area 0 link to a non-PE
   area 0 router in that OSPF network. (The non-PE area 0 router
   functions as a CE router.) This ensures that inter-area routes and
   AS-external routes can be leaked between the PE routers and the non-
   PE OSPF backbone.

   When a type 3 LSA is sent over an area 0 link from a PE router to a
   CE router, a special bit in the LSA Options field is set.  This is
   used to ensure that if any CE router sends this type 3 LSA to a PE
   router, the PE router will not further redistribute it.

   Two sites which are not in the same OSPF area will see the VPN
   backbone as being an integral part of the OSPF backbone. However, if
   there are area 0 routers which are NOT PE routers, then the VPN
   backbone actually functions as a sort of higher level backbone,
   providing a third level of hierarchy above area 0.  This allows a
   legacy OSPF backbone to become disconnected during a transition
   period, as long as the various segments all attach to the VPN
   backbone.

   When a PE router needs to distribute to a CE router a route which
   comes from a site outside the latter's OSPF domain, the PE router
   presents itself as an ASBR, issues a type 4 LSA for itself if
   necessary, and distributes the route in a type 5 LSA.  OSPF route
   tagging is used to ensure that a type 5 LSA generated by a PE router
   will be ignored by any other PE router that may receive it.  A
   special OSPF route tag, which we will call the VPN Route Tag, will be
   used for this purpose.







Rosen                                                           [Page 6]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


4.2. Details

4.2.1. General

   If a PE and a CE are communicating via OSPF, the PE MUST create, and
   MUST flood to the CE, a type 1 LSA advertising its link to the CE.
   The PE MUST have an OSPF router id which is valid (i.e., unique)
   within the OSPF domain. The PE MUST also be configured to know which
   OSPF area the link is in. A PE-CE link may be in any area, including
   area 0; this is a matter of the OSPF configuration.

   Whether or not the PE-CE link is an area 0 link, the PE itself MUST
   be an OSPF area 0 router.  That is, the link state topology from a
   site will not be passed along by the PE.

   The PE MUST support at least one OSPF instance for each OSPF domain
   to which it attaches.  Each instance of OSPF MUST be associated with
   a single VRF.  If n CEs associated with that VRF are running OSPF on
   their respective PE/CE links, then those n CEs are OSPF adjacencies
   of the PE in the corresponding instance of OSPF.  Generally, though
   not necessarily, if the PE attaches to several CEs in the same OSPF
   domain, it will associate the interfaces to those PEs with a single
   VRF.

   If the OSPF domain has any area 0 routers (other than the PE
   routers), then at least one of those MUST be a CE router, and MUST
   have an area 0 link to at least one PE router. This adjacency MAY be
   via an OSPF virtual link.

   For each OSPF domain, there MUST be a globally unique identifier
   which can be encoded in a BGP Extended Communities attribute. Routes
   from a particular OSPF domain will, when distributed in BGP as VPN-
   IPv4 routes, carry this attribute. The OSPF Domain will be encoded as
   the VPN of Origin Extended Community [VPN, EXT] attribute.  (It is
   shown in [VPN] how to assign globally unique values to this
   attribute.) Each VRF that is associated with an OSPF instance must be
   configured with a value of this attribute. All VRFs that correspond
   to the same OSPF domain MUST be configured with the same value of
   this attribute.

   If a particular VRF in a PE is associated with an instance of OSPF,
   then it will be configured with a special OSPF route tag value, which
   we call the VPN Route Tag.  This route tag will be included in any
   Type 5 LSAs that the PE originates and sends to any of the attached
   CEs. Its value is arbitrary, but must be distinct from any OSPF Route
   Tag being used within the OSPF domain.  Its value MUST therefore be
   configurable.




Rosen                                                           [Page 7]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


   If a PE router needs to use OSPF to distribute to a CE router a route
   which comes from a site outside the CE router's OSPF domain, the PE
   router SHOULD present itself to the CE router as an Autonomous System
   Border Router (ASBR), and SHOULD report such routes as AS-external
   routes.  That is, these PE routers originate Type 5 LSAs reporting
   the extra-domain routes as AS-external routes. Each such Type 5 LSA
   MUST contain an OSPF route tag whose value is that of the VPN Route
   Tag.  This tag identifies the route as having come from a PE router.
   The VPN Route Tag MUST be used to ensure that a Type 5 LSA originated
   by a PE router is not redistributed through the OSPF area to another
   PE router.

   When a PE/CE link is an area 0 link, the high-order bit of the LSA
   Options field (previously unused) is used to distinguish type 3 LSAs
   which report routes across the VPN backbone from other VPN sites. We
   refer to this as the DN bit. The DN bit is set in a type 3 LSA which
   is sent from a PE router to a CE router across an area 0 link. When a
   PE router receives, from a CE router, a type 3 LSA with the DN bit
   set, the route is ignored. Without this mechanism, the type 3 LSA
   could be sent by a PE to a CE, flooded through a number of OSPF
   routers, and then sent to another PE; this could cause a loop.  This
   mechanism prevents such loops.


4.2.2. Handling LSAs from the CE

   This section specifies the way in which a PE router handles the OSPF
   LSAs it receives from a CE router.

   If a route is received in a Type 5 LSA, and if it has an OSPF route
   tag value equal to the VPN Route Tag, then that route is ignored.

   If a route is received in a Type 3 LSA, and if it has the DN bit set
   in its Options Field, then the route is ignored.

   Otherwise, there is normal OSPF processing, for the relevant instance
   of OSPF in the PE.

   Next, the PE must examine the corresponding VRF. For every address
   prefix which appears there, the PE must create a VPN-IPv4 route in
   BGP. These routes must have the following attributes:

     - The VPN of Origin Extended Community attribute must uniquely and
       globally identify the OSPF domain, as explained above.







Rosen                                                           [Page 8]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


     - OSPF Route Type Extended Community Attribute. This is encoded as
       follows:

         * Type: 0x8000

         * Area Number: 4 bytes, encoding a 32-bit area number. For AS-
           external routes, the value is 0. A non-zero value identifies
           the route as being internal to the OSPF domain, and as being
           within the identified area. Area numbers are relative to a
           particular OSPF domain.

         * OSPF Route Type: 1 byte, encoded as follows:

             ** 1 or 2 for intra-area routes (depending on whether the
                route came from a type 1 or a type 2 LSA -- however this
                difference is not significant to the procedures
                specified herein)

             ** 3 for summary routes

             ** 5 for external routes (area number must be 0)

             ** 7 for NSSA routes.

         * Options: 1 byte. Currently this is only used if the route
           type is 5 or 7. Setting the least significant bit in the
           field indicates that the route carries a type 2 metric.

     - OSPF Router ID Extended Community. This attribute specifies the
       router-id corresponding to the router that is identified in the
       BGP Next Hop attribute.
         * Type: 0x8001

         * Router ID: 4 Byte

         * Unused: 2 Byte. Must be zero.

       Note that this router-id is an address in the address space of
       the OSPF network (i.e., the address space of the VPN), NOT in the
       address space of the Service Provider network. That is, it must
       be unique only within an OSPF domain.

     - MED. By default, this should be set to the value of the OSPF
       distance associated with the route, plus 1.

       The intention of all this is the following. OSPF Routes from one
       site are converted to BGP, distributed across the VPN backbone,
       and possibly converted back to OSPF routes before being



Rosen                                                           [Page 9]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


       distributed into another site. With these attributes, BGP carries
       enough information about the route to enable the route to be
       converted back into OSPF "transparently", just as if BGP had not
       been involved.

   Routes which a PE receives in type 4 LSAs MUST be  ignored.

   The attributes specified above are in addition to any other
   attributes which routes must carry in accord with the [VPN].

   The Site of Origin attribute, which is usually required by [VPN], is
   OPTIONAL for routes which a PE learns from a CE via OSPF.

   Use of the Site of Origin attribute would, in the case of a multiply
   homed site (i.e., a site attached to several PE routers), prevent an
   intra-site route from being reinjected into a site from the VPN
   backbone. Such a reinjection would not harm the routing, because the
   route via the VPN backbone would be advertised in a type 3 LSA, and
   hence would appear to be an inter-area route; the real intra-area
   route would be preferred. But unnecessary overhead would be
   introduced. On the other hand, if the Site of Origin attribute is not
   used, a partitioned site will find itself automatically repaired,
   since traffic from one partition to the other will automatically
   travel via the VPN backbone. Therefore the use of a Site of Origin
   attribute is optional, so that a trade-off can be made between the
   cost of the increased overhead and the value of automatic partition
   repair.


4.2.3. Automatic creation of sham links

   Suppose that the PE is attached to a CE which is in OSPF domain D,
   and that the PE/CE link is in OSPF area n.

   Suppose the PE receives a labeled VPN-IPv4 route via BGP, whose Route
   Target attribute allows the route to be installed in the PE's VRF for
   OSPF domain D.

   Suppose that all of the following conditions hold:

     - either the route has no Site of Origin attribute, or the route's
       Site of Origin attribute is not the same as the Site of Origin
       associated with the CE,

     - the route has an OSPF route type whose area number is the same as
       the area number of the PE/CE link (i.e., area n),





Rosen                                                          [Page 10]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


     - the route has an OSPF Router ID attribute.

   Then the PE will create a type 1 LSA, describing a link between
   itself (i.e., its own OSPF router id for its instance of OSPF in OSPF
   domain D) and the router id which is the value of that attribute.
   This link (call it a "sham link") is considered to be in area n. It
   is incorporated in the PE's link state database for the area, and
   flooded to the CE. (Of course, if this LSA already exists, a new one
   is not created.)

   Sham links may be created for any area, including area 0.  If it is
   known that there are no backdoor links in a particular, it may be
   desirable to disable the creation of sham links for that area,
   especially if that area is area 0.

   If, due to BGP withdrawals, there are no longer any received BGP
   routes for which the above conditions hold, the sham link is removed,
   and the necessary OSPF actions taken. Similarly, the sham link must
   be removed if a PE finds that the other endpoint is unreachable,
   according to the routing algorithm of the VPN backbone network.

   The OSPF metric associated with a sham link must be configurable (and
   there must be a configurable default). Even though LSAs are not
   flooded on the link, as long as there is an OSPF "backdoor
   connection" between the VPN sites, LSAs from one site will flow to
   the other.  Whether traffic between the sites flows via the backdoor
   link or via the VPN backbone depends on the settings of the OSPF link
   metrics.  The metrics can be set so that the backdoor link is not
   used unless connectivity via the VPN backbone fails, for example.

   PEs SHOULD NOT flood LSAs on a sham link.

   When the Site of Origin attribute is used, if two PEs are attached to
   the same VPN site (as identified by the Site of Origin attribute), a
   sham link is NOT created between them.

   Note that a BGP route which is determined to be an intra-area route
   is never redistributed into OSPF. Instead, the sham link is created
   and advertised, and normal OSPF procedures will find the intra-area
   route.

   This assumes that if an area spans two or more sites, there is at
   least one site which exports at least one route to each other site,
   and which imports at least one route from each other site. This will
   cause the creation of sufficient bidirectional sham links to provide
   full OSPF intra-area connectivity.

   In a two-site OSPF area, as long as the backdoor link is up, OSPF



Rosen                                                          [Page 11]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


   will cause the VRF to be populated with intra-area routes, and the
   corresponding BGP routes will not be installed in the VRF. Note that
   the route via a sham link is an intra-area route, and may be
   preferred by OSPF to the route that uses the backdoor link.  If the
   backdoor link fails, OSPF will remove these intra-area routes.
   Inter-site routes from BGP will then be installed in the VRF, and
   reported to the CE in type 3 LSAs.  (If the preferred intra-area
   route were using the sham link rather than the backdoor link, failure
   of the backdoor link may not cause any change in the route taken the
   packets, even though that route may cease to be an intra-area route
   and become instead an inter-area route.)

   If a particular LSA has been issued by the PE router in order to
   distribute a particular BGP route, and the BGP route is later
   withdrawn, the corresponding LSA MUST be flushed.


4.2.4. VPN-IP routes received via BGP

   This section describes how the PE router handles VPN-IP routes
   received via BGP.

   If a received BGP VPN-IP route is not installed in the VRF, nothing
   is reported to the CE. A received route will not be installed into
   the VRF if some other route is preferable. (Note that a route which
   is not installed in the VRF may still cause the PE to create an OSPF
   link to another PE as specified in the previous section.)

   Note that according to the usual OSPF route preference rules, intra-
   area routes, as computed by the OSPF, will be installed in the VRF in
   preference to any other routes received over BGP. This means that the
   CE will simply not hear about inter-area or external routes to
   address prefixes for which there is an intra-area route.

   In the following, we specify what is reported, in OSPF LSAs, by the
   PE to the CE, assuming that the PE is not configured to do any
   further summarization or filtering of the routing information before
   reporting it to the CE.

   If ONE of the following conditions holds for a given route that is
   received via BGP:

     - the route does not have a VPN of Origin attribute (identifying
       the OSPF domain), or







Rosen                                                          [Page 12]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


     - the route's VPN of Origin attribute has a value which is not the
       same as that associated with the VRF, or

     - the route has no OSPF Route Type attribute

   then the route MUST be distributed to the CE in a type 5 LSA with a
   type 2 metric. By default, the MED, if present, is converted to a
   type 2 metric. If the MED is not present, a default type 2 metric
   value is used.

   Otherwise, if the route has an OSPF route type of external route, it
   MUST be advertised to the CE in a type 5 LSA. By default, the MED, if
   present, is converted to a type 1 or type 2 metric, as determined by
   the external route property of the VPN-IPv4 route.  If no MED is
   present, a default type 2 metric value is used.

   Whenever a type 5 LSA is originated by a PE router and sent to a CE
   router, the VPN Route Tag MUST be placed in the LSA.

   Otherwise, if the route has an OSPF route type of "summary route",
   the route should be treated as if it had been received in an OSPF
   type 3 LSA. This means that the PE will report the route in a type 3
   LSA to the CE. The DN bit is set in this LSA.  (Note that this case
   is possible even if the VPN-IP route carries an area number identical
   to that of the CE router.  This means that if an area is
   "partitioned" such that the two pieces are connected only via the VPN
   backbone, it appears to be two areas, with inter-area routes between
   them.)

   Whenever the PE sends the CE a type 5 LSA, it MUST also create a type
   4 LSA for itself, presenting itself as an ASBR.  a Note that this way
   of handling AS-external routes makes every PE appear to be an ASBR
   attached to all the AS-external routes. In a multihomed site, this
   can result in a number of type 5 LSAs containing the same
   information.


5. Acknowledgments

   Significant contributions to this work have been made by Derek Yeung
   and Yakov Rekhter.

   Thanks to Ross Callon for his comments.








Rosen                                                          [Page 13]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-vpns-ospf-bgp-mpls-00.txt         July 2000


6. Authors' Address


   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   250 Apollo Drive
   Chelmsford, MA, 01824

   E-mail: erosen@cisco.com



7. Bibliography

   [EXT] "BGP Extended Communities Attribute", draft-ramachandra-bgp-
   ext-communities-04.txt, Ramachandra, S. and Tappan, D.  May, 2000.

   [OSPF] "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, Moy, J., April 1998.

   [VPN] "BGP/MPLS VPNs", draft-rosen-rfc2547bis-01.txt, Rosen, E., et.
   al., May 2000.






























Rosen                                                          [Page 14]
