Network Working Group                                        A. Hathcock
Internet-Draft                                                 J. Merkel
Intended Status: Informational                        Alt-N Technologies
Expires: September 6, 2007                                 March 6, 2007


              The Minger Email Address Verification Protocol
                       draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes the Minger protocol.  Minger is a protocol 
   for determining whether an email address exists and, optionally, 
   retrieving some information about the user of that address.  It
   includes security in the form of a username/hashed password but can
   also be used anonymously if desired.
 
Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  The problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  The solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The Minger protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1  The Minger query process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2  Description of query elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Minger responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5  
     3.1  Description of response elements  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2  Example responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Anonymous mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9  
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 11


































Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


1. Introduction

1.1 The problem

   It is common for elements within a typical email handling topology 
   to be unaware of whether individual local-parts are valid for the   
   mail it accepts.  For example, so-called "edge" servers which provide 
   security oriented services for downstream mail handling elements 
   often do not have an exhaustive listing of all valid local-parts for 
   a given domain.  Thus, they are sometimes forced to accept messages 
   which might otherwise be rejected as "user unknown".  Similarly, 
   entities offering "backup MX" mail services are rarely privy to a 
   complete local-part listing and are therefore forced to accept 
   messages which might otherwise be rejected.  Finally, even within a 
   common administrative framework of several locally maintained and 
   controlled SMTP servers in a load balanced configuration, it is not
   always possible for all servers to access a common local-part 
   database.

1.2 Existing solutions

   The need to determine whether an email address contains a valid local
   part has lead to the use of at least two existing mechanisms - Finger 
   [RFC1288] and SMTP "call-back" / "call-forward".  

   Finger [RFC1288] describes a protocol for the exchange of user 
   information.  In theory, Finger could be used to determine whether an 
   account exists by careful examination of the results of a Finger 
   query.  However, Finger suffers from a lack of security which makes 
   its modern day use problematic.  For example, it is possible for 
   attackers to obtain information about the users of an email system 
   which they can then sell or use as targets for spam and viruses.  
   Also, Finger requires the use of TCP rather than UDP which seems ill  
   suited to a simple verification scheme.

   SMTP "call-back" and "call-forward" are terms describing a widespread 
   practice whereby SMTP servers place an incoming SMTP session on hold 
   while they attempt to use an outbound SMTP session to determine 
   whether or not a given email address is valid.  The theory behind this 
   is as follows:  if an SMTP server responds positively to an SMTP RCPT 
   or MAIL command [RFC2821] with a given email address then this 
   potentially means that the address local part is valid.  One problem 
   with such a scheme is the lack of efficiency inherent in the need to 
   tear-up and tear-down an SMTP session over TCP.  Also, because these 
   types of SMTP sessions are not purposed to deliver mail, they 
   typically drop connection after the RCPT command is processed.  This 


Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


   leads to a large number of SMTP sessions which appear in logs to have 
   simply failed for no reason.

   SMTP includes a VRFY command which can be used to determine whether
   an email address exits.  It is routinely disabled for the same
   reasons described above in the discussion on Finger.

1.3 The solution

   What's needed is a UDP based protocol which is secure, has little 
   overhead, and can be easily invoked to determine whether a given 
   email address is valid or not.  Minger fulfills this need.

2. The Minger protocol
 
   Minger is a UDP protocol that operates on port 4069.

   Syntax descriptions use the form described in Augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form for Syntax Specifications (ABNF) [RFC4234].

2.1 The Minger query process

   A Minger client constructs a query string comprised of either two or 
   four elements and transmits it over UDP to a Minger server.  The 
   format of the query is as follows:

  ABNF:

   Query-string = id SP mailbox [SP credentials]

   id = 1*50(VCHAR)                  ; used to match a query to a 
                                     ; response

   mailbox = Local-part "@" Domain   ; as defined in [RFC2821]

   credentials = username SP digest  ; authentication credentials 

   username = 1*50(VCHAR)            ; username credential

   password = 1*50(VCHAR)            ; password credential

   digest-text = username ":" password ; input text for digest

   digest = base64                   ; digest for security
                                     ; base64 defined in [RFC1734]



Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 4]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


2.2 Description of query elements

   id   

      This is an identifier assigned by the program that generates the 
      query.  This same value will be echoed back in the response 
      returned by the Minger server and can therefore be used to match 
      a response to the proper query.

   mailbox  
       
      This is the email address for which verification of 
      existence is desired. 

   credentials 

      These values are pre-arranged elements determined and 
      configured in advance so that Minger servers provide service only 
      to authorized clients.  When not provided, Minger is operating in 
      anonymous mode.

   digest 

     This is the base64 encoding of the MD5 [RFC1321] hash of
     Digest-text.  Digest-text is constructed, the MD5 hash of that
     is computed, and that result is base64 encoded.

3. Minger responses

   Minger servers return responses in a simple XML format.  The XML
   format returned by the Minger server has certain required elements 
   but can include additional optional elements as desired by particular 
   implementations.

[W3C-XML] DTD:

   <!DOCTYPE MingerResponse [
   <!ELEMENT MingerResponse (name?, email?)>
   <!ATTLIST MingerResponse
        id CDATA #REQUIRED
        status DIGIT #REQUIRED>
   <!ELEMENT name CDATA>
   <!ELEMENT email CDATA>
   ]>




Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 5]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


3.1 Description of response elements
   
   id
   
      Queries submit an identifier.  That value is copied into the
      id field within responses.  This allows clients to match up
      responses to the proper queries.

   status

      The following status codes are defined:

      0 - invalid request (for example, malformed query string)
      1 - access denied (for example, query from unauthorized IP)
      2 - bad or missing credentials (returned when anonymous
          mode is disabled and no credentials were provided in the 
          query string or when the credentials themselves are 
          invalid)
      3 - email address does not exist
      4 - email address exists but can not receive mail (for example, 
          the account associated with the email address has exceeded
          local storage constraints or it is otherwise disabled due 
          to local policy)
      5 - email address exists and is active (able to receive mail)

   name and email

      Optional full name and email address associated with the query
      result.  The value returned in the "email" element might differ
      from the email address used in the actual query itself.  For
      example, if the query specifies an email address alias then the 
      minger result might contain the actual email address in the 
      "email" element.

  Note: Minger servers MAY supply one or more additional XML elements
      to provide additional data not specified by this document.

3.2 Example responses

   Minger response returned when the queried email address does 
   not exist:

      <MingerResponse id="12345" status="3"/>
    
  



Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 6]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


   Minger response returned for invalid credentials:

      <MingerResponse id="543" status="2"/>
   
   Minger response returned when the queried email address exists: 

      <MingerResponse id="ab12fg" status="5"/>
      
   Minger response returning optional name and email elements:

      <MingerResponse id="lkj234" status="5">
      <name>Arvel Hathcock</name>
      <email>arvel@altn.com</email>
      </MingerResponse>

4. Anonymous mode

   Minger clients MAY attempt anonymous queries; that is, queries which 
   do not contain authentication credentials within the query string.  
   Minger servers SHOULD respond to anonymous queries in the same way 
   they respond to authenticated queries.  However, Minger servers MAY 
   be configured to refuse anonymous queries.  If so, they MUST respond
   with a status of "2".  Additionally, Minger servers MAY respond to 
   anonymous queries with a sub-set or none of any optional user data
   that may otherwise be provided.  























Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 7]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


5. Security Considerations

   Minger is used to obtain information about the validity of an email 
   address.  It may also be used to retrieve additional implementation 
   specific data about the user of an email address.  Minger also
   supports an anonymous mode concept in which use of authentication
   credentials is not required.  Extreme care must therefore be taken
   to ensure that sensitive data is not transmitted unless appropriate. 
   To reduce the likelihood of abuse, Minger servers should require
   authentication and secure access with IP-based ACLs.

   With using authentication credentials, the original password is
   safe because only a hash is sent.  However, since the hash does 
   not depend on the message, it is subject to replay abuse.

6. IANA Considerations

   IANA has assigned tcp & upd port 4069 for Minger. 






























Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 8]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


7. Informative References

   [RFC1288]  Zimmerman, D., "The Finger User Information Protocol",
              RFC 1288, December 1991.

   [RFC1734]  Myers, J., "POP3 Authentication Command", RFC 1734, 
              December 1994.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., Editor, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC
              2821, March 2001.

   [RFC4234]  Crocker, D., Ed. And P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC1321]  Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message Digest Algorithm", RFC 1321, 
              MIT Laboratory for Computer Science and RSA Data Security, 
              Inc., April 1992.

   [W3C-XML]  Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, C. and E. Maler,
              "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (2nd ed)", W3C 
              REC-xml, October 2000, <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml>.
























Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 9]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   We wish to thank the members of the MDaemon Beta Community 
   (md-beta-subscribe@altn.com) for their ideas and help.

Authors' Addresses

   Arvel Hathcock
   Alt-N Technologies 
   http://www.altn.com

   Email: arvel.hathcock@altn.com


   Jonathan Merkel
   Alt-N Technologies
   http://www.altn.com

   Email: jon.merkel@altn.com





























Hathcock                Expires September 26, 2007             [Page 10]


Internet-Draft          draft-hathcock-minger-01.txt          March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).



Hathcock                Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 11]



