



Network Working Group                                      J. Hildebrand
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                P. McManus
Expires: May 14, 2015                                            Mozilla
                                                       November 10, 2014


       Erosion of the moral authority of transparent middleboxes
                 draft-hildebrand-middlebox-erosion-01

Abstract

   Many middleboxes on the Internet attempt to add value to the
   connections that traverse that point on the network.  Problems in
   their implementations erode the moral authority that otherwise might
   accrue to the legitimate value that they add.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 14, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Hildebrand & McManus      Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                     November 2014


1.  Introduction

   There are several middlebox use cases that typically stand in the way
   of better encryption helping to mitigate perpass-style attacks.

   o  Local caching

   o  Enterprise policy controls, including Data Loss Prevention (DLP)
      and monitoring for acceptable use

   o  Service provider acceleration of mobile data

   o  Network management and quality of service routing

   o  Authorization and billing of network services

   These use cases may cause third parties to an otherwise end-to-end
   conversation to have legitimate legal and moral rights that grant
   them participation in the conversation.  This document discusses
   several reasons why the legitimacy of these use cases is undermined
   in the minds of some who build other products for the Internet.

2.  Similarity to attacks

   Some middlebox capabilities are currently implemented using the same
   mechanisms employed by attackers, including passive capturing of
   plaintext data, active impersonation, and denial of service.
   Further, some services are legitimate in one context but illegitimate
   in another - and the transparent nature of the middleboxes creates
   security problems separating those problem domains.

   It is difficult to design protocols that simultaneously prevent a
   given vulnerability and simultaneously selectively allow legitimate
   access, and arguments that particular attacks cannot therefore be
   mitigated are greeted by end-users with skepticism - particularly
   when the benefit added by the middlebox does not accrue directly to
   those users.

3.  Unintentional breakage

   The experiences of living with a wide variety of middleboxes in the
   real world lead developers to realize that they all have defects that
   go years without being addressed.  Even when the vendor fixes a given
   bug, software is updated so infrequently at this layer that often the
   bug must just be worked around.

   Developers that have to add multiple special cases to their products
   as they discover every new way to incorrectly implement what they



Hildebrand & McManus      Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                     November 2014


   previously thought were simple protocols often overreact by using
   protocols that are harder to manage, have worse security properties,
   or perform poorly.

   Even middleboxes that are operating correctly become design
   constraints that inhibit end to end innovation because of their
   centralized model.  A middlebox that inserts itself into all web
   traffic on a network but only speaks HTTP/1.1 will not allow the
   evolution of any device on that network beyond that state.

4.  Support cost appropriation

   When a middlebox subtly fails, end users never call the entity that
   deployed the middlebox, much less the vendor that built that box.
   Indeed, the nature of a transparent middlebox makes it very difficult
   to even diagnose the error for a professional.  Instead, they file a
   support request with the services that they are trying to access.

   The team that developed that service typically spends many hours
   finally tracking down the issue, only to finally find the problem
   with the middlebox.  The original end user never has the authority to
   fix the middlebox or even opt out of using it.  Instead they demand
   the service owner work around the problem.  The service implementor
   may not have any more control than the end user, so too often the
   result is that new technologies have to be abandoned because they are
   not backwards compatible with middlebox infrastructure that neither
   the end user nor service operator has direct control over.  This
   dynamic holds back Internet evolution.

   When the costs associated with broken behavior are not paid by the
   developers of that behavior, it is easy for those developers to
   assume that everyone is happy with their product.

5.  Other monetary incentives

   Developers of new services will often try to make their network
   traffic as similar as possible to an existing essential service.
   This approach maximizes the chances that they will be able to develop
   a user base, however it can stress middleboxes beyond their design
   constraints causing them to fail in new ways.

   When middlebox developers bring about their own downfall by pushing
   application providers outside of natural design patterns, they do not
   impress the community with their desire to be trustable elements of
   the Internet architecture.

6.  Conclusions




Hildebrand & McManus      Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                     November 2014


   When the moral authority of middleboxes is eroded, arguments by their
   developers to allow unfettered access to the plaintext of traffic
   that traverses those boxes may be called into question.

   As an industry, we should look for other mechanisms to provide
   legitimate third-party value.  Explicitly addressed intermediaries
   offer an alternative to transparent middleboxes.  Addressing the
   harder problems of service discovery and authorization would make
   these services more effective, robust, and secure than their existing
   middlebox counterparts.

7.  References

Authors' Addresses

   Joe Hildebrand
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: jhildebr@cisco.com


   Patrick McManus
   Mozilla

   Email: pmcmanus@mozilla.com


























Hildebrand & McManus      Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 4]
