
Network Working Group                         Luc Ceuppens (Chromisys)
Internet Draft                              Dan Blumenthal (Chromisys)
Expiration Date: September 2000                 John Drake (Chromisys)
                                     Jacek Chrostowski (Cisco Systems)
                                       W.L. Edwards (iLambda Networks)
 
 
              Performance Monitoring in Photonic Networks 
                         in support of MPL(ambda)S 
    
                    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 
    
1. Abstract 
    
   Realizing the important role that photonic switches can play in 
   data-centric networks, work has been going on within the IETF to 
   combine the control plane of MPLS (more specifically traffic 
   engineering) with the point-and-click provisioning capabilities of 
   photonic switches [1]. This document outlines a proposal to expand 
   this initiative to include DWDM, OADM and ATM systems. It also 
   proposes to expand the work beyond simple establishment of optical 
   paths and include optical performance monitoring and management. The 
   combined path routing and performance information that will be 
   carried and shared between these network elements will allow the 
   elements or element management system (EMS) to adequately assess the 
   "health" of an optical path (which can be a wavelength or fiber 
   strand). The routers and/or ATM switches at the edges of the 
   photonic network will then use this information to dynamically 
   manage the millions of wavelengths available in the photonic layer.  
    
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 1] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
2. Introduction 
    
   Over the last two years, DWDM has proven to be a cost-effective 
   means of increasing the bandwidth of installed fiber plant. While 
   the technology originally only served to increase the size of the 
   fiber spans, it is quickly becoming the foundation for networks that 
   will offer customers a new class of high-bandwidth and broadband 
   capabilities.  
     
   Sales of DWDM systems will reach $6 billion in North America by the 
   end of 2000. This roughly translates into tens of thousands of 
   wavelengths deployed within optical networks, either as point-to-
   point connections or in ring topologies. In addition, several 
   millions of wavelengths are projected to be deployed in enterprise, 
   metropolitan, regional, and long haul networks by 2007 in the United 
   States alone.  
    
   These wavelengths will require routing, add/drop, and protection 
   functions, which can only be achieved through the implementation of 
   network-wide management and monitoring capabilities. Current-
   generation DWDM networks are monitored, managed and protected within 
   the digital domain, using SONET and its associated support systems. 
   However, to leverage the full potential of wavelength-based 
   networking, the provisioning, switching, management and monitoring 
   functions have to move from the digital to the optical domain. 
   Efficiently managing (i.e., adding, dropping, routing, protecting, 
   and restoring) the growing number of traffic-bearing wavelengths can 
   only be achieved through a new breed of optical networking element. 
   This network element is the photonic switch*. 
    
   Photonic switching is the next logical step in a long history of 
   switching technology that started with manual "plug board" 
   operators, evolved to mechanical crossbar and finally digital 
   switching. Photonic switching will enable transparent photonic 
   networks. Photonic networks will greatly simplify the architecture 
   of both the network and the network nodes by establishing end-to-end 
   optical paths across the network. An end-to-end photonic path 
   behaves as a transparent$  "clear channel", so that there is 
   virtually nothing in the path to limit the throughput of the fibers. 
                     

*  Photonic switches are often referred to as optical cross-connects 
  (OXC). However, today's OXCs are based on electrical rather than 
  photonic switching fabrics, and therefore do not demonstrate the 
  optical transparency required to grow photonic networks in the 
  future. We use the term photonic switch to distinguish these classes. 
$ Transparency implies that signals with any type of modulation schemes 
  (analog or digital), any bit rate, and any type of format can be 
  superimposed and transmitted without interfering with one another, 
  and without their information being modified within the network. 
  Opaque networks do not have this property. 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 2] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   A transparent channel essentially behaves like an ideal 
   communications with almost no noise and very large bandwidth. 
   Secondly, as the nodes in a photonic network have essentially no 
   data processing to do, they can be made extremely simple and hence 
   very cheap. Finally, optical node simplicity also means simplicity 
   of control and management. 
    
   Without any doubt, the next revolution in the telecommunications 
   industry will occur within the optical domain. Now that the basic 
   components are available to build photonic networks, the most 
   important innovations will come from adding intelligence that 
   enables the interworking of all the network elements (Routers, ATM 
   switches, DWDM transmission systems and photonic switches). This new 
   photonic internetwork will make it possible to provision high 
   bandwidth in seconds, turning the new optical technology into a 
   revenue spinner for the service provider rather than just a way of 
   saving money. 
    
   However, the intelligent open photonic network can only be built if 
   the currently vertically layered network migrates to a horizontal 
   model where all network elements work as peers to dynamically 
   establish optical paths through the network. The IETF has already 
   addressed the interworking of routers and optical switches through 
   the MPL(amda)S initiative [1]. We propose to expand this initiative 
   to include DWDM systems and ATM systems. We also propose to expand 
   the work beyond simple establishment of optical paths and include 
   optical performance monitoring and management. The combined 
   information that will be carried and shared between these network 
   elements will allow the elements or element management system (EMS) 
   to adequately assess the "health" of an optical path (which can be a 
   wavelength or fiber strand). The routers and/or ATM switches at the 
   edges of the photonic network will then use this information to 
   dynamically manage the millions of wavelengths available in the 
   photonic layer. 
    
    
   As a summary, the following functions need to be covered 
    
   1. Dynamic Bandwidth Provisioning 
   2. Optical Performance Monitoring 
   3. Signaling for 1 and 2. 
    
   The remainder of this document discusses these functions into more 
   detail. 








 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 3] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
3. Dynamic bandwidth provisioning 
    
   As indicated above, the photonic network uses photonic switches and 
   optical transmission equipment to provide point-to-point connections 
   to attached internetworking devices. These connections will 
   typically take the shape of dedicated wavelengths, but can also be 
   SONET leased line services or gigabit Ethernet connections. While 
   the photonic network will typically provide these bandwidth services 
   to IP routers, the model should be extended to include ATM switches. 
    
   While the idea of bandwidth-on-demand is certainly not new, existing 
   networks do not support instantaneous service provisioning. Current 
   provisioning of bandwidth is painstakingly static. Activation of 
   large pipes of bandwidth takes anything from weeks to months. 
    
   The imminent introduction of photonic switches in the transport 
   networks opens new perspectives. Combining the bandwidth 
   provisioning capabilities of photonic switches with the traffic 
   engineering capabilities of MPLS [2], will allow routers and ATM 
   switches to request bandwidth where and when they need it. 
    
   To make this work, however, requires more than simply advertising 
   the availability of routes by the photonic switches to the routers 
   and/or switches. They will also need to provide information about 
   the characteristics and performance of the paths. Adequately 
   assessing the status and health of an optical path through the 
   photonic network requires a detailed cooperation between the 
   photonic switches and the transmission systems providing the basic 
   transport capabilities in the long-haul network. 
    
    
4. Performance Monitoring 
    
   Service providers to date have limited the role of DWDM in the 
   network to creating "virtual fiber", i.e., the straightforward 
   increase in capacity of the fiber plant, even if this meant a 
   dramatic increase in complexity since each virtual fiber required 
   the deployment of its own SONET equipment. The reason behind this 
   restricted role is the worry about network management, alarm 
   monitoring and protection capabilities of DWDM systems and the 
   photonic layer in general. 
    
   Current performance monitoring in optical networks requires 
   termination of a channel (wavelength) at an OEO (optical-electrical-
   optical conversion) point to detect bits related to BER of the 
   payload or frame (e.g., SONET LTE monitoring). For example, one form 
   of error checking can be carried out at the SONET level by 
   monitoring the B1 and J0 overhead bytes of the SONET stream. 
   However, while these bits indicate if errors have been received, 
   they do not supply channel-performance data. This makes it very 
   difficult to assess the actual cause of the degraded performance. 
    
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 4] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   The premise of photonic networks requires the availability of tools 
   to measure and control the smallest granular component of such 
   networks --the wavelength channel. These functions include the 
   monitoring of amplifiers and switches at add/drop sites, the 
   deployment and commissioning of DWDM routes, as well as the 
   restoration and protection of networks. This must be accomplished 
   with speed and accuracy over an extended period of time.  
    
   Fast and accurate determination of the various performance measures 
   of a wavelength channel implies that measurements have to be done 
   while leaving it in optical format. In the remainder of this 
   document we will refer to this as "optical performance monitoring" 
   (OPM). One possible way of achieving this is by tapping a portion of 
   the optical power from the main channel using a low loss tap of 
   about 1%.  In this scenario, the most basic form of OPM will utilize 
   a power-averaging receiver to detect loss of signal (LOS) at the 
   optical power tap point. Existing DWDM systems use OTDRs (Optical 
   time-domain reflectometers) to measure the parameters of the optical 
   links.  
 
   As photonic networks mature, it will be desirable to generate a more 
   detailed picture of the channel "health" in a manner that can be 
   communicated to the EMS and other network control entities, as well 
   as between other network elements. By monitoring various OPM 
   parameters, one can attempt to estimate the BER, detect gradual or 
   sudden performance degradation, and report these to local or global 
   NMS entities, and to attached internetworking devices. Also, fiber 
   spans are typically characterized, or calibrated, during the 
   provisioning process on DWDM systems, as fiber manufacturer, fiber 
   type etc. all have a bearing on how the various DWDM spectrums 
   should be populated. It would be useful to have the calibrated data 
   for each fiber span available as part of the overall information on 
   the photonic layer. All the available information can then be 
   correlated across the network to make decisions on fault isolation 
   and take appropriate actions such as rerouting the connection or 
   adaptively downgrading or upgrading the bit-rate of a channel.  
    
   When deploying an optical network it is common practice to document 
   the baseline for all operating parameters, such as signal power, 
   bit-error rate, OSNR, etc., prior to network turn-on. During normal 
   operation, network elements equipped with OPM capabilities can 
   report any degradation events of the optical channel to the network 
   operations center (NOC) and to the other network elements. The 
   element management system (EMS) can document the degradation of the 
   photonic layer in time by saving optical performance monitoring data 
   in an archival database. As channels are added, removed or rerouted, 
   the NOC can continuously monitor and analyze the status as channels 
   are dynamically managed. 
     
   With the advent of an open photonic network, we can envision a trend 
   of leasing channels or wavelengths that span multiple networks. This 
   will require optical interconnects between various networks. 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 5] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   Invariably, as channels are handed off between carriers, problems 
   can occur which require monitoring to resolve conflicts. Most of 
   these issues occur at network boundaries. In addition, if service 
   providers offer various levels of QoS, both networks will have a way 
   of negotiating the end-to-end QoS of the channels and both service 
   providers will need a way to ensure that the other party lives up to 
   the service contract. Here again, independent monitoring is needed 
   to ensure quality and continuity of service. 
    
   The issue of effective OPM sensitivity will impact how pervasive 
   each technique is used in a network due to cost and complexity. 
   Certain techniques may require an optical amplifier at the tap point 
   resulting in OPM module sensitivity equivalent to that of the final 
   path termination point. Other issues that need to be addressed 
   include definition of OPM at the section, line and path levels. 
   Since monitoring can be in principal performed at any point within 
   the network, traditional use of LTE points does not carry over. 
    
   Another problem related to transparency lies in determining the 
   threshold values for the various parameters at which alarms must be 
   declared. Very often these values depend on the bit rate on the 
   channel and should ideally be set depending on the bit rate. 
   However, in a truly transparent network, one may have to set alarms 
   to correspond to the highest possible bit rate that can be present 
   on a channel. In addition, since a signal is not terminated at an 
   intermediate node, if a wavelength fails, all nodes along the path 
   downstream of the failed wavelength could trigger an alarm. This can 
   lead to a large number of alarms for a single failure, and makes it 
   somewhat more complicated to determine the cause of the alarm (alarm 
   correlation). 
    
   We see as potential candidates, the following OPM functions: 
    
   1. Dispersion (chromatic and polarization mode):  
      The distortion or spreading of bits due to variations in 
      propagation velocity of different wavelengths and polarization 
      modes in the fiber and other network elements. 
    
   2. Optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR):  
      The ratio of optical power in a primary data channel to the power 
      in optical background noise accumulated during transmission and 
      switching. This ratio is usually specified within some optical 
      bandwidth of a receiver filter. The OSNR of a channel at the 
      destination receiver will set the limit of the final detected SNR.  
    
   3. Bit-rate  
      The data rate of the channel in a transparent system will be 
      necessary to make decisions on other performance metrics. 
    
   4. Q-Factor  
      A measure of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) assuming Gaussian 
      noise statistics. 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 6] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
      
   5. Wavelength registration  
      The determination of which wavelengths are present on a given 
      fiber.  
 
   6. Wavelength selective component drift  
      The drift of a laser, filter, mux or other wavelength selective 
      component relative to the ITU grid. 
    
   7. Optical cross talk 
      Two types of cross talk are of interest, in-band and out-of-band. 
      In-band cross talk is seen as at the same wavelength as the 
      primary channel and appears as cross talk in the electronic 
      domain. Out-of-band cross talk appears as a different wavelength 
      in the presence of the primary wavelength and appears as cross 
      talk in the optical domain. 
    
   8. Optical power transients  
      Changes in the optical powers that are not due to normal bit 
      transitions. May be due to optical amplifier gain transients or 
      other transient non-linearity in the system. 
    
   9. Bit-error-rate 
      In a SONET environment BER can be directly measured on the channel 
      using means to look at bits within the data stream. However, in a 
      purely photonic network there will typically not be access to the 
      data streams carried over the channel. However, by interpreting 
      the other optical parameters, the system should be able to 
      estimate the BER with relatively good accuracy, as well as 
      guarantee bit error rate performance to the users of the channel. 
    
   10.Jitter 
      Random fluctuations in the location of rising and falling edges of 
      bits relative to a local or recovered clock reference. As line 
      speeds continue to increase, jitter will become a critical 
      performance parameter. 
    
   11.Insertion loss 
      Indicates the input to output loss of a network element. When 
      examining excessive power loss along the path of a channel the 
      ability to measure insertion loss of individual network elements 
      is very useful, specifically when compared against an archival 
      database. 
    
   12.Optical power level 
    
 
   In addition to verifying the service level provided by the network 
   to the user, performance monitoring is also necessary to ensure that 
   the users of the network comply with the requirements that were 
   negotiated between them and the network operator. For example, one 
   function may be to monitor the wavelength and power levels of 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 7] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   signals being input to the network to ensure that they meet the 
   requirements imposed by the network. 
    
   To make any Performance Measurement metrics meaningful, major effort 
   should be on conducting serious testing to draw correlation between 
   the proposed Optical measurement metrics with the quality of the 
   signals (electrical). 
    
    
5. Signaling 
    
   The vast majority of existing communications networks uses framing 
   and data formatting overhead as the means to communicate between 
   network elements and management systems.  
    
   It is clear however, that truly transparent and open photonic 
   networks can only be built with transparent signaling support. 
   Arguments in favor of transparency include, but are certainly not 
   limited to: 
    
   - Framing and formatting makes the network opaque and as such 
     inhibits the creation of bit rate and protocol transparent 
     networks. As overhead information is processed in the digital 
     domain, it requires an optical-to-electrical and electrical-to-
     optical conversion at every point in the network where traffic is 
     inserted or dropped and at each point where management and 
     monitoring is required. This imposes severe limitations and is 
     probably the single biggest inhibitor of growth in current optical 
     networks. That is why "digital wrappers" are not a viable 
     solution. In fact, an all-optical network using digital wrappers 
     is a contradiction in terms! 
    
   - Attached internetworking equipment and customer equipment may not 
     support the framing overheads. 
    
   - In today's optical network (I.e., SONET) the service and 
     infrastructure layer are inseparable. As a result, "optical-
     network-ignorant" protocols such as (ten) gigabit Ethernet, fiber 
     channel or ESCON cannot be transported without being translated to 
     the infrastructure layer. Hence the need for adaptations such as 
     "gigabit Ethernet over SONET", "packet over SONET" etc. 
    
   In contrast, separate control plane techniques# supports flexible 
   control and management of multi-vendor networks and will pave the 
   way for truly open and transparent photonic networks.  
    
                     
#  There may be instances where some "embedded" wavelength routing 
   information is required. One such instance is in existing networks 
   where DWDM junctions are "hard-wired" and the end-to-end path may 
   consist of different wavelengths. 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 8] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   As already mentioned, the approach proposed by the MPLS/TE [1] task 
   force of IETF propose to combine recent advances in MPLS traffic 
   engineering control plane with emerging photonic switching 
   technology to provide a framework for real-time provisioning of 
   optical channels and allow the use of uniform semantics for network 
   management operations control in hybrid networks consisting of 
   photonic switches and label switching routers (LSRs). While the 
   proposed approach is particularly advantageous for data-centric 
   optical internetworking systems, it can easily be expanded to 
   include basic transmission services. Similarly, it can be expanded 
   beyond simple bandwidth provisioning to include optical performance 
   monitoring. 
    
   It is worth mentioning that while the signaling is used to 
   communicate all monitoring results, the monitoring itself is done on 
   the actual data channel, or some range of bandwidth around the 
   channel. Therefore, all network elements must be guaranteed to pass 
   this bandwidth in order for monitoring to happen at any point in the 
   network. 
    
   Several signaling flows have to be supported: 
    
   - between the internetworking equipment and the photonic cross-
     connect 
   - between the photonic cross-connect and the DWDM transmission 
     systems 
   - between the DWDM systems and optical amplifiers 
   - between the DWDM systems and optical add/drop multiplexers 
   - between the internetworking devices and optical add/drop 
     multiplexers or DWDM transmission systems (if this connection does 
     not run through a PXC) 
    
   We propose that the connection signaling be limited to exchanges 
   between the internetworking device and the transmission network 
   element it is directly connected to. This transmission element 
   (e.g., a photonic cross-connect) then interfaces with the DWDM 
   systems (if present) and so forth. This allows for the photonic 
   switches to discover the transmission network topology and 
   characteristics prior to attached devices asking for connections. It 
   also caters for the continued support of any proprietary signaling 
   that may already exist between DWDM and/or other transmission 
   systems (whether in-band or out-of-band). All that is required is 
   support of the standard external signaling interface. 
    
   We also propose these signaling flows be supported on a dedicated 
   wavelength, configured throughout the network. Whether this 
   wavelength is part of the standard ITU grid or not, is beyond the 
   scope of this document. We recommend however, that the signaling 
   wavelength be a standard ITU channel, considering that the 
   combination of existing C-band (1530- to 1560-nm) and the emerging 
   S- (upper 1400-nm region) and L- (1570- to 1625-nm) transmission 
   bands will leave little room for suitable non-ITU wavelengths. 
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                    [Page 9] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
   Since dedicating an entire wavelength might not always be viable, we 
   should envision the possibility of using this wavelength also for 
   data traffic and envisage a way of sending the non-time-critical 
   traffic in between the management traffic. 
    
   The signaling protocol can easily be based on existing protocols. A 
   slightly modified OSPF can be used for optical network topology 
   discovery and distribution, as well as for route computation and 
   path selection. Topology advertisement includes not only the nodes 
   and the links to the nodes, but also characteristics of the links.  
   The actual signaling protocol can be RSVP as extended for MPLS/TE. 
   Finally, path management includes monitoring the path for failures, 
   knowledge of failure restoration policies, and path teardown. 
    
    
6. Summary 
    
   This document outlined a proposal to expand Multi-Protocol Lambda 
   Switching in two areas: 
    
   - Include network elements such as DWDM, OADM and ATM switches to 
     create a versatile transparent and open photonic network. 
   - Expand the work beyond basic connection establishment and include 
     performance-monitoring capabilities 
    
   Work in this area should be closely coordinated with activities in 
   the T1 committee, ITU and OIF to ensure a consistent industry-wide 
   solution.  
 
    
8. Security Considerations 
 
   This document raises no new security issues. 
    
    
9. References
 
   [1] Awduche, D., Y. Rekhter, J. Drake and R. Coltun, "Multi-Protocol 
       Lambda Switching: Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering Control 
       With Optical Crossconnects", work in progress, November 1999. 
    
   [2] Awduche, D., J. Malcolm, J. Agogbua, M. O'Dell and J. McManus, 
       "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", RFC 2702, 
       September 1999. 
    
    
10.Acknowlegdements 
    
   We would like to thank Curtis Brownmiller (MCI WorldCom) for his 
   review and comments. 
    
    
 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                   [Page 10] 

Internet Draft    draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-00.txt        March 2000  
 
11.Author's Addresses 
    
   Luc Ceuppens                      W.L. Edwards 
   Chromisys                         iLambda Networks 
   1012 Stewart Drive                Aspen, CO 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94086               970.948.7104 
   Email: lceuppens@Chromisys.com    Email: texas@ilambda.com 
    
   Dan Blumenthal                    Jacek Chrostowski 
   Chromisys                         Cisco Systems 
   421 Pine Avenue                   365 March Rd 
   Goleta, CA 93117                  Canata, Ontario K2K2C9 
   Email: danb@Chromisys.com         Email: jchrosto@cisco.com 
    
   John Drake 
   Chromisys 
   1012 Stewart Drive 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94086 
   Email: jdrake@Chromisys.com 
 
































 
Ceuppens/Blumenthal et al.                                   [Page 11] 


