

                  MIP6 Working Group                                       G. Giaretta 
                  Internet Draft                                           I. Guardini 
                  Expires: July 2006                                        E. Demaria 
                                                                                 TILab 
                                                                          J. Bournelle 
                                                                               GET/INT 
                                                                              R. Lopez 
                                                                       Univ. of Murcia 
                                                                          January 2006 
                   
                   
                                        Goals for AAA-HA interface 
                                   draft-ietf-mip6-aaa-ha-goals-01.txt 
                   
               Status of this Memo 
                   
                  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
                  any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
                  aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
                  becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
                  BCP 79. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
                  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
                  Drafts. 
                  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
                  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
                  at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
                  reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
                  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
                   
                  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
                   
                  This Internet-Draft will expire on July 27, 2006. 
                   
                  Copyright Notice 
                   
                     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  All Rights Reserved. 
                   
               Abstract 
                   
                  In commercial deployments Mobile IPv6 can be a service offered by a 
                  Mobility Services Provider (MSP). In this case all protocol 
                  operations may need to be explicitly authorized and traced, 
                  requiring the interaction between Mobile IPv6 and the AAA 
                  infrastructure. Integrating the AAA infrastructure offers also a 
                  solution component for Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping in integrated and 
                  split scenarios. 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                  This document describes various scenarios where a AAA interface for 
                  Mobile IPv6 is actually required. Additionally, it lists design 
                  goals and requirements for such an interface. 
                   
               Conventions used in this document 

                  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
                  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
                  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
                   
                   
               Table of Contents 
                   
                  1.   Introduction................................................3 
                  2.   Motivation..................................................4 
                  3.   Bootstrapping scenarios.....................................5 
                     3.1  Split Scenario...........................................5 
                     3.2  Integrated Scenario......................................6 
                  4.   Goals for the AAA-HA interface..............................7 
                     4.1  General goals............................................7 
                     4.2  Service Authorization....................................7 
                     4.3  Accounting...............................................8 
                     4.4  Mobile Node Authentication...............................8 
                     4.5  Provisioning of configuration parameters.................8 
                  5.   IANA Considerations.........................................9 
                  6.   Security Considerations....................................10 
                  7.   Acknowledgment.............................................11 
                  8.   References.................................................12 
                     8.1  Normative References....................................12 
                     8.2  Informative References..................................12 
                  Authors’ Addresses..............................................13 
                   
                   
                   















                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 2] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               1. Introduction 
                   
                  Mobile IPv6 [2] was originally designed as a protocol without any 
                  integration with the AAA infrastructure of the Mobility Service 
                  Provider (MSP) that offers mobility service. Nonetheless, in some 
                  environments it might be desirable to authenticate the user based on 
                  existing credentials stored in the AAA infrastructure, to authorize 
                  protocol operations and to enable accounting. Due to this 
                  requirement, Mobile IPv6 might require the interaction with the AAA 
                  infrastructure. Integrating the AAA infrastructure offers also a 
                  solution component for Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping [3] in split [4] 
                  and integrated [5] scenarios. 
                   
                  This document describes various scenarios where a AAA interface is 
                  required. Additionally, it lists design goals and requirements for 
                  such an interface. 
                   
                  This document only describes requirements, goals and scenarios. It 
                  does not provide solutions.  
                   
                  Notice that this document builds on the security model of the AAA 
                  infrastructure. As such, the end host shares credentials with the 
                  home AAA server and the communication between the  AAA server and 
                  the AAA client can be protected. If the AAA server and the AAA 
                  client are not part of the same administrative domain, then some 
                  sort of contractual relationship between the involved administrative 
                  domains is typically in place in form of roaming agreements. 
                   
                   





















                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 3] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               2. Motivation 
                
                  Mobile IPv6 specification [2] requires that Mobile Nodes (MNs) are 
                  provisioned with a set of configuration parameters, namely the Home 
                  Address and the Home Agent Address, in order to accomplish a home 
                  registration. Moreover MNs and Home Agents (HAs) must share the 
                  cryptographic material needed to protect Mobile IPv6 signaling (e.g. 
                  shared keys or certificates to setup IPsec security associations).    
                   
                  One approach is to statically provision the necessary configuration 
                  parameters at MNs and HAs. This solution is sub-optimal from a 
                  deployment perspective, especially in large networks with a lot of 
                  users (e.g., a mobile operator network). For this reason the Mobile 
                  IPv6 bootstrapping problem was investigated [3]. Based on the 
                  analysed scenarios (i.e. integrated and split), two solutions were 
                  developed. The solution for the split scenario is described in [4] 
                  and the one for the integrated scenario can be found at [5]. A key 
                  point behind these mechanisms is that, whenever static provisioning 
                  is not feasible, the AAA infrastructure of the MSP can be used as 
                  the central element to enable dynamic Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping. In 
                  this case the AAA infrastructure can be exploited to offload the end 
                  host's authentication to the AAA server as well as to deliver the 
                  necessary configuration parameters to the HA. 
                
                  Moreover, in case Mobile IPv6 is a service offered by a Mobility 
                  Service Provider (MSP), all protocol operations (e.g. home 
                  registrations) may need to be explicitly authorized and monitored 
                  (e.g. for accounting purposes). This can be accomplished relying on 
                  the AAA infrastructure of the MSP, that stores users' service 
                  profiles and credentials. 
                   
                  The deployment of this service model requires the availability of an 
                  interface between the AAA infrastructure and the HA, that can be 
                  seen as the Network Access Server (NAS) for Mobile IPv6. The core 
                  capabilities that should be supported by this interface include 
                  Mobile IPv6 service authorization and maintenance (e.g. asynchronous  
                  service termination) as well as the exchange of accounting data. 
                  This basic set of features is needed in any Mobile IPv6 
                  bootstrapping scenario. 
                   
                  There is therefore space for the definition of a general AAA-HA 
                  communication interface capable to support the basic features 
                  described above (e.g. authorization and accounting) as well as the 
                  extended capabilities (e.g. transfer of configuration data) needed 
                  to enable various dynamic Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping scenarios. 
                   
                
                   


                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 4] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               3. Bootstrapping scenarios 
                   
                  This section describes some bootstrapping scenarios in which a 
                  communication between the AAA infrastructure of the Mobility Service 
                  Provider and the Home Agent is needed.  
                   
               3.1 Split Scenario 
                   
                  In the split scenario [4], there is the assumption that the mobility 
                  service and network access service are separate. This implies that 
                  the mobility service can be authorized by a different entity 
                  deploying its own AAA infrastructure. The entity offering the 
                  mobility service is called Mobility Service Provider (MSP) while the 
                  entity authorizing the service is the Mobility Service Authorizer 
                  (MSA). 
                   
                  In this scenario, the Mobile Node discovers the Home Agent Address 
                  using the Domain Name Service (DNS). It queries the address based on 
                  the Home Agent name or by service name. In the former case, the 
                  Mobile Node is configured with the  Fully Qualified Domain Name 
                  (FDQN) of the Home Agent. In the latter case, the document [4] 
                  defines a new service resource record (SRV RR). 
                   
                  Then the Mobile Node performs an IKEv2 [6] exchange with the HA to 
                  setup IPsec SAs (to protect Mobile IPv6 signaling) and to configure 
                  its Home Address (HoA). The IKEv2 Mobile Node to Home Agent 
                  authentication can be done using either public key signatures or the 
                  Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP). 
                   
                  If EAP is used for authentication, the operator can choose any 
                  available EAP authentication methods. Note that even if EAP is used, 
                  the MN authenticates the HA using public key signature based 
                  authentication. The HA may rely on a remote EAP server. In this 
                  case, a AAA protocol such as RADIUS EAP [7] or Diameter EAP Error! 
                  Reference source not found. must be used between the HA and the home 
                  EAP server. This allows a pool of HAs to rely on the same EAP server 
                  to authenticate Mobile Nodes. It also allows the roaming mobility 
                  case in which the Mobile Node obtains the mobility service in a 
                  different administrative domain (MSP != MSA). 
                   
                  The Mobile Node may also want to update its FQDN in the DNS with the 
                  newly allocated Home Address. The document [4] recommends that the 
                  HA performs the DNS entry update on behalf of the Mobile Node. For 
                  that purpose, the Mobile Node indicates its FDQN in the IKEv2 
                  exchange (IDii field in IKE_AUTH) and adds a DNS Update Option in 
                  the Binding Update message sent to the HA. 
                   
                  When the Mobile Node uses a Home Agent belonging to a different 
                  administrative domain (MSP != MSA), the local HA may not share a 
                  security association with the home DNS server. In this case, the 
                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 5] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                  document [4] suggests the home AAA server to be responsible of the 
                  update. Thus the HA should send to the home AAA server the FDQN-HoA 
                  pair through the AAA protocol. Note that the AAA exchange between 
                  the HA and the AAA infrastructure is normally terminated before the 
                  HA receives the Binding Update message. The reason is that the 
                  authentication has succeeded if the Mobile Node is able to send the 
                  BU. 
                                                      
                   
               3.2 Integrated Scenario 
                   
                  In the integrated scenario [5], the assumption is which the mobile 
                  user's mobility service is authorized by the same authorizer than 
                  network access service. Basically Mobility Service Authorizer (MSA) 
                  and the Access Service Authorizer (ASA) are the same entity. The 
                  scenario considers two cases:  
                   
                  1. Mobile Node requests a home agent to its home domain (ASA/MSA) 
                   
                  2. Mobile Node requests a home agent to the Access Service Provider 
                     (ASP) 
                   
                  In the first case, Home Agent is allocated by user's home domain. In 
                  the second case it is allocated by user's visited domain. In both 
                  cases, it is assumed that the AAA server in the home domain (AAAH) 
                  authorizes both network access service and mobility service. 
                   
                  In this scenario, Mobile Node discovers the Home Agent Address using 
                  DHCPv6. During network access service authentication and 
                  authorization, AAAH also verifies if authenticating user is 
                  authorized to use mobility service. In affirmative case, AAAH sends 
                  to the Network Access Server (NAS) where the Mobile Node is 
                  attached, the information about the assigned home agent. Then NAS 
                  stores that information. To request home agent data, Mobile Node 
                  sends a DHCPv6 Information Request to the 
                  All_DHCP_Relay_Agents_and_Servers multicast address. With this 
                  request, Mobile Node can specify if it wants a home agent provided 
                  by the visited domain (ASP) or by the home domain (ASA). In both 
                  cases, the NAS acts a DHCPv6 relay. When the NAS receives DHCPv6 
                  Information Request then it attaches home agent information received 
                  from AAAH in a new DHC Relay Agent Option defined in [5]. 
                   
                  In case Mobile Node cannot acquire home agent information via 
                  DHCPv6, it can try the default mechanism based on DNS described in 
                  [4]. After the Mobile Node has acquired home agent information, the 
                  mechanism used to bootstrap the HoA, IPsec Security Association, and 
                  Authentication and Authorization with the MSA is the same described 
                  in the bootstrapping solution for split scenario [4]. 
                   
                                                      
                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 6] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               4. Goals for the AAA-HA interface 
                   
                  The motivations and scenarios illustrated in previous sections raise 
                  the need to define an interface between the AAAH server and the HA. 
                  The following sections list a set of goals for this interface. 
                   
               4.1 General goals 
                   
                  G1.1 The AAAH server and the HA MUST be able to authenticate each 
                        other (mutual authentication) in order to prevent the 
                        installation of unauthorized state on the HA. 
                   
                  G1.2 The AAA-HA interface MUST provide integrity protection in 
                        order to prevent any alteration of exchanged data (e.g. Mobile 
                        IPv6 configuration parameters). 
                   
                  G1.3 The AAA-HA interface MUST provide replay protection.   
                   
                  G1.4 The AAA-HA interface SHOULD provide confidentiality since it 
                        may be used to transfer keying material (e.g. shared key 
                        generated during EAP authentication). 
                   
                  G1.5 The AAA-HA interface should support inactive peer detection. 
                        This functionality can be used by the AAAH server to maintain 
                        a list of active HAs (e.g. useful for HA selection). 
                   
               4.2 Service Authorization 
                   
                  G2.1 The AAA-HA interface SHOULD allow the use of Network Access 
                        Identifier (NAI) to identify the mobile node. 
                   
                  G2.2 The HA SHOULD be able to query the AAAH server to verify 
                        Mobile IPv6 service authorization for the mobile node. 
                   
                  G2.3 The AAAH server MAY enforce explicit operational limitations 
                        and authorization restrictions on the HA (e.g. packet filters, 
                        QoS parameters). 
                   
                  G2.4 The AAAH server MUST be able to send an authorization lifetime 
                        to the HA to limit Mobile IPv6 session duration for the MN. 
                
                  G2.5 The HA MUST be able to request to the AAAH server an extension 
                        of the authorization lifetime granted to the MN. 
                   
                  G2.6 The AAAH server MUST be able to force the HA to terminate an 
                        active Mobile IPv6 session for authorization policy reasons 
                        (e.g. credit exhaustion). 
                   
                   

                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 7] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               4.3 Accounting 
                
                  G3.1 The AAA-HA interface must support the transfer of accounting 
                        records needed for service control and charging. These include 
                        (but may not be limited to): time of binding cache entry 
                        creation and deletion, octets sent and received by the mobile 
                        node in Bi-directional Tunneling, etc. 
                
               4.4 Mobile Node Authentication 
                   
                  G4.1 The AAA-HA interface MUST support pass-through EAP 
                        authentication with the HA working as EAP authenticator 
                        operating in pass-through mode and the AAAH server working as 
                        back-end authentication server. 
                
               4.5 Provisioning of configuration parameters 
                   
                  G5.1 The HA should be able to communicate to the AAAH server the 
                        Home Address allocated to the MN (e.g. for allowing the AAAH 
                        server to perform DNS update on behalf of the MN). 
                   
                
                
                
                

























                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 8] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               5. IANA Considerations 
                   
                  No new message formats or services are defined in this document. 
                   














































                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 9] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                   
               6. Security Considerations 
                
                  As stated in section 4.1 the AAA-HA interface must provide mutual 
                  authentication, integrity and replay protection. Furthermore, if 
                  security parameters (e.g. IKE pre-shared key) are transferred 
                  through this interface, confidentiality is a feature that is 
                  strongly recommended to be supported. However note that some 
                  suitable interfaces may not provide end-to-end confidentiality 
                  between AAA and HA (e.g. AAA protocols). 
                







































                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 10] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
               7. Acknowledgments 
                
                  The authors would like to thank James Kempf, Alper Yegin, Vijay 
                  Devarapalli, Basavaraj Patil, Gopal Dommety for their comments and 
                  feedback. Moreover the authors would like to thank Hannes Tschofenig 
                  for his deep technical and editorial review of the draft. 
                 











































                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 11] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                
               8. References 
                
               8.1  Normative References 
                   
               [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
                   Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
                
               [2] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
                   RFC 3775, June 2004. 
                
               8.2  Informative References 
                   
               [3] Patel, A. et al. "Problem Statement for bootstrapping Mobile IPv6", 
                   draft-ietf-mip6-bootstrap-ps-02 (work in progress), March 2005. 
                   
               [4] Giaretta, G., Kempf, J. and Devarapalli, V., "Mobile IPv6 
                   bootstrapping in split scenario", draft-ietf-mip6-bootstrapping-
                   split-01 (work in progress), October 2005. 
                   
               [5] Chowdhury, K. and Yegin, A., "MIP6-bootstrapping via DHCPv6 for the 
                   Integrated Scenario", draft-ietf-mip6-bootstrapping-integrated-dhc-
                   00 (work in progress), October 2005. 
                   
               [6] Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol",  draft-ietf-
                   ipsec-ikev2-17 (work in progress), September 2004.  
                   
               [7] Aboba, B. and Calhoun, P., "RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial In 
                   User Service) Support For Extensible Authentication Protocol 
                   (EAP)", RFC 3579, September 2003. 
                   
               [8] Eronen, P., Hiller, T. and Zorn, G., "Diameter Extensible 
                   Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application", RFC 4072, August 2005. 
                   
               [9] Chowdhury, K. and Lior, A., "RADIUS Attributes for Mobile IPv6 
                   bootstrapping", draft-chowdhury-mip6-bootstrap-radius-01 (work in 
                   progress), October 2004. 
                   
               [10]  Jang, H. J. and Yegin, A., "DHCP Option for Home Agent Discovery 
                   in MIPv6", draft-jang-dhc-haopt-01 (work in progress), April 2005. 
                   
               [11]  Giaretta, G., Guardini, I., Demaria, E., Bournelle, J., Laurent-
                   Maknavicius, M., "MIPv6 Authorization and Configuration based on 
                   EAP", draft-giaretta-mip6-authorization-eap-02 (work in progress), 
                   September 2004. 
                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 12] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                
               Authors’ Addresses 
                   
                  Gerardo Giaretta 
                  Telecom Italia Lab 
                  via G. Reiss Romoli, 274  
                  10148 TORINO 
                  Italy 
                  Phone: +39 011 2286904 
                  Email: gerardo.giaretta@tilab.com 
                    
                  Ivano Guardini 
                  Telecom Italia Lab 
                  via G. Reiss Romoli, 274  
                  10148 TORINO 
                  Italy 
                  Phone: +39 011 2285424 
                  Email: ivano.guardini@tilab.com 
                   
                  Elena Demaria 
                  Telecom Italia Lab 
                  via G. Reiss Romoli, 274  
                  10148 TORINO 
                  Italy 
                  Phone: +39 011 2285403 
                  Email: elena.demaria@tilab.com 
                   
                  Julien Bournelle 
                  GET/INT 
                  9 rue Charles Fourier 
                  Evry  91011 
                  France 
                  Email: julien.bournelle@int-evry.fr 
                   
                  Rafa Marin Lopez 
                  University of Murcia 
                  30071 Murcia 
                  Spain 
                  EMail: rafa@dif.um.es 
                   










                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 13] 
               Internet-Draft          AAA-HA interface goals          January 2006 
                
                
               Intellectual Property Statement 
                
                  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
                  Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
                  to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
                  in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
                  rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
                  it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
                  Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
                  documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
                   
                  Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
                  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
                  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
                  of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
                  specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
                  at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
                   
                  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
                  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
                  rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
                  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf 
                  ipr@ietf.org 
                
               Disclaimer of Validity 
                
                  This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
                  an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
                  REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
                  INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
                  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
                  THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
                  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
               Copyright Statement 
                   
                  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
                   
                  This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
                  contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
                  retain all their rights. 
                   
               Acknowledgment 
                   
                  Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
                  Internet Society. 



                
                
               Giaretta, et al.        Expires - July 2006               [Page 14] 