
Network Working Group                                          M. Duerst
Internet-Draft                                  Aoyama Gakuin University
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 23, 2006
Expires: April 26, 2007


                  The Archived-At Message Header Field
                      draft-duerst-archived-at-06

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo defines a new email header field, Archived-At:, to provide
   a direct link to the archived form of an individual email message.









Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Header Field Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Multiple Archived-At Header Fields . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Interaction with Message Fragmentation and Reassembly  . .  4
     2.4.  Syntax Extension for Internationalized Message Headers . .  4
     2.5.  The X-Archived-At Header Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Implementation and Usage Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Formats of Archived Message  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Implementation Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Usage Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Registration of the Archive-At Header Field  . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  Registration of the X-Archived-At Header Field . . . . . .  9
   6.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Changes from -05.txt to -06.txt  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Changes from -04.txt to -05.txt  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  Changes from -03.txt to -04.txt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.4.  Changes from -02.txt to -03.txt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13























Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


1.  Introduction

   [RFC2369] defines a number of header fields that can be added to
   Internet messages such as those sent by email distribution lists or
   in netnews [RFC1036].  One of them is the 'List-Archive' header field
   that describes how to access archives for the list.  This allows to
   access the archives as a whole, but not the individual message.

   There is often a need or desire to refer to the archived form of a
   single message.  For more detailled usage scenarios, please see
   Section 3.3.  This memo defines a new header, 'Archived-At', to refer
   to a single message at an archived location.  This allows to find a
   message to a mailing list in the archive of that mailing list much
   more quickly and directly.  It can also be used independently of
   mailing lists, for example in connection with legal requirements to
   archive certain messages.

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Header Field Definition

2.1.  Syntax

   For the Archived-At header field, the field name is 'Archived-At'.
   The field body consist of a URI [STD66] enclosed in angle brackets
   ('<', '>').  The URI MAY contain folding white space (FWS,
   [RFC2822]), which is ignored.  MTAs MUST NOT insert whitespace within
   the angle brackets, but client applications SHOULD ignore any
   whitespace, which might have been inserted by poorly behaved MTAs.
   The URI points to an archived version of the message.  See
   Section 3.1 for some more details.

   This header field is subject to the encoding and character
   restrictions for mail headers as described in [RFC2822].

   More formally, the header field is defined as follows in ABNF
   according to [RFC4234]:

      archived-at = "Archived-At:" [FWS] "<" URI ">" CRLF

   where URI is defined in [STD66] and CRLF and FWS are defined in
   [RFC2822].






Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


   Please note that the above ABNF does not take into account FWS within
   URI; an ABNF that does take FWS into account, but does not describe
   the URI syntax restrictions, is provided here:
      archived-at-alt = "Archived-At:" [FWS] '<' unstructured '>' CRLF

   This syntax is kept simple in that only one URI per header field is
   allowed.  In this point, the syntax is different from [RFC2369].
   Also, comments are not allowed.

2.2.  Multiple Archived-At Header Fields

   Each Archived-At header field only contains a single URI.  If it is
   desired to list multiple URIs where an archived copy of the message
   can be found, a separate Archived-At field per URI is required.
   Multiple Archived-At header fields with the same URI SHOULD be
   avoided.  An Archived-At header field SHOULD only be created if the
   message is actually being made available at the URI given in the
   header field.

   If a message is forwarded from a list to a sublist, and both lists
   support adding the Archived-At header field, then the sublist SHOULD
   add a new Archived-At header field without removing the already
   existing one(s), unless the header field is exactly the same as an
   already existing one, in which case the new header field SHOULD NOT
   be added.

2.3.  Interaction with Message Fragmentation and Reassembly

   [RFC2046] allows for the fragmentation and reassembly of messages.
   Archived-At header fields are to be treated in the same way as
   Comment header fields, i.e. copied to the first fragment message
   header on fragmentation and back from there to the header of the
   reassembled message.

   This treatement has been choosen for compatibility with existing
   infrastructure.  It means that Archived-At header fields in the first
   fragment message MAY refer to an archived version of the whole,
   unfragmented, message.  To avoid confusion, Archived-At headers
   SHOULD NOT be added to fragment messages.

2.4.  Syntax Extension for Internationalized Message Headers

   There are some efforts to allow non-ASCII text directly in message
   header field bodies.  In such contexts, the URI non-terminal in the
   syntax defined in Section 2.1 is to be replaced by IRI as defined in
   [RFC3987].  The specifics of the actual octet encoding of the IRI
   will follow the rules for general direct encoding of non-ASCII text.
   For conversion between IRIs and URIs, the procedures defined in



Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


   [RFC3987] are to be applied.

2.5.  The X-Archived-At Header Field

   For backwards compatibility, this document also describes the
   X-Archived-At header field, a precursor of the Archived-At header
   field.  The X-Archived-At header field MAY also be parsed, but SHOULD
   not be generated.

   The following is the syntax of the X-Archived-At header field, in
   ABNF according to (which also defines SP) [RFC4234]:

      obs-archived-at = "X-Archived-At:"  SP URI CRLF

   The X-Archived-At header field does not allow white space inside URI.


3.  Implementation and Usage Considerations

3.1.  Formats of Archived Message

   There is no restriction on the format used to serve the archived
   message from the URI in a 'Archived-At' header field.  It is expected
   that in many cases, the archived message will be served as (X)HTML,
   as plain text, or in its original form as message/rfc822 [RFC2046].
   Some forms of URIs may imply the format in which the archived message
   is served, although this should not be relied upon.

   If the protocol used to retrieve the message allows for content
   negotiation, then it is also possible to serve the archived message
   in several different formats.  As an example, a HTTP URI in an
   'Archived-At' header may make it possible to serve the archived
   message both as text/html for human consumption in a browser and as
   message/rfc822 for use by a mail user agent without loss of
   information.

3.2.  Implementation Considerations

   This section shortly discusses some implementation considerations.
   Mailing list expanders and email archives are often separate pieces
   of software.  It may therefore be difficult to create an
   'Archived-At' header field in the mailing list expander software.

   One way to address this difficulty is to have the mailing list
   expander software generate an unambiguous URI, e.g. an URI based on
   the message id of the incoming email, and to set up the archiving
   system so that it redirects requests for such URIs to the actual
   messages.



Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


   Such a system has been implemented and is in productive use at W3C.
   As an example, the URI
   "http://www.w3.org/mid/0I5U00G08DFGCR@mailsj-v1.corp.adobe.com",
   containing the significant part of the message id
   "<0I5U00G08DFGCR@mailsj-v1.corp.adobe.com>", is redirected to the URI
   of this message in the W3C mailing-list archive at
   http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/uri/2004Oct/0017.html.

   Source code for this implementation is available at
   http://dev.w3.org/cvsweb/search/, in particular
   http://dev.w3.org/cvsweb/search/cgi/mid.pl and
   http://dev.w3.org/cvsweb/search/bin/msgid-db.pl.

   When using the message id to create an address for the archived mail,
   care has to be taken to escape characters in the message id that are
   not allowed in the URI, or to remove them, as done above for the "<"
   and ">" delimiters.

3.3.  Usage Considerations

   It may at first seem strange to have a pointer to an archived form of
   a message in a header field of that same message.  After all, if one
   has the message, why would one need a pointer to it?  It turns out
   that such pointers can be extremely useful.  This section describes
   some of the scenarios for their use.

   You may want to refer to messages in a non-message context, such as
   on a Web page, in an instant message, or in a phone conversation.  In
   such a case, you can extract the URI from the Archived-At header
   field, avoiding the search for the correct message in the archive.

   You may want to refer to other messages in a message context.
   Refering to a single message is often done by replying to that
   message.  However, when referring to more than one message, providing
   pointers to archived messages is a widespread practice.  The
   Archived-At header field makes it easier to provide these pointers.

   You may want to find messages related to a message at hand.  You may
   not have received the related messages, and therefore need to use an
   archive.  You may also prefer finding related messages in the archive
   rather than in your MUA, because messages in archives may be linked
   in ways not provided by your MUA.  The Archived-At header field
   provides a link to the starting point in the archive from which to
   find related messages.

   Please note that in the above usage scenarios, it is mostly the human
   reader, rather than the email client software, that makes use of the
   URI in the Archived-At header.  However, this does not rule out the



Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


   use of the URI in the Archived-At header by the email client or other
   software if such use is found helpful.


4.  Security Considerations

   There are many potential security issues when activating and
   dereferencing an URI.  For more details, please see [STD66].  In the
   context of this proposal, the following are particularly relevant: An
   intruder may get access to the message transmission and be able to
   insert an URI pointing to some malicious content.  Also, somebody may
   be able to construct a message that is harmless when received
   directly, but that produces problems when accessed via the URI.  One
   reason for this may be the format used in the archive, where some
   content was not adequately escaped.

   The Archived-At header field points to some archived form of the
   message itself.  This in turn may contain the Archived-At field.
   This creates a potential for a denial-of-service attack on the server
   pointed to by the URI in the Archived-At header field.  The
   conditions are that the archived form of the message is downloaded
   automatically, and that further URIs in that message are followed and
   downloaded recursively without checking for already downloaded
   resources.  However, this kind of scenario can easily be avoided by
   implementations.  First, the URI in the Archived-At header field
   should not be dereferenced automatically.  Second, appropriate
   measures for loop detection should be used.


5.  IANA Considerations





















Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


5.1.  Registration of the Archive-At Header Field

   IANA is herewith requested to register the Archived-At header field
   in the Message Header Fields Registry ([RFC3864]) as follows:

      Header field name:
         Archived-At

      Applicable protocol:
         mail (RFC 2822) and netnews (RFC 1036)

      Status:
         standard

      Author/Change controller:
         IETF

      Specification document(s):
         Internet-Draft draft-duerst-archived-at-06.txt
         (Note to RFC Editor: Replace this with
          RFC YYYY (RFC number of this specification))

      Related information:
         none



























Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


5.2.  Registration of the X-Archived-At Header Field

   IANA is herewith requested to register the Archived-At header field
   in the Message Header Fields Registry ([RFC3864]) as follows:

      Header field name:
         X-Archived-At

      Applicable protocol:
         mail (RFC 2822) and netnews (RFC 1036)

      Status:
         deprecated

      Author/Change controller:
         IETF

      Specification document(s):
         Internet-Draft draft-duerst-archived-at-06.txt
         (Note to RFC Editor: Replace this with
          RFC YYYY (RFC number of this specification))

      Related information:
         none


6.  Change Log

   Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this whole section before
   publication.

6.1.  Changes from -05.txt to -06.txt

      Removed 'also optionally' for netnews.

      Improved explanation in section about IRIs.

      Some wording improvements.

6.2.  Changes from -04.txt to -05.txt

      Small wording adjustments for readability.

      Separated normative and informative references, added reference to
      RFC1036.

      Moved X-Archived-At header into separate section and added
      registration template.



Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


      Clarified syntax: allowed FWS, provided alternate syntax in an
      attempt to describe different syntactic layers, changed single
      quotes to double quotes for literals.

      Added section about message fragmentation.

      Reorganized document to reduce number of top-level sections.

      Added section about IRIs.

      Removed reference to 'safe' URI characters (no longer a term used
      in URI spec).

      Removed "URI not empty" comment in ABNF: URI according to STD66
      has to contain a scheme part anyway because it is absolute.

6.3.  Changes from -03.txt to -04.txt

      Updated from RFC 2234 to RFC 4234.

      Updated author's address/affiliation.

6.4.  Changes from -02.txt to -03.txt

      Fixed syntax to allow spaces after colon.

      Avoided misunderstanding with message ids ('<' and '>' are part of
      the message id)

      Added reference to RFC 2119 (keywords)

      Changed "MUST" to "SHOULD" for existence of message


7.  Acknowledgements

   The members of the W3C system team, in particular Gerald Oskoboiny,
   Olivier Thereaux, Jose Kahan, and Eric Prud'hommeaux, created the
   mid-based email archive lookup system and the experimental form of
   the Archived-At header.  Pete Resnik provided the motivation for
   writing up this memo.  Discussion on the ietf-822@imc.org mailing
   list, in particular contributions by Frank Ellermann, Arnt
   Gulbrandsen, Graham Klyne, Bruce Lilly, Charles Lindsey, and Keith
   Moore, has led to further improvements of the proposal.


8.  References




Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

   [RFC3864]  Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
              Procedures for Message Header Fields", RFC 3864, BCP 90,
              September 2004.

   [RFC3987]  Duerst, M. and M. Suignard, "Internationalized Resource
              Identifiers (IRIs)", RFC 3987, January 2005.

   [RFC4234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [STD66]    Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1036]  Horton, M. and R. Adams, "Standard for Interchange of
              USENET Messages", December 1987.

   [RFC2046]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046,
              November 1996.

   [RFC2369]  Baer, J. and G. Neufeld, "The Use of URLs as Meta-Syntax
              for Core Mail List Commands and their Transport through
              Message Header Fields", RFC 2369, July 1998.

















Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


Author's Address

   Martin Duerst (Note: Please write "Duerst" with u-umlaut wherever
                 possible, for example as "D&#252;rst" in XML and HTML.)
   Aoyama Gakuin University
   5-10-1 Fuchinobe
   Sagamihara, Kanagawa  229-8558
   Japan

   Phone: +81 42 759 6329
   Fax:   +81 42 759 6495
   Email: mailto:duerst@it.aoyama.ac.jp
   URI:   http://www.sw.it.aoyama.ac.jp/D%C3%BCrst/







































Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    The Archived-At Message Header Field      October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Duerst                   Expires April 26, 2007                [Page 13]




