Network Working Group                                         L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei
Intended status: Informational                                 M. Zarny
Expires: August 2015                                      Goldman Sachs
                                                            C. Jacquenet
                                                          France Telecom
                                                         S. Chakrabarty
                                                              US Ignite

                                                       February 4, 2015



         Interface to Network Security Functions Problem Statement
                draft-dunbar-i2nsf-problem-statement-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 4, 2015.



Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This draft describes the motivation, focused use cases, and the
   problem statement for Interface to Network Security Functions.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Motivation................................................3
      1.2. Impact from Network Function Virtualization...............4
      1.3. Network Security Functions under Consideration............4
      1.4. The scope of the proposed work............................5
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................7
   3. Focused Use Cases..............................................8
   4. Problem Space.................................................10
   5. The Benefits..................................................11
   6. Related industry initiatives..................................12
      6.1. Related IETF WGs.........................................12
      6.2. Relationship with ETSI NFV...............................13
      6.3. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service.................14
      6.4. Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance.........14
      6.5. Productive Eco-system with Open Source Communities.......14
   7. Security Policies/functions negotiation.......................15
   8. Conclusion and Recommendation.................................15
   9. Manageability Considerations..................................16
   10. Security Considerations......................................16
   11. IANA Considerations..........................................16


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   12. References...................................................16
      12.1. Normative References....................................16
      12.2. Informative References..................................16
   13. Acknowledgments..............................................17



  1. Introduction

   This draft describes the motivation, focused use cases, and the
   problem statement for Interface to Network Security Functions.

   In the context of I2NSF, the term "Virtual Network Security
   Function" is used frequently to emphasize the point that the
   entities that consume the Network Security functions don't own or
   host them. Those network security functions can be achieved by
   physical appliances, or by VMs instantiated on servers.

  1.1. Motivation

   Enterprises are increasingly consuming network functions, especially
   the network security related functions that are not hosted at their
   promises. Some of the reasons driving up this demand are the desire
   (and the necessity) to:

     - Implement stringent security functions at branch offices where
        minimal security infrastructures/capabilities exist;
     - Provide interfaces for clients, and/or applications to
        dynamically alter security policies;
     - Maintain consistent security policies across a large number of
        sites and devices.

   According to [Gartner-2013], the demand for cloud-based security
   services is growing. Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) are
   increasingly adopting cloud-based security services to replace on-
   premises security tools, while larger enterprises are deploying a
   mix of traditional and cloud-based security services.

   To efficiently meet the dynamic demand of security functions
   requests from clients, it is desirable to have mechanisms to:




Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


     - Specify concrete security rules (or attributes) for security
        functions hosted and managed by third party, and
     - Have standardized mechanisms for clients, users, or
        applications to request/negotiate/validate security functions
        that are not physically located on the local premises.

   Despite their increasing popularity, most common cloud security
   services do not yet have industry standards by which users/clients
   can request their desired services. (The "user-provider"
   relationship may exist between two different firms or between
   different domains of the same firm.)

  1.2. Impact from Network Function Virtualization

   The ETSI Network Function Virtualization (NFV) initiative brings out
   another management challenges for security policies to be enforced
   by distributed (virtual) network security functions (vNSF). Those
   trends require a standard interface to express, monitor, and manage
   the security policies on distributed security functions that may be
   running on different premises.


  1.3. Network Security Functions under Consideration

   There are many network functions being deployed and new ones are
   popping up with business and application demands. In order to have a
   concrete context for the protocols discussion, we start with the
   following network security related functions:

     - Firewall
     - Intrusion Detection System/ Intrusion Prevention System
        (IDS/IPS)

   The reason for starting with security-related functions is due to
   the wide acceptance of security functions that are not running on
   customer/enterprise premises. Numerous security vendors are now
   leveraging cloud based models to deliver security solutions. This
   shift has occurred for a variety of reasons including greater
   economies of scale, streamlined delivery mechanisms, and the demand
   of business and applications for more sophisticated security
   functions that they do not have. Consumers, enterprise clients as


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   well as applications are embracing the business model of requesting
   for security functions that do not run on their own premises on
   demand, also known as Network Security as a Service.



  1.4. The scope of the proposed work

   The Interface to vNSF (I2NSF) initiative is to identify how to
   express, monitor, and manage the security policies on distributed
   security functions that may be running on different premises. I2NSF
   also allows clients to communicate their specific security policies
   (request/monitor/report) to security functions.

   There are two aspects of the I2NSF work:

     - Service Layer, which is for clients to express, monitor, or
        manage their desired security policies for their designated
        traffic.

        This layer will leverage the existing protocols in RESTconf,
        AAA, SACM, and security policy expression using Role Based
        Access Control (RBAC), Mandatory Access Control (MAC), or
        Attribute based access control (ABAC).

     - Functional layer, which is to specify the proper interface to
        the individual security functions or function instances when
        overall policies are enforced by a collection of security
        functions located in multiple premises.


   The Interface to Network Security Functions (I2NSF) initiative aims
   at improving the dynamic allocation and operation of network
   security functions by documenting a global framework that would
   include protocol-based control and management interfaces, along with
   adequate data models. The information required for the provisioning,
   the configuration and the operation of network security functions
   will be exchanged through the said interfaces and protocols. The
   I2NSF initiative will also take into account the need for co-
   existing with legacy configuration and management systems used to
   allocate and operate network security functions, whether they are


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   embedded in network devices or virtualized in data center
   environments, for example. The standard Interface to
   request/negotiate/allocate/operate (Virtual) Network Security
   Functions (I2NSF) is one of the necessary tools for operators and
   service providers to offer network security functions as a service
   to their corporate clients.

   It is envisioned that clients of the I2NSF interfaces include
   Application Gateway, Security Administrator, service orchestration
   systems, even some security functions requests for more
   sophisticated functions when detect something suspicious.

   Various aspects to I2NSF include:

   - The mechanism for clients (applications) to
   request/negotiate/validate security policies that are enforced by
   security functions physically located in different premises, or
   administrative domain.

   - Information/data model to configure and monitor the newly
   instantiate virtual security functions (NFV initiative).



   The "requester <-> provider" relationship has different connotations
   in different scenarios:

   - Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting some
     network functions from its provider;
   - Inter-domain, e.g. Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one
     operator domain requesting some network functions from another
     operator domain, where "A" and "B" can be from same operator or
     different operators; or
   - Application Gateways <-> Network relationship, i.e. an application
     gateway (e.g. cluster of servers) requesting some security
     policies for their designated traffic.

   The security functions offered by third party need Bi-directional
   periodic communications among multiple entities for policies
   negotiation, validation, potentially re-directing traffic to higher
   level security functions, etc. Therefore, the service requires


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   programmatic interfaces or protocol exchange, whereas API is
   conventionally associated with functional calls on one system.

   The objective of the proposed work is to standardize the protocols
   (or the interface) and architecture for Requester and Provider to
   negotiate the functions needed as well as the associated attributes
   or security policies.

   The proposed protocols between requester and provider can be used
   for the following scenarios:

     - A Client requests a certain network security function from a
        provider
     - The provider fulfills the request for example, by instantiating
        an instance of the service in question, or configures
        additional rules in an already provisioned vNSF.

  2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

   Cloud DC:   The data centers that are not on premises of enterprises
               yet have the compute/storage resources that can be
               requested or purchased by the enterprises. What the
               enterprises actually get is Virtual Data Centers.

   DC:         Data Center

   Domain:     The term "Domain" in this draft has different
               connotations in different scenarios:

               Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting
                           some network functions from its provider;




Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


               Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one operator
                           domain requesting some network functions
                           from another operator domain; or

               Applications <-> Network relationship, i.e. an
                           application (e.g. cluster of servers)
                           requesting some functions from network, etc.



   Virtual Network Function:  In the context of I2NSF, the term
               "Virtual Network Function" is used frequently to
               emphasize the point that the entities that consume the
               Network functions, mostly L4-L7 functions, don't own or
               host them. Those network functions can be achieved by
               physical appliances, or by VMs instantiated on common
               compute servers (i.e. the ETSI NFV defined Virtualized
               network functions).

   Virtual Security Function: a security function that can be requested
               by one domain but may be owned or managed by another
               domain.

   Cloud-based security functions: used interchangeably with the
               "Virtual Security Functions" in this draft.

  3. Focused Use Cases

   Many use cases have been described by [I2NSF-ACCESS], [I2NSF-DC] and
   the [I2NSF-Mobile]. To make I2NSF more focused, we will start with
   one use case that is described by all three use case drafts.

   Enterprises, residential, and mobile customers are increasingly
   consuming network functions, especially the network security related
   functions that are not running on their premises.  The ETSI Network
   Function Virtualization (NFV) initiative brings out another
   management challenges for security policies to be enforced by
   distributed (virtual) network security functions (vNSF). Those
   trends require a standard interface to express, monitor, and manage
   the security policies on distributed security functions that may be
   running on different premises.


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   One key aspect of those multiple premises hosted security functions
   is to have standard ways to express, monitor and verify security
   policies among distributed and virtual security functions.


   The standard ways (I2NSF) to express security policies makes it
   possible for Application Gateway, e.g. Video Conference Controller,
   to dynamically inform the network security controller to have some
   specific encrypted flows by-passing some FW/IPS/IDS for a specific
   time span. Otherwise, some flows can't go through the FW/IPS/IDS
   because the payload is encrypted. Or require manually configuring a
   wide set of port ranges for calls to pass through (ex: ports 50,000
   to 50,999) if there is a firewall placed in the middle of any
   enterprise deployment (very common for defense in depth postures).
   This causes a bigger attack surface area.  I2NSF can dynamically
   create pinhole firewalls rules that are only active for when the
   call media session is alive. Once the session is over the pinhole
   policy is removed.


   The standard interface (I2NSF) also makes it possible for Cloud DC
   to offer Virtual Firewall Function On Demand service.

   Clients of cloud data center not only need virtual networks to
   interconnect their virtual compute/storage resources, but they also
   need virtual firewall services to enforce the proper communication
   policies. VPN clients, especially branch office access points, may
   need firewalls that are hosted by the VPN provider to be integrated
   with the VPN service.

   Per [NW-2011], A cloud-based firewall is different from an on-
   premise one (aside from its location) in three key areas:
   scalability, availability and extensibility.

      - Scalability: Cloud-based firewalls are designed to serve
         multiple customers and their increasing demand. Unlike with an
         on-premise firewall, upgrading a cloud-based firewall-e.g.,
         for greater throughput-should be transparent to enterprise
         users.
      - Availability: Cloud-based firewall providers tend to offer
         extremely high availability through their highly redundant and


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


         resilient data centers. In contrast, most enterprises may not
         be able to offer "carrier-grade" high availability.
      - Extensibility: Enterprises looking for vendor diversity can
         subscribe to cloud-based firewalls from different providers.
         Furthermore, additional features can be added more seamlessly,
         transparently.



  4. Problem Space

   Many vendors already offer Security as a Service in the cloud.
   However, all their solutions are proprietary, with different
   interfaces and different modes of operation.

   There are no common interfaces/mechanisms for clients or
   applications to monitor or verify the required security policies or
   security functions. There is a lack of user-friendly service
   (policy) template.

   I2NSF will only focus on the following problem spaces:

      - Security Policy Layer, which is for clients to express,
         monitor, verify the needed security policies for their
         specific flows.

         Proper language has to be identified between clients and
         network security function controllers. This layer will
         leverage the existing protocols in RESTconf, AAA, SACM, and
         security policy expression using Role Based Access Control
         (RBAC), Mandatory Access Control (MAC), or Attribute-based
         access control (ABAC).

      - Capability (or Functional) Layer, which specifies the
         information/data models to Security functions/devices (virtual
         & physical). This layer will leverage the existing protocols
         and data models defined by I2RS, Netconf, and NETMOD.







Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   There are many other problems associated with Security Function on
   Demand that are out of the scope of I2NSF:

     - Diverse security services:

         The I2NSF will only cover Firewall and IPS/IDS, may be
         extending to other security functions after re-chartering.

     - Scalability:

        Not only diverse CPU/memory needed for different security
        functions can be difficult to manage, but the solution itself
        may have some limits, e.g. maximum number of firewall rules.

     - Availability:

        The requested security functions or security policies might not
        be fulfilled. The negotiation protocol is not in the scope of
        I2NSF.

     - Converting policies to vendor-specific configurations
     - Dynamic features update



  5. The Benefits

   The goal of I2NSF is to specify standard mechanisms for clients to
   request security functions or security policies from another domain.
   The framework allows the clients to view, request, and/or verify the
   security functions/policies offered by different providers. This
   framework can make it easy for a cluster of devices requiring the
   similar security policies to have consistent policies across
   multiple sites.

   The network service providers, with their physical access to a vast
   number of enterprises and consumers, are very well positioned to
   provide the "Security Function on Demand" services.  The providers
   can act as security function brokers to their directly connected
   domains. They can offer a service catalog and standard mechanisms by
   which enterprises (or applications) can query request, or/and verify
   the needed security functions or policies.


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   With the standard interfaces for clients to request the needed
   security functions and policies, network operators can leverage
   their current VPN to enterprises and access to a vast population of
   end users to offer a set of consolidated Security solutions and
   policies. The IETF can play an instrumental role in defining this
   common interface and framework for network operators.



  6. Related industry initiatives
  6.1. Related IETF WGs

   IETF NETCONF: I2NSF should consider using Netconf protocol for
   capability layer to communicate the security data models to the
   designated security functions.

   NETMOD ACL Model: draft-ietf-netmod-acl-model-00 describes the very
   basic attributes for access control. I2NSF will extend the ACL data
   model to be more comprehensive, for example, extend to multiple
   actions and policies, and describes various services associated with
   the security functions under consideration.

   For Firewall, I2NSF will specify the information model associated
   with various services of FW, such as stateful or deep packet
   inspection, packet/flow/stream filtering and redirect (remote and
   local), etc.

   In addition, I2NSF has to specify the needed information model for
   the monitoring/reporting of FW.

   I2RS: I2RS is thinking how to create interface between data and
   control plane, essentially be able to run an application like BGP
   somewhere else and then communicate the instruction to data plane
   how to act. I2NSF is looking specifically into expressing security
   policies in two layers. I2NSF should leverage the protocols
   developed by I2RS. I2NSF is only to develop the additional
   information models and data models for distributed security
   functions, like FW and IPS/IDS. The Policy structure specified by
   http://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hares-i2rs-bnp-info-model/ can




Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   be used by I2NSF to be extended to include recursive actions to
   other security functions.

   IETF SFC is about mechanism of chaining together service functions
   while treating service functions as black box; VNFpool is about the
   reliability and availability of the virtualized network functions.
   But none of them address how service functions are requested, or how
   service functions are fulfilled.

   Both SFC and VNFpool don't cover in-depth specification (e.g. rules
   for the requested FW) for clients to request its needed functions.
   In SFC & VNFpool, FW function is a black box, that is treated in
   same way as Video Optimization function. SFC/VNFpool don't cover the
   negotiation part, e.g. Client needs Rule x/y/z for FW, but the
   Provider can only offer x/z.

   IETF SACM (Security Assessment and Continuous Monitoring) specifies
   the mechanisms to assess end point security. The end points can be
   routers, switches, clustered DB, installed piece of software. SACM
   is about "How to encode that policy in a manner where assessment can
   be automated". For examples:

       - a Solaris 10 SPARC or Window 7 system used in a environment
          that requires adherence to a policy of Mission Critical
          Classified.
       - rules like "The maximum password age must be 30 days" and
          "The minimum password age must be 1 day"



   IETF midcom, nsis, pcp, (arguably) SOCKS have done some work that
   have some aspects related to or can be used by I2NSF.

  6.2. Relationship with ETSI NFV

   We believe that the I2NSF is one of the enabling tools for Network
   Security as a Service (NSaaS), which is a subset of VNF as a Service
   (VNFaaS) specified by ETSI NFV Group Specification Use Cases
   [gs_NFV]. The main benefits of virtualized network functions are
   increased flexibility to efficiently share the resources, and
   decreased setup and management costs. NFV defines the architecture


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   to pool together many virtual network functions to be managed and
   consumed collectively.

   NFV, with its heavy representation from service provider side, can
   define more detailed service model for VNFaaS and setting
   requirement for IETF's narrowly scoped I2NSF interface.

  6.3. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service

   Open source projects like OpenStack and CloudStack have begun to
   tackle the issues of interfaces to security functions but much work
   remains. There are many pieces of open sourced code, and there are a
   lot of areas not covered. The combined contributed source code is
   not comprehensive.

   OpenStack completed the Firewall as a Service project and specified
   the set of APIs for Firewall services:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/fwaas_api_abstractions.html

   OpenStack has defined the APIs for managing Security Groups:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/securitygroup_api_abstractions.html

   The attributes defined by OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service
   are very primitive. However they can be the basis of the information
   model for the I2NSF IETF initiative.



  6.4.  Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance

   https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/secaas/#_get-involved

   SaaS by CSA is at the initial stage of defining the scope of work.

  6.5. Productive Eco-system with Open Source Communities

     Our goal is to form a Collaborative Loop from IETF to Industry
     Open Source Communities (as Dave Ward said at IETF 91 Lunch
     session).


Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


     Open-source initiatives are not to be considered as an alternative
     to formal standardization processes. On the contrary, they are
     complementary, with the former acting as an enabler and
     accelerator of the latter. Open-source provides an ideal mechanism
     to quick prototyping and validating contending proposals, and
     demonstrating the feasibility of disruptive ideas that could
     otherwise not be considered. In this respect, open-source
     facilitates the engagement in the standardization process of small
     (and typically more dynamic) players such as start-ups and
     research groups, that would see better opportunities of being
     heard and a clearer rewards to their efforts. An open-source
     approach is extremely useful as well for the production of open
     reference implementations of the standards at the same (or even
     faster) pace they are defined. The availability of such reference
     implementations translate into much simpler interoperability and
     conformance assessments for both providers and users, and can
     become the basis for incremental differentiation of a common
     solution, thus allowing a cooperative competition ("coopetition")
     model.

  7. Security Policies/functions negotiation

   The protocol needed for this security function/policies negotiation
   may be somewhat correlated to the dynamic service parameter
   negotiation procedure [RFC7297]. The CPP template documented in
   RFC7297, even though currently covering only Connectivity, could be
   extended as a basis for the negotiation procedure. Likewise, the
   companion CPNP protocol could be a candidate to proceed with the
   negotiation procedure.

   The "security as a service" would be a typical example of the kind
   of (CPP-based) negotiation procedures that could take place between
   a corporate customer and a service provider. However, more security
   specific parameters have to be considered by this proposed work.

  8. Conclusion and Recommendation

   The I2NSF aims at providing standard interfaces for clients to
   express, monitor, and manage their desired security policies, which
   can be instantiated on devices at different premises.



Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


  9. Manageability Considerations

   TBD.

  10. Security Considerations

   TBD

  11. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please remove
   this section before publication.

  12. References
12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC7297] Boucadair, M., "IP Connectivity Provisioning Profile",
             RFC7297, April 2014.

12.2. Informative References

   [I2NSF-ACCESS] A. Pastor, et al, "Access Use Cases for an Open OAM
             Interface to Virtualized Security Services", <draft-
             pastor-i2nsf-access-usecases-00>, Oct 2014.

   [I2NSF-DC] M. Zarny, et al, "I2NSF Data Center Use Cases", <draft-
             zarny-i2nsf-data-center-use-cases-00>, Oct 2014.

   [I2NSF-MOBILE] M. Qi, et al, "Integrated Security with Access
             Network Use Case", <draft-qi-i2nsf-access-network-usecase-
             00>, Oct 2014

    [gs_NFV] ETSI NFV Group Specification, Network Functions
             Virtualizsation (NFV) Use Cases. ETSI GS NFV 001v1.1.1,
             2013.





Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015


   [Boucadair-framework] M. Boucadair, et al, "Differentiated Service
             Function Chaining Framework", < draft-boucadair-service-
             chaining-framework-00>; Aug 2013

   [Gartner-2013] E. Messmer, "Gartner: Cloud-based security as a
             service set to take off", Network World, 31 October 2013

   [NW-2011] J. Burke, "The Pros and Cons of a Cloud-Based Firewall",
             Network World, 11 November 2011

   [SC-MobileNetwork] W. Haeffner, N. Leymann, "Network Based Services
             in Mobile Network", IETF87 Berlin, July 29, 2013

   [Application-SDN] J. Giacomonni, "Application Layer SDN", Layer 123
             ONF Presentation, Singapore, June 2013

  13. Acknowledgments

   Acknowledgements to Andy Malis for his review and contributions.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

























Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement                Feb 2015



Authors' Addresses
   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175
   Plano, TX 75024, USA
   Phone: (469) 277 5840
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com

   Myo Zarny
   Goldman Sachs
   30 Hudson Street
   Jersey City, NJ 07302
   Email: myo.zarny@gs.com

   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes 35000
   France
   Email: Christian.jacquenet@orange.com


   Shaibal Chakrabarty
   US Ignite
   1776 Massachusetts Ave NW, Suite 601
   Washington, DC 20036
   Phone: (214) 708 6163
   Email: shaibalc@us-ignite.org

















Dunbar, et al.          Expires August 4, 2015                [Page 18]

