



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Obsoletes: 4371 (if approved)                                  T. Hardie
Intended status: Best Current Practice                  February 4, 2019
Expires: August 8, 2019


   Update to the Process for Selection of Trustees for the IETF Trust
                    draft-ietf-iasa2-trust-update-03

Abstract

   This memo updates the process for selection of trustees for the IETF
   Trust.  Previously, the Internet Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC) members also acted as trustees, but the IAOC has been
   eliminated as part of an update of the structure of the Internet
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  This memo specifies that the
   trustees shall be selected separately.

   This memo obsoletes RFC 4371.  The changes relate only to the
   selection of trustees.  All other aspects of the IETF Trust remain as
   they are today.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 8, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Trustees for the IETF Trust         February 2019


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  IETF Trust  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Selection of Trustees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Appendix A.  Changes from Previous Versions . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   This memo updates the process for selection of trustees for the IETF
   Trust.  Previously, the Internet Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC) members also acted as trustees, but the IAOC has been
   eliminated as part of an update of the structure of the Internet
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  This memo specifies that the
   trustees shall be selected separately.  See Section 3.

   This memo obsoletes RFC 4371.  The changes relate only to the
   selection of trustees.  All other aspects of the IETF Trust remain as
   they are today.  Section 2 copies the definition as it was in RFC
   4371, only leaving out the part about trustee selection and adding a
   reference to the IETF Trust website.

   For a discussion of why this change is needed and a rationale for
   these specific changes, see [I-D.ietf-iasa2-trust-rationale].

2.  IETF Trust

   A Trust ("the IETF Trust") has been formed for the purpose of
   acquiring, holding, maintaining, and licensing certain existing and
   future intellectual property and other property used in connection
   with the administration of the IETF.  The Trust was formed by the
   signatures of its Settlors and initial Trustees.  The Settlors, who
   contributed initial intellectual property to the Trust, were ISOC and




Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Trustees for the IETF Trust         February 2019


   the Corporation for National Research Initiatives.  The Beneficiary
   of the IETF Trust is the IETF as a whole.

   Further details of the IETF Trust may be found at the IETF Trust's
   website, <https://trustee.ietf.org/>.

3.  Selection of Trustees

   This document revises the original Trustee selection procedures
   defined in [RFC4071] and [RFC4371], to eliminate the requirement that
   trustees be drawn from the members of the IAOC.

   In this newly revised IETF Trust structure, there will be five
   Trustees.  Three shall be appointed by the IETF Nominating Committee
   (NomCom) and confirmed by the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG), one shall be appointed by the IESG, and one shall be
   appointed by the Internet Society (ISOC) Board of Trustees.  The
   appointments by the IESG and ISOC Board of Trustees do not require
   confirmation.

   The IETF Trust Chair informs the nominating committee of the Trustee
   positions to be reviewed.  The IETF Trust will provide a summary of
   the expertise desired of the Trustee candidates to each appointing
   body.

   A change to the Trust Agreement is required to put this change into
   effect, and this document requests that the current Trustees make
   this change at the earliest convenient time and no later than the end
   of the 104th IETF meeting in March 2019.

   The terms of the appointed trustees from IETF NomCom shall be three
   years.  The initial selection shall be one, two, and three year terms
   in order to initially stagger the terms.  The other appointments by
   the IESG and the ISOC Board of Trustees shall be two year terms, with
   the initial terms being one and two years, respectively.  The goal of
   the staggered initial terms is to minimize potential Trustee turnover
   in any single year.  To maintain the staggered terms, each appointing
   body may at its discretion appoint Trustees for shorter terms as
   needed in exceptional situations, e.g., for mid-term vacancies or
   when an appointment is not ready by the time of the first IETF of the
   year.

   Once the initial trustee selections according to the procedures in
   this document are complete, and at each subsequent annual meeting of
   the IETF Trust once new trustees are seated, the trustees shall elect
   by a majority vote of the IETF Trust one trustee to serve as IETF
   Trust Chair.




Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Trustees for the IETF Trust         February 2019


   The processes regarding NomCom appointments and recalls of Trustees
   for the IETF Trust follow those described in
   [I-D.ietf-iasa2-rfc7437bis].  For the appointments by the IESG, the
   IESG is expected to run an open selection process and to consider the
   necessary skill set and conflicts of interest as part of that
   process.

4.  Security Considerations

   This memo has no security implications for the Internet.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo requests no action from IANA.

6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank members of the earlier IASA 2.0
   design team who were Brian Haberman, Eric Rescorla, Jari Arkko, Jason
   Livingood, Joe Hall, and Leslie Daigle.  The authors would also like
   to thank Alissa Cooper, Andrew Sullivan, Brian Carpenter, Lucy Lynch,
   and John Levine for interesting discussions in this problem space.
   The authors would also like to thank Russ Housley, Bob Hinden, Scott
   Mansfield, Alexey Melnikov, Suresh Krishnan, Mirja Kuhlewind, Ben
   Campbell, Spencer Dawkins, Martin Vigoreux, Benjamin Kaduk, and
   Adrian Farrel for careful review.  Finally, the authors would like to
   thank the authors of [RFC4371], as the text from that RFC remains in
   this document.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-iasa2-rfc7437bis]
              Kucherawy, M., Hinden, R., and J. Livingood, "IAB, IESG,
              IETF Trust and IETF LLC Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the IETF Nominating and
              Recall Committees", draft-ietf-iasa2-rfc7437bis-05 (work
              in progress), January 2019.

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R., Ed. and B. Wijnen, Ed., "Structure of the
              IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, DOI 10.17487/RFC4071, April 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4071>.

   [RFC4371]  Carpenter, B., Ed. and L. Lynch, Ed., "BCP 101 Update for
              IPR Trust", BCP 101, RFC 4371, DOI 10.17487/RFC4371,
              January 2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4371>.



Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Trustees for the IETF Trust         February 2019


7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-iasa2-trust-rationale]
              Arkko, J., "Discussion of the IASA 2.0 Changes as They
              Relate to the IETF Trust", draft-ietf-iasa2-trust-
              rationale-03 (work in progress), October 2018.

Appendix A.  Changes from Previous Versions

   RFC Editor: Please remove this section upon publication.

   The -03pre1b version replaced updates of RFCs 4071 and 4371 with
   obsoletion of RFC 4371, and updated the reference to RFC 7437 to its
   newer bis version.  It also copied the one remaining paragraph from
   RFC 4371 to this document.

   The version draft-itef-iasa2-trust-update-02.txt made some editorial
   corrections, as well as clarifying that no confirmation is needed in
   the cases other than the nomcom appointment, specified how IETF Trust
   chair is chosen, and required that an open process be used by the
   IESG for the selections.

   The version draft-ietf-iasa2-trust-update-01.txt has taken into
   account last call comments.  The changes are: 1) Clarification of the
   role of the IETF Trust Chair to indicate which trustee positions are
   up for selection, similar to how RFC 7437 requires the IETF Executive
   Director to do it. 2) The addition of empty security and IANA
   consideration sections. 3) The clarification of the staggering rules
   for NomCom selections. 4) Updated text regarding the application of
   rules from RFC 7437. 5) Update draft title to be correct in terms of
   specifying a process rather than the actual persons.  6) Update the
   text regarding desirable expertise to use the same language as in RFC
   7437 instead of the "list of desired qualifications".

   The version draft-ietf-iasa2-trust-update-00.txt corrected the
   desired document status to BCP, and made several editorial and
   language updates.  This version also updated the wording for the
   request for the current trustees to adopt this change, from "earliest
   convenience" to "earliest convenient time".

   The version draft-arkko-iasa2-trust-update-00.txt was the initial
   version.

Authors' Addresses







Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Trustees for the IETF Trust         February 2019


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Kauniainen  02700
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net


   Ted Hardie

   Email: ted.ietf@gmail.com








































Arkko & Hardie           Expires August 8, 2019                 [Page 6]
