


Mobility Extensions for IPv6                                   W. Haddad
(Mext)                                                          Qualcomm
Internet-Draft                                                 F. Dupont
Intended status: Standards Track                                     ISC
Expires: January 15, 2009                                  July 14, 2008


  Enabling an Enhanced Care-of Address Reachability Test for the Home
                                 Agent
            draft-haddad-mext-enhanced-reachability-test-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2009.
















Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


Abstract

   This memo aims to improve Mobile IPv6 protocol security by enabling
   an enhanced care-of address rechability test for the home agent.  The
   main goals are to discourage a rogue mobile node from misleading its
   home agent to flood a targeted foreign network and to empower the
   latter to thwart this type of attack if launched at a later stage.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Goals and Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Proposed Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  New Options and Messages Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12





























Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


1.  Introduction

   Mobile IPv6 protocol (described in [MIPv6]) describes two different
   modes for handling data packet exchange when the mobile node (MN) is
   located in a foreign network.  These two modes, namely the
   bidirectional tunneling (BT) and route optimization (RO), have two
   commonalities.  The first one is the mechanism used to update the HA
   after each IP handoff and requires the MN to send a binding update
   (BU) message to its HA immediately after configuring a care-of
   address (CoA).  A second commonality is the HA's reaction upon
   receiving a valid BU message and can be described as a blind trust in
   the MN claim(s) regarding its new CoA(s).  The common consequence is
   that the HA will always tunnel data packets to the MN's new location
   without conducting any reachability test on the new claimed CoA.

   This memo aims first and foremost to avoid the potential consequences
   of lack of CoA reachability test on the HA side.  For this purpose,
   it introduces an enhanced and seamless CoA test which makes launching
   a network flooding attack complicated enough to discourage a rogue MN
   from misleading its HA to flood a particular target.  In addition, it
   empowers the targeted network to thwart such attack if launched at a
   later stage.





























Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERM].














































Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


3.  Goals and Assumptions

   The suggested work is motivated by two main goals.  An explicit goal
   is to improve MIPv6 overall security without increasing the signaling
   message load on the MN.  For this purpose, the key exchange in the
   proposed mechanism is performed between the MN's HA and the new AR.
   It should be noted here that repeating the same CoA reachability test
   as the one which is periodically performed between the MN and its
   CN(s), i.e., as part of the return routability procedure, will result
   in a significant increase in the amount of signaling messages on the
   MN side as it needs also to be repeated periodically in order to be
   efficient.

   The resulting improvement from the proposed mechanism should also
   benefit other protocols which have been designed around MIPv6, e.g.,
   network mobility protocol (described in [NEMO]).  Another goal is to
   strengthen the network's ability to thwart network flooding attack
   launched via the MN's HA by improving the network protective means,
   in the same way as has already been suggested in the network flooding
   defense mechanism (described in [NFD]) for the enhanced route
   optimization (described in [ERO]).

   Another implicit goal is to provide yet another strong incentive to
   deploy the secure neighbor discovery protocol (described in [SeND]),
   as the proposed mechanism assumes that SeND is deployed.  This means
   that the MN is CGA enabled (as described in [CGA]) and is able to
   exploit all protective features provided by SeND on the link.
























Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


4.  Proposed Mechanism

   In order to address the issues and uncertainties described earlier,
   we introduce in the following an enhanced secure and seamless CoA
   reachability test which is triggered by the MN's HA upon receiving a
   valid BU message from the MN.  The suggested reachability test does
   not directly involve the MN and does not affect the HA treatment of
   the BU message (as described in RFC3775) nor does it increase the
   overall latency.  In fact, the suggested mechanism involves the MN in
   three ways.  The first one is not new as it has already been used in
   NFD and consists on establishing a 'symbiotic' relationship (SR) with
   the AR (described in [SRP]).  The second requirement put on the MN is
   to "partially" inform its HA about the new SR related to its claimed
   CoA, its new AR's IP address, the AR's public key as well as
   providing the HA a link to the AR's certificate.  Clearly, these
   information will be sent in the BU message and thus, require defining
   new options.  The third and last requirement is to send also the HA's
   IPv6 address and its public key to the new AR.  Again, this
   information should be sent in new options carried in one message used
   during a neighbor discovery protocol (described in [NDP]) exchange,
   e.g., the router solicitation (RtSol) message.

   Establishing an SR with the AR requires the MN to incorporate special
   parameters in order to generate the 128-bit random parameter
   (RAN(128)) to be used to configure its CGA address.  As described in
   the SRP mechanism, this means that the RAN(128) used together with
   the MN's public key and other parameters to generate the 64-bit
   interface identifier (IID) should in turn, be generated from the AR's
   public key and another "inner" random 128-bit parameter
   (I_RAND(128)).  The MN should then encrypt the I_RAND(128) with the
   AR's public key and send it to the AR in an NDP message signed with
   the MN's CGA private key.  In addition, the MN MUST also include the
   HA's IPv6 address and may also provide the HA's public key.  These
   two parameters will be stored by the AR together with the MN's SR and
   its public key.

   On the HA side, the MN must include in the BU message the AR's IPv6
   address, its public key and a link to its certificate, i.e., the same
   as the one obtained by the MN when attaching to the AR link.  In
   addition, the MN must include in an encrypted form a 128-bit
   parameter derived from hashing RAND(128) and called HRAND(128)).

   As mentioned earlier, the design of the suggested CoA reachability
   test should avoid increasing the latency.  For this purpose, it is
   highly recommended that the HA triggers the CoA reachability test
   immediately after launching the DAD procedure for the MN's IPv6 home
   address, following the receipt of a valid BU message.  Triggering an
   enhanced CoA reachability test requires the HA to send a new message



Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


   called "Binding Confirm Request (BCR)" to the MN's AR in which, it
   must insert the MN's new claimed CoA, a nonce and disclose what it
   knows about the SR established between the MN and its AR by
   authenticating the message with HRAND(128).  In addition, the HA MAY
   sign the BCR message.

   Upon receiving a BCR message, the AR starts first by checking if the
   queried CoA is stored in its cache memory.  Then it fetches the MN's
   corresponding SR and uses it to validate the HA knowledge by checking
   the message authenticity.  If the HA's public key is available, and
   only if the authentication is valid, then the AR proceeds to check
   also the signature.  If the authentication is valid (and the
   signature if it is provided), then the AR should immediately reply by
   sending a "Binding Confirm (BC)" message in which, it MUST insert the
   nonce, authenticate it with HRAND(128) and sign it with its private
   key.

   When the HA gets a BC message from the AR, it starts first by
   checking the nonce then validates the message authenticity.  Then it
   verifies the signature by using the AR's public key already stored in
   the MN's corresponding entry.  It becomes clear by now that the AR's
   signature is a key feature as it allows the HA to validate the
   certificate provided by the MN and provides a solid proof to the HA
   about the AR's role and topological location.  Hence, if the
   signature is valid, then the HA can consider with enough confidence
   that the MN has indeed visited the AR and exchanged NDP messages with
   it and an SR has been accepted.  Furthermore, it also serves as an
   indication to the HA that the AR is now empowered to repel any
   malicious behavior that can emanate from the MN, e.g., launching a
   flooding attack at a later stage.  It follows that the CoA
   reachability test does not need to be repeated periodically.

   After completing a successful reachability test, i.e., performed in
   parallel with the DAD procedure in the home network, the HA starts
   tunneling data packets to the MN's new CoA.  As already mentioned,
   the presence of the SR between the MN and its AR will prevent the MN
   from moving away at some point, and launching a flooding attack by
   keeping sending acknowledgment messages to the CN, e.g., using
   another interface.  In fact, in case such an attack is launched, the
   AR will quickly detect the MN's absence on the link and securely
   request the HA to halt the data packets flow to the MN's CoA.  Note
   that in our context, making a secure request to the HA implies that
   the AR MUST send the SR established by the MN without encryption and
   must sign the message with its private key.  This also means that
   processing such request on the HA side means that it has to check
   first if the SR is valid by hashing it and comparing the hash to the
   corresponding HRAND(128).




Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


5.  New Options and Messages Formats

   TBD
















































Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


6.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces an enhanced and seamless CoA reachability
   test especially designed to be used by the HA in order to check the
   MN's topological location and compare it to the claimed CoA.  In
   fact, the proposed mechanism enables to address uncertainties
   surrounding a potential network flooding threat in MIPv6 protocol as
   well as in its derivative(s).  Consequently, the main goal is to
   improve the security in MIPv6 in a way which does not directly
   involve the MN and does not require a periodic exchange of signaling
   messages.

   The proposed mechanism is inspired from the NFD mechanism which is
   tightly based on the SR concept to enable replacing the periodic CoA
   reachability test on the CN side.  In other words, the presence of an
   SR does not require adding new parameters in order to secure the
   exchange between the HA and the AR, although this is possible.

   Our suggested protocol also assumes that the HA is always interested
   in validating the MN's claimed CoA prior to any data traffic
   redirection to the new claimed CoA.  Such assumption severely limits
   the MN's manoeuvrability room for bypassing such test since the
   absence of any information regarding the AR and SR in the BU message
   will lead the HA to test the MN's CoA reachability using a state
   cookie as described in [CTSC], i.e., by asking the MN directly upon
   receiving a valid BU message.  In such scenario, if the MN has
   established an SR with the AR but avoided disclosing it to its HA,
   then it will have to answer the reachability test by itself which
   implies sending an additional mobility signaling message.  Otherwise,
   i.e., in the absence of an SR, the AR won't forward the message sent
   by the HA to its final destination in which case, the MN won't be
   able to answer the reachability test nor to get its data traffic.
   This also means that the MN won't be able to launch any attack as it
   will be practically considered by the AR as non-existing on its link.

















Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [CGA]    Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
            RFC 3792, March 2005.

   [ERO]    Vogt, C., Arkko, J., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
            Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, June 2006.

   [MIPv6]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
            for IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [NDP]    Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
            "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
            September 2007.

   [NEMO]   Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
            "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
            January 2005.

   [SeND]   Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfield, B., Zill, B., and P.
            Nikander, "Secure Neighbor Discovery (SeND)", RFC 3971,
            March 2005.

   [TERM]   Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
            Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP , March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [CTSC]   Dupont, F. and J. Combes, "Care-of Address Test for MIPv6
            using a State Cookie", Internet
            Draft, draft-dupont-mipv6-rrcookie-05.txt, November 2007.

   [NFD]    Haddad, W. and M. Naslund, "On Using 'Symbiotic
            Relationship' to Repel Network Flooding Attack", Internet
            Draft, draft-haddad-mipshop-netflood-defense-01.txt,
            July 2008.

   [SRP]    Haddad, W. and M. Naslund, "On Secure Neighbor Discovery
            Proxying Using 'Symbiotic' Relationship", Internet
            Draft, draft-haddad-cgaext-symbiotic-sendproxy-01.txt,
            July 2008.








Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad
   Qualcomm
   500 Somerset Corporate Blvd
   Bridgewater, New Jersey 08807
   US

   Phone: +908 938 5027
   Email: whaddad@qualcomm.com


   Francis Dupont
   ISC

   Email: Francis.Dupont@fdupont.fr



































Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Enhanced CoA Reachability Test            July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Haddad & Dupont         Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 12]

