Transport-Services                                       M.J. Montpetit
Internet Draft                                                      MIT
Intended status: Informational                          I. Zhovnirovsky
Expires: June 5, 2014                                           QFactor
                                                       December 5, 2013

                       Use Cases and Requirements
                draft-montpetit-transport-use-cases-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as 
   Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 5, 2014.
Copyright Notice
   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.




Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 1]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013
Abstract

   This document describes some of the use cases that will allow
   choosing different transport services. It also presents their
   derived requirements and conditions of utilization, when available,
   to an application attached to an Internet subnetwork. The use cases
   assume that a transport "choice" is based on the requirements of 
   the application. The fallback is considered to be TCP/UDP.

Table of Contents1. Introduction

2. Conventions used in this document

3. Application Use Cases and Derived Requirements

3.1. Web Surfing/Browsing

3.2. Streaming Video

3.3. Real-time Communications

3.4. Photo/video Sharing
3.5. Data centers/storage

3.6. Internet of Things (IoT)
3.7. Public Safety
3.8. Information Centric Networks/Content Centric Networks
4. Security Considerations
5. IANA Considerations
6. Conclusions
7. References
8. Acknowledgments






Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 2]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013
1. Introduction
   Different transport services are now being developed in the Internet
   Community. A number of these are used to address performance
   requirements that standard transport such as the TCP and UDP
   protocol meet only partially especially over wireless. This document
   defines the use cases most likely to necessitate the use of one
   of those transport service and to list their derived requirements. It
   responds to a need to define which transport service is best suited
   for an application and which API(s) would allow the use of those
   services. The APIs are considered to be native to the platform. The
   applications will request a connection by specifying a set of 
   requirements. The will then API connect it to the best fit 
   "transport" (falling back to TCP/UDP if nothing is compliant).Hence
   the use cases will help define how to update middleware to work
   better without requiring a change to existing API and envision some
   futuristic situations where applications would use a newer enhanced
   and common API, to benefit from novel network services. In this
   document the actual underlying link layer is not specified but it is
   assumed that for example wireless enhanced transport services will
   be used in many of the cases.
2. Conventions used in this document
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119[1]. 
   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.
3. Application Use Cases and Derived Requirements

   In this section we define the use cases for a number of 
   applications that require one (1) or more transport service.
   The application should be able to use an API based on derived
   requirements such as bandwidth or delay or security, beyond
   the usual fallback of TCP and UDP.

3.1. Web Surfing/Browsing
   <Will add text>




Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 3]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013
3.1.1. Faster Browsing via multi-streaming for HTTP prior to 2.0
3.1.1.1. Description
   Using a new TCP connection for every HTTP request is known to be
   inefficient; it causes delay for connection setup and requires a TCP
   connection to spend most of its time in slow start, operating at a
   point that may be far from the capacity of the path between the
   sender and receiver. HTTP/1.1 allows persistently using the same TCP
   connection for multiple HTTP requests, but with a fixed sequence
   that is defined by the browser, thereby creating Head-Of-Line (HOL)
   blocking delay if e.g. the first of several such requests requires
   accessing a database. SPDY and HTTP/2.0 seek to improve upon the
   performance of HTTP/1.1 by asynchronously multiplexing multiple
   application-level (web) flows onto a single TCP connection. However,
   HOL blocking delay in the order of a Round-Trip Time (RTT) can still
   occur whenever a packet is dropped, as TCP only allows delivering
   data in the exact order in which they arrive. This problem is
   alleviated with QUIC [9], a UDP-based transport protocol that 
   operates under SPDY [2].
   The SPDY/QUIC solution is not without issues. UDP may sometimes be
   blocked; some middle-boxes rate-limit UDP more than TCP [5]. Running
   a transport protocol in user space may have issues in very-low-RTT
   environments due to less precise Operating System timing. Not all
   clients and servers support both protocols. It seems that being able
   to provide similar benefits without requiring changing the HTTP
   implementation could be beneficial for many web browsers and
   servers.
3.1.2. Derived requirements
   It is possible to let applications that open the same set of
   (seemingly) TCP connections between the same pair of hosts benefit
   from SCTP's multi-streaming. In [10], this was prototypically done
   with middle-boxes that terminated the TCP connections and mapped
   them onto streams of a single SCTP association. This did not require
   any change to the applications themselves. If a similar function was
   provided by the Operating System, directly underneath the socket
   interface, the same benefits could be attained with fewer overheads.
   This requires hiding the use of SCTP (or any other multi-streaming-
   capable transport, e.g. Minion [7]) from applications, and it needs 
   a signal inside the protocol in use to tell the host on the receiving
   end that these streams must be mapped back onto what an application
   believes to be TCP sockets.



Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 4]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013


3.1.3. Other HTTP acceleration mechanisms

<To be provided>

3.2. Streaming Video
   Streaming video is one of the dominant traffic types on the
   Internet. Hence the choice of an appropriate transport service for
   video may become essential in the future to minimize congestion and
   increase user experience.
3.2.1. Adaptive Video Streaming
   <To be provided>

3.2.2. Scavenger-Type Pre-Fetching Of Streaming Media
3.2.2.1. Description
   Streaming media applications use a play-out buffer on the receiver
   (consumer) side to avoid playback interruptions when the network
   bandwidth temporarily drops below the bitrate of the stream. As
   visualized with the playback bar in most popular streaming systems
   such as e.g. YouTube, this buffer is typically filled a couple of
   seconds ahead of the play-out time. If the network's capacity would
   allow filling it much further ahead, this could have multiple 
   benefits:
   -  if congestion happens later, the play-out would stay
      uninterrupted for a longer period or the risk of interruptions
      would be reduced further

   -  if a user decides to skip ahead within the length of the already
      buffered data, this request could be honored instantly as the
      data are already available in the receiving host
   This is, however, not typically done. One reason to avoid pre-
   fetching much more than users need most of the time is that this may
   be seen as a waste of network capacity that could otherwise be left
   up to other applications. If, however, this was done in a scavenger-
   like mode, using a congestion control that backs off as soon as
   other flows compete for network capacity, this problem would
   disappear, and it would probably be beneficial to pre-fetch
   as much as possible at any time.




Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 5]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013

3.2.2.2. Derived Requirements

   A transport protocol that is used for streaming media should, upon
   request from the application, switch to a low-priority congestion
   control mechanism such as LEDBAT on the fly. Switching back from
   low-priority to "normal" congestion control must happen when e.g.
   the user moves the playback bar beyond the end of the playback 
   buffer and must therefore also be possible on the fly.
3.3. Real-time Communications

   Real time communications can be divided into three (3) 
   categories, namely voice, video and gaming that may have 
   different requirements. 
3.3.1. Voice over IP
3.3.1.1. Description
   Voice over IP uses the real time transport protocol (RTP) over UDP 
   transport. The transport requirements of VoIP have been defined and
   solutions implemented including when there are interactions with
   intermediate boxes including firewalls and NAT boxes.
3.3.1.2. Derived Requirements
   In order for a transport service to provide VoIP services it
   requires minimal delay, in-order delivery and adequate error
   mitigation. And while UDP is the preferred protocol newer transports
   (such as Minion or others) could provide better performance.
3.3.2. IP based real-time video
   TV over the Internet Protocol (IPTV) adds multicast requirements as 
   well as the use of minimal caching, except for so called "trick 
   plays" over linear transmission, to streaming. The now concluded
   reliable multicast working group (rmt) has defined a number of
   mechanisms to provide multicast services using acknowledgements and
   forward error correction. 
   <reviewing rmt documentation and more inputs to come>
3.3.2.1. Derived Requirements
   In order for a transport service to provide IPTV services it 
   requires minimal delay, in-order delivery and very good error
   mitigation.



Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 6]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013

3.3.3. Gaming

   Online games require very low delay and because of that use small
   packets (and in this share requirements with VoIP). It is also
   beneficial to think that games could use tunneling and other
   multiplexing mechanisms to ensure minimal delay and synchronization
   between players.

3.3.3.1 Description

  <to come>
3.3.3.2. Derived Requirements
   <to come>
3.4. Photo/video Sharing
  <to come>
3.5. Data centers/storage
   There is a lot of work being performed in TCP for data centers (DCs) 
   and as such DCs require certain characteristics from the transport
   layer.

3.5.1. Description
   <reviewing DCTCP-slides][4] > 
3.6. Internet of Things (IoT)
   While the Internet of Things has yes to define specific requirements
   for transport services a number of protocols to collect sensor data
   have been proposed, such a IBM Machine to Machine communication
   protocol call Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) which
   covers part of the IoT spectrum of application.
   <More to come>
3.7. Public Safety
   In the past few years there has been a push for public safety
   systems to use Internet based protocols and private and public
   networks to ensure availability and resiliency.


Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 7]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013

3.7.1. Description
   Public safety services are similar to the ones already defined above
   (browsing, caching, real time services, streaming etc.). However,
   the nature of these services requires strong security, high
   reliability and 'always on' nature.
3.7.2. Derived Requirements
   In order for transport services to be used in public safety strong
   encryption like the one proposed by tcpcrypt [3] may be useful. In
   addition low delay is essential. Reliability the and always-on
   requirements can also be enhanced by mechanisms like FEC. Some 
   requirements are shared with multipath TCP [8].
3.8. Information Centric Networks/Content Centric Networks
   Information Centric (ICN) and Content Centric (CCN) Networking
   are emerging interest area in the Internet and define
   new mechanisms to connect to resources. The IRTF has chartered an 
   ICN working group [6] that will investigate the issues like 
   scalability and naming conventions to ensure deployability.
3.8.1. Description

   An ICN does not require a different transport but will signal
   transport requirements in a different manner.

3.8.2. Derived Requirements
   In the ICN/CCN work the access to a specific resource via the
   transport mechanism will be in the form of a publish/subscribe. 
   It is for the transport to derive what this means in terms of
   performance.

   <To be completed>
4. Security Considerations
   None relating to the document. Specific use case security
   requirements to be detailed later.




Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 8]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013

5. IANA Considerations
   This document makes no request of IANA.
   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.
6. Conclusion

   <Will add a conclusion>

7. References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References
   [2]   Mike Belshe, Robert Peon, "SPDY Protocol", draft-mbelshe-
         httpbis-spdy-00, February 2012.
   [3]   A. Bittau, Dan Boneh, M. Hamburg, H. Handley, D. Mazieres,
         Q. Slack, "Cryptographic protection of TCP Streams",
         draft-bittau-tcp-crypt-03, September 3, 2012.
   [4]   DTCP Slide deck:
         http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/80/slides/iccrg-3.pdf
   [5]   Seppo Hatonen, Aki Nyrhinen, Lars Eggert, Stephen Strowes,
         Pasi Sarolahti and Markku Kojo. "An Experimental Study of Home
         Gateway Characteristics." Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Internet 
         Measurement Conference (IMC), Melbourne, Australia, November
         1-3, 2010.
   [6]   Information Centric Network IRTF charter: 
         http://irtf.org/icnrg.
   [7]   Jana Iyengar, Stuart Cheschire, Josh Graessley, "Minion - 
         Service Model and Conceptual API", draft-iyengar-minion-
         concept-02, October 21 2013 (work in progress).
   [8]   Michael Sharf, Alan Ford, "Multipath TCP (MPTCP) Application
         Interface Considerations", RFC 6897, March 2013. 

Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                  [Page 9]


Internet-Draft   draft-montpetit-transport-use-case       December 2013

   [9]   QUIC Slide Deck at IETF88, 
         http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/88/slides/slides-88-tsvarea-
         10.pdf
   [10]  Michael Welzl, Florian Niederbacher, Stein Gjessing: 
         "Beneficial Transparent Deployment of SCTP: the Missing
         Pieces",IEEE GlobeCom 2011, 5-9 December 2011, 
         Houston, Texas.
   <others to come>
8.  Acknowledgments
   The author would like to thank Michael Welzl, Jose Saldana, Igor 
   Zhovnirovsky, Lars Eggert and Martin Sustrik for use case 
   suggestions and technical discussions prior to and during the
   preparation of this draft.
   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors. 
   All rights reserved.Authors' Addresses
Marie-Jose MontpetitMITEmail: mariejo@mit.edu

Igor Zhovnirovsky 
QFactor Communications
Email: iez@qfactor.com











Montpetit                Expires June 5, 2014                 [Page 10]


