
Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                                  VeriSign
Expires: February 18, 2002                                   L. Masinter
                                                               AT&T Labs
                                                               T. Hardie
                                                                 Equinix
                                                                G. Klyne
                                               Content Technologies Ltd.
                                                         August 20, 2001


      An IETF URN Sub-namespace for Registered Protocol Parameters
                     draft-mealling-iana-urn-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 18, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a new sub-delegation for the 'ietf' URN
   namespace defined in RFC 2648 for registered protocol items.

1. Introduction

   From time to time IETF standards require the registration of various



Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


   protocol elements in some well known central repository.  The
   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority maintains this central authority
   and takes direction from the IETF on what, how and when to add items
   to that registry.  The IANA maintains lists of items such as all
   assigned port numbers, MIME media types, enterprise numbers, etc.
   Over time there has developed a need to be able to reference these
   elements in various schema.  In the past this was done in a very
   adhoc way that easily led to interoperability problems.  This
   document creates a new sub-delegation below the "ietf" [2]URN
   namespace [1] called 'params' which acts as a standardized mechanism
   for naming the items registered for IETF standards.

2. Lessons Learned

   In the process of writing this document, the authors attempted to
   pre-assign as many names as possible.  This involved a complete
   review of every item currently in the IANA repository.  There were
   several organizational issues that had direct impact on how well a
   URN could be assigned to particular existing entries in the registry.
   As a result, the authors have included a set of recommendations that
   could be made to document authors seeking to setup new registries.

2.1 Multiple Registries Per File

   The authors found that the practice of putting multiple registries in
   a single file on the IANA ftp archive caused large amounts of
   confusion.  A good example is the Mobile IP Numbers registry.  Due to
   having several very different concepts in the same file it is very
   difficult to understand where one set of parameters ends and another
   begins.

   The authors recommend that, in the future, the IANA create
   subdirectories in which each separate registry is maintained in a
   separate file.  Also, document authors are encouraged to suggest a
   document/directory structure to the IANA in their IANA considerations
   section.

2.2 Unclear Index Values

   In many cases the registry had no clearly unique value that could be
   used in the URN.  An example here is the Public Data Network Numbers
   registry which is a mapping between IP addresses and X.121 addresses.
   It is not clear which value to use in the name.  In recent history
   the IANA has begun assigning a simple index value to assignments and
   often this can be used in the URN.  Document authors are encouraged
   to include some type of indexing value in their IANA considerations
   section so that some other entity can uniquely talk about a
   particular entry.



Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


2.3 General Disorganization

   Due to historical neglect there are several registries that are in a
   general state of 'disrepair'.  The Mobile IP Numbers registry above
   is a good example.  Experts in this area are encouraged to produce
   new documents providing guidance to the IANA for how these registries
   should be organized for clarity.

2.4 Obsolete Registries

   While there have been a few registries that have been marked as
   obsolete (SGMP Vendor Specific Codes), there is a general lack of a
   way of moving an IANA registry to historical status.  The authors
   recommend that the IESG create a method by which a document can
   request that an IANA registry be obsoleted.

3. Changes to RFC 2434

   The authors realize that assigning URNs to new items in the registry
   with no guidance from those asking for the registry is an additional
   burden the IANA does not need.  Thus the authors suggest that the
   following updates be made to RFC 2434:

   In the event that an RFC requests that the IANA maintain a registry,
   the IANA Considerations section of that document MUST include the
   following:

   o  The top level registry name -- This is the unique string that goes
      between the third and fourth colons in the URN and is also used as
      the directory name in any network accessible repositories.  For
      example, the registry name for the Socks Methods is found in the
      sub-directory called "socks-methods" on the IANA FTP site.  This
      value is also used to assign the URN as "urn:ietf:params:socks-
      methods:".  The requesting document MUST provide this value but
      the IANA SHOULD follow that recommendation.  In the case where
      there is a conflict the IANA can assign another value.

      The intent here is that if the registry is simple then this value
      will be both the filename in which the IANA puts this information
      and the URN sub-namespace that is created.  If the registry is
      complex and thus has sub-registries, then this value will be the
      directory name in the FTP archive.

   o  sub-registry names -- In the case where a particular registry has
      sub-sections then the requesting document MUST provide names for
      these sub-registries.  The intent is that these sub-registry names
      will be the filenames/sub-directories that exist under the
      registry directory as well as being the section name in the URN



Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


      that is assigned.  The document author should ensure that for each
      sub-registry there is one and only one set of values and that an
      index value exists that is unique within that sub-registry.


4. Namespace Specifics

   Using the template in RFC 2611 as a guide, this is the specification
   for the 'params' sub-namespace:

   Sub-namespace name:

      "params"


   Declared registrant of the namespace:



       The Internet Engineering Task Force


   Declaration of structure:

      The namespace is primarily opaque.  The IANA, as operator of the
      registry, may take suggestions for names to assign but they
      reserve the right to assign whatever name they desire, within
      guidelines set by the IESG.  The colon character (":") is used to
      denote a very limited concept of hierarchy.  If a colon is present
      then the items on both sides of it are valid names.  In general,
      if a name has a colon then the item on the left hand side
      represents a class of those items that would contain other items
      of that class.  For example, a name can be assigned to the entire
      list of DNS resource record type codes as well as for each
      individual code.  The URN for the list might look like this:



       urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-type-codes



      while the URN for the SOA records type code might look like this:



       urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-type-codes:soa




Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001





   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      None.


   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      The IANA has sole discretion for assigning names and thus can
      guarantee uniqueness by comparing the name to be assigned with the
      list of previously assigned names.


   Identifier persistence considerations:

      The IANA has sole discretion for assigning names and thus can
      guarantee persistence by comparing the name to be assigned with
      the list of previously assigned names.


   Process of identifier assignment:

      Identifiers are assigned only after a particular protocol element
      or number has been registered with the IANA using standard
      policies and procedures.  Once that element is assigned and in the
      repository, the IANA will take requests for that element to have a
      name assigned.  The assignment request can suggest a name to use
      but the IANA may ignore that request.


   Process of identifier resolution:

      At this time no resolution mechanism is defined though one is
      expected.


   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      Lexical equivalence is achieved by exact string match.


   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      There are no additional characters reserved.





Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


   Validation mechanism:

      None.


   Scope:

      Global



5. Assigning Names

   The authors originally attempted to pre-assign names for every item
   currently in the repository but found this a) difficult and b) of
   little current value.  The solution is a template and process for
   requesting that a name by assigned to a particular registry entry.

   The creation of a new registry name will be simple for most flat
   registries.  The only required elements will be the registry name
   (see recommended changes to RFC 2434 above), a reference to relevant
   documents, a statement about which current/proposed document
   repositories contains the authoritative data for the registry, and a
   statement specifying which element in the registry is the value to be
   used in the URN.  In most cases this last element will be the index
   value assigned by the IANA.

   More complex registries (DNS Parameters for example) will need to
   repeat that information for any sub-namespaces.  It should also be
   clear as to whether or not a name is assigned to the sub-namespace
   itself (i.e.  is 'urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-types' valid by itself and
   if so, what does it name?).

   The template:

   Registry name: -- The name of the sub-namespace.  In many cases this
      should be the same name as what the registry itself.

   Specification: -- Relevant IETF published documents that define the
      registry and the items in it.

   Repository: -- A pointer to the 'current' location of the registry in
      the protocol parameters repository.  This value will change over
      time as the entity that maintains the repository moves files and
      or fileservers.  It is not meant as a permanent binding to the
      filename but as a hint to the IANA for what the initial mapping
      would be.




Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


   Index value: -- A statement specifying which value in the registry is
      the index to each entry in that registry.  This index value will
      be used in the URN to name each entry.  In some cases it can
      actually be the thing being named, in others, where those values
      can change, it should be an index to the record instead of
      something in the record itself.

   The process for requesting that a URN be assigned is currently to put
   the above template in the IANA considerations section of the
   specifying document.  Other more automated processes may be proposed
   at a latter time if demand requires it.

6. Security Considerations

   None not already inherent to using URNs.

7. IANA Considerations

   This document puts a new and significant burden on the IANA since it
   may require a additional assignment process to happen for each new
   IANA registry.  It is the hope of the authors that the required
   strictness that the URN assignment puts on the registering document
   authors will actually make the IANA's job easier by taking the guess
   work out of creating a new registry.

References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [2]  Moats, R., "A URN Namespace for IETF Documents", RFC 2648,
        August 1999.


Authors' Addresses

   Michael Mealling
   VeriSign
   505 Huntmar Park Drive
   Herndon, VA  22070
   US

   Phone: +1 770 921 2251
   EMail: michaelm@netsol.com
   URI:   http://www.verisign.com







Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


   Larry Masinter
   AT&T Labs
   75 Willow Road
   Menlo Park, CA  94025
   US

   Phone: +1 650 463 7059
   EMail: LMM@acm.org
   URI:   http://larry.masinter.net


   Ted Hardie
   Equinix
   901 Marshall Street
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   US

   EMail: hardie@equinix.com


   Graham Klyne
   Content Technologies Ltd.
   1220 Parkview, Arlington Business Park
   Theale, Reading  RG7 4SA
   UK

   Phone: +44 118 930 1300
   EMail: GK@ACM.ORG























Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                August 2001


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling, et. al.       Expires February 18, 2002               [Page 9]

