


Network Working Group                                     L. Daigle, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                           O. Kolkman, Ed.
Updates: 4844, 2223
(if approved)                                Internet Architecture Board
Intended status: Informational                                     (IAB)
Expires: April 23, 2009                                 October 20, 2008


               On RFC Streams, Headers, and Boilerplates
               draft-iab-streams-headers-boilerplates-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 23, 2009.

Abstract

   RFC documents contain a number of fixed elements such as the title
   page header, standard boilerplates and copyright/IPR statements.
   This document describes them and introduces some updates to reflect
   current usage and requirements of RFC publication.  In particular,
   this updated structure is intended to communicate clearly the source
   of RFC creation and review.







Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  RFC Streams and Internet Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  RFC Structural Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  The title page header  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  The Status of this Memo  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Additional Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4.  Other structural information in RFCs . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  RFC Editor Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  IAB members at time of approval . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix C.  Document Editing Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     C.1.  version 00->01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     C.2.  version 01->02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     C.3.  version 02->03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14




























Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


1.  Introduction

   Previously RFCs (e.g.  [RFC4844]) contained a number of elements that
   were there for historical, practical, and legal reasons.  They also
   contained boilerplate material to clearly indicate the status of the
   document and possibly contained "Notes" to indicate how the document
   interacts with IETF Standards-Track documents.

   As the RFC Series has evolved over the years, there has been
   increasing concern over appropriate labelling of the publications to
   make clear the status of each RFC and the status of the work it
   describes.  Chiefly, there is a requirement that RFCs published as
   part of the IETF's review process not be easily confused with RFCs
   that may have had a very different review and approval process.
   Various adjustments have been made over the years, including evolving
   text of "Notes" included in the published RFC.

   With the definition of the different RFC streams [RFC4844] it is
   appropriate to formalize the definition of the various pieces of
   standard RFC boilerplate and introduce some adjustments to ensure
   better clarity of expression of document status, aligned with the
   review and approval processes defined for each stream.

   This memo identifies and describes the common elements of RFC
   boilerplate structure, and provides a comprehensive approach to
   updating and using those elements to communicate, with clarity, RFC
   document and content status.  Most of the historical structure
   information is collected from [RFC2223].

   The changes introduced by this memo should be implemented as soon as
   practically possible after the document has been approved for
   publication.


2.  RFC Streams and Internet Standards

   Users of RFCs should be aware that while all Internet standards-
   related documents are published as RFCs, not all RFCs are Internet
   standards-related documents.

   The IETF is responsible for maintaining the Internet Standards
   Process, which includes the requirements for developing, reviewing
   and approving Standards Track and BCP RFCs.  These, and any other
   standards-related documents (Informational or Experimental) are
   reviewed by appropriate IETF bodies and published as part of the IETF
   Stream.

   Documents published in streams other than the IETF Stream are not



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   reviewed by the IETF for such things as security, congestion control,
   or inappropriate interaction with deployed protocols.  They have also
   not been subject to approval by the Internet Engineering Steering
   Group (IESG), including an IETF-wide last call.  Therefore, the IETF
   disclaims, for any of the non-IETF Stream documents, any knowledge of
   the fitness of those RFCs for any purpose.

   Refer to [RFC2026], [I-D.housley-iesg-rfc3932bis], and [RFC4844] and
   their successors for current details of the IETF process and RFC
   streams.


3.  RFC Structural Elements

3.1.  The title page header

   An RFC title page header can be described as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
<document source>                                          <author name>
Request for Comments: <RFC number>                [<author affiliation>]
[<subseries ID> <subseries number>]    [more author info as appropriate]
[<RFC relation>:<RFC number[s]>]
Category: <category>
                                                            <month year>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   For example, a sample earlier RFC header is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Network Working Group                                          T. Dierks
Request for Comments: 4346                                   Independent
Obsoletes: 2246                                              E. Rescorla
Category: Standards Track                                     RTFM, Inc.
                                                              April 2006

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The right column contains author name and affiliation information as
   well as RFC publication date.  Conventions and restrictions for these
   elements are described in RFC style norms and some individual stream
   definitions.

   This section is primarily concerned with the information in the left
   column:





Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   <document source>  This describes the area where the work originates.
      Historically, all RFCs were labeled Network Working Group.
      "Network Working Group" refers to the original version of today's
      IETF when people from the original set of ARPANET sites and
      whomever else was interested -- the meetings were open -- got
      together to discuss, design and document proposed protocols
      [RFC0003].  Here, we obsolete the term "Network Working Group" in
      order to indicate the originating stream.

      The <document source> is the name of the RFC stream, as defined in
      [RFC4844] and its successors.  At the time of this publication,
      the streams, and therefore the possible entries are:

      *  Internet Engineering Task Force

      *  Internet Architecture Board

      *  Internet Research Task Force

      *  Independent

   Request for Comments: <RFC number>  This indicates the RFC number,
      assigned by the RFC Editor upon publication of the document.  This
      element is unchanged.

   <subseries ID> <subseries number>  Some document categories are also
      labeled as a subseries of RFCs.  These elements appear as
      appropriate for such categories, indicating the subseries and the
      documents number within that series.  Currently, there are
      subseries for BCPs [RFC2026], STDs[RFC1311], and FYIs [RFC1150].
      These subseries numbers may appear in several RFCs.  For example,
      when a new RFC obsoletes or updates an old one, the same subseries
      number is used.  Also, several RFCs may be assigned the same
      subseries number: a single STD, for example, may be composed of
      several RFCs, each of which will bear the same STD number.  This
      element is unchanged.

   [<RFC relation>:<RFC number[s]>]  Some relations between RFCs in the
      series are explicitly noted in the RFC header.  For example, a new
      RFC may update one or more earlier RFCs.  Currently two
      relationships are defined: "Updates", and "Obsoletes" [RFC2223].
      Variants like "Obsoleted by" are also used (e.g in [RFC5143]).
      Other types of relations may be defined elsewhere.

   Category: <category>  This indicates the initial RFC document
      category of the publication.  These are defined in [RFC2026].
      Currently, this is always one of: Standards Track, Best Current
      Practice, Experimental, Informational, or Historic.  This element



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


      is unchanged.

3.2.  The Status of this Memo

   The "Status of This Memo" describes the category of the RFC,
   including the distribution statement.  This text is included
   irrespective of the source stream of the RFC.

   From now on, the "Status of This Memo" will start with a single
   sentence describing the status.  It will also include a statement
   describing the stream-specific review of the material (which is
   stream-dependent).  This is an important component of status, insofar
   as it clarifies the breadth and depth of review, and gives the reader
   an understanding of how to consider its content.

   The first paragraph of the Status of this Memo section contains a
   single sentence, clearly standing out.  It depends on the category of
   the document.

      This memo is an Internet Standards Track document.

      This memo documents an Internet Best Current Practice

      This memo is not an Internet Standards Track specification, <it is
      published for other purposes>.

   For Informational, Experimental, Historic and future categories of
   RFCs, the RFC editor will maintain an appropriate text for <it is
   published for other purposes>.  For example, with an Informational
   document this could read "it is published for informational
   purposes".

   The second paragraph contains text as follows that is specific to the
   initial category:

   Standards Track:  "This document specifies an Internet standards
      track protocol for the Internet community.  Please see the
      "Updates to the RFC" section of this document for information on
      where to find the status of this document and the availability of
      errata for this memo."

   Best Current Practice:  "This document specifies an Internet Best
      Current Practices for the Internet Community.  Please see the
      "Updates to the RFC" section of this document for information on
      where to find the status of this document and the availability of
      errata for this memo."





Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   Experimental:  "This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the
      Internet community.  This memo does not specify an Internet
      standard of any kind.  Discussion and suggestions for improvement
      are requested."

   Informational:  "This memo provides information for the Internet
      community.  This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any
      kind. "

   Historic:  "This memo defines a Historic Document for the Internet
      community.  It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind."

   Note that the texts in paragraph 1 and 2 of the boilerplate indicate
   the initial status of a document.  During their lifetime documents
   can change status to e.g.  Historic.  This cannot be reflected in the
   document itself and will need be reflected in the information refered
   to in Section 3.4.

   The third paragraph of the "Status of This Memo" will now include a
   paragraph describing the type of review and exposure the document has
   received.  This is defined on a per-stream basis.  From now on, these
   paragraphs will be defined as part of RFC stream definitions.

   The following texts may be updated if the stream definitions are
   updated, but initial paragraphs for the existing streams are:

   IETF Stream:  "This document is a product of the Internet Engineering
      Task Force (IETF). "

      If there has been an IETF consensus call per IETF process, an
      additional sentence should be added: "This document represents a
      consensus of the IETF community.  It has received public review
      and has been approved for publication by the Internet Engineering
      Steering Group."

   IAB Stream:  "This document is a product of the Internet Architecture
      Board (IAB), and represents information that the IAB has deemed
      valuable to provide for permanent record.  This document has been
      approved for publication by the IAB and is therefore not a
      candidate for any level of Internet Standard; see section
      Section 2 of RFCXXXX."

   IRTF Stream:  "This document is a product of the Internet Research
      Task Force (IRTF).  The IRTF publishes the results of Internet-
      related research and development activities.  These results might
      not be suitable for deployment.  This document has been approved
      for publication by the IRSG.  It is not a product of the IETF and
      is therefore not a candidate for any level of Internet Standard;



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


      see section Section 2 of RFCXXXX."

      In addition a sentence indicating the consensus base within the
      IRTF may be added: "This RFC represents the consensus of the
      <insert_name> Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force
      (IRTF)." or alternatively "This RFC represents the individual
      opinion(s) of one or more members of the <insert_name> Research
      Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)".

   Independent Stream:  "This document is a contribution to the RFC
      Series, independently of any other RFC stream.  The RFC Editor has
      chosen to publish this document at its discretion and makes no
      statement about its value for implementation or deployment.  It is
      therefore not a candidate for any level of Internet Standard; see
      section Section 2 of RFCXXXX."

3.3.  Additional Notes

   Exceptionally, a review and publication process may prescribe
   additional notes that will appear as labelled notes after the "Status
   of This Memo".

   While this has been a common feature of recent RFCs, it is the goal
   of this document to make the overall RFC structure adequately clear
   to remove the need for such notes, or at least make their usage truly
   exceptional.

3.4.  Other structural information in RFCs

   RFCs contain other structural informational elements.  The RFC Editor
   is responsible for the positioning and layout of these structural
   element.  Note also that new elements may be introduced or obsoleted
   using a process consistent with [RFC4844].  These additions may or
   may not require documentation in an RFC.

   Currently the following structural information is available or is
   being considered for inclusion in RFCs

   Copyright Notice  A copyright notice with a reference to BCP78
      [BCP78] and an Intellectual Property statement referring to BCP78
      and BCP79 [BCP79].  The content of these statements are defined by
      those BCPs.

   ISSN  The International Standard Serial Number [ISO3297]: ISSN 2070-
      1721.  The ISSN uniquely identifies the RFC series as title
      regardless of language or country in which it is published.  The
      ISSN itself has no significance other than the unique
      identification of a serial publication.



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   Updates to the RFC  A reference identifying where more information
      about the document can be found.  This may include information
      whether the RFC has been updated or obsoleted, the RFC's
      originating stream, a listing of possible errata, and information
      on how to submit errata as described in
      [I-D.rfc-editor-errata-process].


4.  Security considerations

   This document tries to clarify the descriptions of the status of an
   RFC.  Misunderstanding the status of a memo could cause
   interoperability problems, hence security and stability problems.


5.  IANA considerations

   None.


6.  RFC Editor Considerations

   The RFC Editor is responsible for maintaining the consistency of the
   RFC series.  To that end the RFC Editor maintains a style manual
   [RFC-style].  In this memo we mention a few explicit structural
   elements that the RFC editor needs to maintain.  The conventions for
   the content and use of all current and future elements are to be
   documented in the style manual.

   Adding a reference to the stream in the header of RFCs is only one
   method for clarifying from which stream an RFC originated.  The RFC
   editor is encouraged to add such indication in e.g. indices and
   interfaces.

   [The rest of this section contains specific instructions towards
   editing this document and can be removed before publication]

   The documents has two sections, including this one that need to be
   removed before publication as an RFC.  This one and Appendix C.

   This memo introduces a number of modifications that will have to be
   implemented in various tools, such as the xml2rfc tool, the nit
   tracker and the rfc-erratum portal.

   The number "XXXX" is to be replaced with RFC number of this memo.

   References [RFC-style], [BCP78] and [BCP79] have been constructed.
   Please bring these in line with RFC Editorial conventions.



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   In section Section 3.4: For the final publication, it should be
   warranted that the ISSN is *not* split by a line break, for clarity.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [I-D.housley-iesg-rfc3932bis]
              Alvestrand, H. and R. Housley, "IESG Procedures for
              Handling of Independent and IRTF Stream Submissions",
              draft-housley-iesg-rfc3932bis-04 (work in progress),
              October 2008.

 7.2.   Informative References

    [ISO3297]   Technical Committee ISO/TC 46, Information and
              documentation, Subcommittee SC 9, Identification and
              description. , "Information and documentation -
              International standard serial number (ISSN)" , 09 2007 .

    [RFC0003]   Crocker, S. , "Documentation conventions" , RFC 3 ,
              April 1969 .

    [RFC1311]   Postel, J. , "Introduction to the STD Notes" , RFC 1311
              , March 1992 .

    [RFC1150]   Malkin, G.  and J. Reynolds , "FYI on FYI: Introduction
              to the FYI Notes" , RFC 1150 , March 1990 .

    [RFC2223]   Postel, J.  and J. Reynolds , "Instructions to RFC
              Authors" , RFC 2223 , October 1997 .

    [RFC2629]   Rose, M. , "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML" , RFC 2629
              , June 1999 .

    [RFC3978]   Bradner, S. , "IETF Rights in Contributions" , BCP 78 ,
              RFC 3978 , March 2005 .

    [RFC3979]   Bradner, S. , "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology" , BCP 79 , RFC 3979 , March 2005 .

    [RFC4844]   Daigle, L.  and Internet Architecture Board , "The RFC
              Series and RFC Editor" , RFC 4844 , July 2007 .




Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


    [RFC4748]   Bradner, S. , "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF
              Trust" , BCP 78 , RFC 4748 , October 2006 .

    [RFC4749]   Sollaud, A. , "RTP Payload Format for the G.729.1 Audio
              Codec" , RFC 4749 , October 2006 .

    [RFC5143]   Malis, A. , Brayley, J. , Shirron, J. , Martini, L. ,
              and S. Vogelsang , "Synchronous Optical Network/
              Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SONET/SDH) Circuit
              Emulation Service over MPLS (CEM) Encapsulation" ,
              RFC 5143 , February 2008 .

    [I-D.rfc-editor-errata-process]
               Ginoza, S. , Hagens, A. , and R. Braden , "RFC Editor
              Proposal for Handling RFC Errata" ,
              draft-rfc-editor-errata-process-02 (work in progress) ,
              May 2008 .

    [BCP78]     Bradner, S., Ed. , "IETF Rights in Contributions" ,
              BCP 78 , October 2006 .

              [RFC3978]and[RFC4748]

   [BCP79]    Bradner, S., Ed. and T. Narten, Ed., "Intellectual
              Property Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 79, April 2007.

              [RFC3979]and[RFC4749]

   [RFC-style]
              RFC Editor, "RFC Style Guide",
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/howtopub.html>.


Appendix A.  IAB members at time of approval

   The IAB members at the time this memo was approved were (in
   alphabetical order): Loa Andersson, Gonzalo Camarillo, Stuart
   Cheshire, Russ Housley, Olaf Kolkman, Gregory Lebovitz, Barry Leiba,
   Kurtis Lindqvist, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran, Dave
   Thaler, and Lixia Zhang.  In addition, the IAB included two ex-
   officio members: Dow Street, who was serving as the IAB Executive
   Director, and Aaron Falk, who was serving as the IRTF Chair.


Appendix B.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Bob Braden, Brian Carpenter, Steve Crocker, Sandy Ginoza,
   and John Klensin who provided background information and inspiration.



Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


   Various people have made suggestions that improved the document.
   Among them are: Lars Eggert and Alfred Hoenes.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


Appendix C.  Document Editing Details

   [To Be Removed before publication]

   $Id: draft-iab-streams-headers-boilerplates-03.txt 49 2008-10-20 13:54:58Z olaf $

C.1.  version 00->01

   Fixed the header so it appropriately shows that the document updates
   RFC 4844, 2223.  And added a link to 3932-bis that should appear in
   tandem with this publication.

   Introduced the "Other structural information in RFCs" section and
   moved the ISSN number from the front matter to this section.  The
   "Other structural information in RFCs" intends to give very rough
   guidance providing the RFC editor with sufficient freedom to move
   pieces around and edit them to please the eye and mind.

   Modified the last sentence 3rd paragraph of the Status of this memo
   section for the IRTF Stream in accordance to a suggestion by Aaron
   Falk; Indicating that review happened by the IRSG and not indicating
   that review did not happen by the IESG.

   Introduced the square brackets around the <author affiliation> in the
   header.  To highlight this is an optional element.

   The definition of the "Clarifies" relation has been taken out.  There
   are arguments that introducing the relation needs a bit more thought
   and is better done by a separate document.

   Provided the RFC Editor with responsibility to maintain several text
   pieces.

   In Section 3.2 some modifications were applied to the text.

   The <description> contains the full name of the stream.

   RFC2223 and 4844 moved to the informative reference section.
   Although I am not sure if those are not normative.  Guidance!!!






Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


C.2.  version 01->02

   Fixed some editorial nits and missing references.

   Clarified that the status and category are initial.

   Added boilerplate text for documents that are initially published as
   Historic.

   Added members of IAB, and removed those members from acknowledgements

   Added References to BCP78 and BCP79.  The exact formatting of those
   references may need to be done by the RFC editor.

   Added text to recognize occurrences of variations of "Obsolete" and
   "Update"

C.3.  version 02->03

   Stray language in the "IAB members at time of approval" section
   removed.


Authors' Addresses

   Leslie Daigle (editor)

   Email: daigle@isoc.org, leslie@thinkingcat.com


   Olaf M. Kolkman (editor)

   Email: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl


   Internet Architecture Board

   Email: iab@iab.org













Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     RFC Streams, Headers, Boilerplates       October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Daigle, et al.           Expires April 23, 2009                [Page 14]

