
 Policy Framework Working Group                          A. Westerinen 
 INTERNET-DRAFT                                          J. Schnizlein 
 Category: Informational                                  J. Strassner 
                                                         Cisco Systems 
                                                        Mark Scherling 
                                                              Bank One 
                                                             Bob Quinn 
                                                        Celox Networks 
                                                             Jay Perry 
                                                                CPlane 
                                                           Shai Herzog 
                                                            IP Highway 
                                                           An-Ni Huynh 
                                                   Lucent Technologies 
                                                          Mark Carlson 
                                                      Sun Microsystems 
                                                             July 2000 
                                                                       
                                                                      
                                                                       
                                                               
                            Policy Terminology 

                  <draft-ietf-policy-terminology-00.txt> 
                      Friday, July 14, 2000, 12:10 AM 

 Status of this Memo 

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  Drafts. 

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

 Copyright Notice 

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 






 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 1] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

 Abstract 

  This document is a glossary of policy-related terms.  It provides 
  abbreviations, explanations, and recommendations for use of these 
  terms.  The document takes the approach and format of RFC2828 
  [R2828], which defines an Internet Security Glossary.  The intent is 
  to improve the comprehensibility and consistency of writing that 
  deals with network policy, particularly Internet Standards documents 
  (ISDs). 

    

 Table of Contents 

  1. Introduction....................................................3 
  2. Explanation of Paragraph Markings...............................4 
  3. Terms...........................................................4 
  4. Intellectual Property..........................................15 
  5. Acknowledgements...............................................15 
  6. Security Considerations........................................16 
  7. References.....................................................16 
  8. Authors' Addresses.............................................18 
  9. Full Copyright Statement.......................................19 
    






























 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 2] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 


 1. Introduction 

  This document provides abbreviations, definitions, and explanations 
  of terms related to network policy. All definitions are provided in 
  Section 3, with the terms listed in alphabetical order.   

  The intent is to improve the comprehensibility and consistency of 
  Internet Standards documents (ISDs)--i.e., RFCs, Internet-Drafts, and 
  other material produced as part of the Internet Standards Process 
  [R2026]. Benefits across the ISDs are well-stated in the Introduction 
  to RFC2828 [R2828]: 

   o "Clear, Concise, and Easily Understood Documentation" - Requires 
     that the set of terms and definitions be consistent, self-
     supporting and uniform across all ISDs. 

   o Technical Excellence - Where all ISDs use terminology accurately, 
     precisely, and unambiguously. 

   o Prior Implementation and Testing - Requires that terms are used in 
     their plainest form, that private and "made-up" terms are avoided 
     in ISDs, and that new definitions are not created that conflict 
     with established ones.  

   o "Openness, Fairness, and Timeliness" - Where ISDs avoid terms that 
     are proprietary or otherwise favor a particular vendor, or that 
     create a bias toward a particular technology or mechanism. 

 Common and/or controversial policy terms are defined in this draft.  
 These terms are directly related and specific to network policy.  
 This is a "living" document that is expected to grow over the next 
 several months, as the current terms are reviewed and additional 
 words suggested for inclusion.   
   
 Wherever possible, this draft takes definitions from existing ISDs.  
 It should be noted that: 
   
   o Expired Internet-Drafts are not referenced, nor are their 
     terminology and definitions used in this document.   

   o Multiple definitions may exist across the ISDs.  Each definition 
     will be listed, with its source. 

 Where definitions are contradictory, the recommendations of the draft 
 editors are presented.  The draft editors will work with other ISD 
 authors to remove contradictions. 







 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 3] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 


 2. Explanation of Paragraph Markings 

  Section 3 marks terms and definitions as follows: 

   o Capitalization: Only terms that are proper nouns are capitalized. 

   o Paragraph Marking: Definitions and explanations are stated in 
     paragraphs that are marked as follows: 

      - "P" identifies basic policy-related terms. 

      - "M" identifies various mechanisms to create or convey policy-
        related information in a network.  For example, COPS and an 
        "Information Model" are two mechanisms for communicating and 
        describing policy-related data. 

      - "A" identifies specific Work Groups and general "areas of use" 
        of policy.  For example, AAA and QoS are two "areas of use" 
        where policy concepts are extremely important to their 
        function and operation. 


 3. Terms 

  Note:  In providing policy definitions, other "technology specific" 
  terms (for example, related to Differentiated Services) may be used 
  and referenced.  These non-policy terms will not be defined in this 
  document, and the reader is requested to go to the referenced ISD  
  for additional detail.  

  $ AAA 
     See "Authentication, Authorization, Accounting." 
   
  $ abstraction levels 
     See "policy abstraction." 
   
  $ action  
     See "policy action."  
   
  $ Authentication, Authorization, Accounting (AAA) 
     (A) AAA efforts in the IETF have focused on the most widely 
       deployed use of authentication: Remote Authentication Dial In 
       User Service (RADIUS). Referencing the RADIUS RFC (R2138), a 
       network access server sends dial-user credentials to a AAA 
       server, and receives authentication that the user is who he/she 
       claims along with a set of attribute-value pairs authorizing 
       various service features for that user. Policy is implied in 
       both the authentication, which can be restricted by time of day, 
       number of sessions, calling number, etc., and the attribute-
       values authorized.  The AAA Working Group is also completing its 
       requirements for a general-purpose AAA protocol expanding beyond 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 4] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

       RADIUS.  The only protocol proposed thus far is Diameter 
       ("radius" pun - not an acronym) [DIAMETER].  And, the 
       Authentication Authorization Accounting ARCHitecture Research 
       Group (AAAARCH) was formed as a new area of research within the 
       IRTF, with the goal of coordination "with the Policy Framework 
       WG and others."  
   
  $ CIM 
     See "Common Information Model." 
   
  $ Common Information Model (CIM) 
     (M) An object-oriented information model published by the DMTF 
       (Distributed Management Task Force) [DMTF]. It consists of a 
       Specification detailing the abstract modeling constructs and 
       principles of the Information Model, and a language definition 
       to represent the Model. CIM includes a set of files, written in 
       the language specified in the Specification. These are known as 
       the Core and Common Models, and define an information model for 
       the "enterprise" - addressing systems, devices, users, software 
       distribution, the physical environment, networks and policy. 
       (See also "information model.") 
   
  $ Common Open Policy System (COPS)  
     (M) A simple query and response TCP-based protocol that can be 
       used to exchange policy information between a Policy Decision 
       Point (PDP) and its clients (Policy Enforcement Points, PEPs). 
       [RFC 2748] (See also "Policy Decision Point" and "Policy 
       Enforcement Point.") 
   
  $ condition  
     See "policy condition."  
   
  $ configuration 
     (P) The set of parameters in network elements and other systems 
       that determine their function and operation. Some parameters 
       are static, such as packet queue assignment and can be 
       predefined and downloaded to a network element.  Others are 
       more dynamic, such as the actions taken by a network device 
       upon the occurrence of some event.   The distinction between 
       static (predefined) "configuration" and the dynamic state of 
       network elements blurs as setting parameters becomes more 
       responsive, and signaling controls greater degrees of a  
       network device's behavior. 

  $ COPS 
     See "Common Open Policy System." 
   
  $ data model 
     (M) A mapping of the contents of an information model into a form 
       that is specific to a particular type of data store or 
       repository.  A "data model" is basically the rendering of an 



 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 5] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

       information model according to a specific set of mechanisms for 
       representing, organizing, storing and handling data.  It has 
       three parts [DecSupp]: 
       - A collection of data structures such as lists, tables, 
          relations, etc. 
       - A collection of operations that can be applied to the 
          structures such as retrieval, update, summation, etc. 
       - A collection of integrity rules that define the legal states 
          (set of values) or changes of state (operations on values). 
       (See also "information model.") 
       
  $ DEN 
     See "Directory Enabled Networks." 
       
  $ Differentiated Services (DS)  
     (M) The IP header field, called the DS-field. In IPv4, it defines 
       the layout of the ToS (Type of Service) octet; in IPv6, it is 
       the Traffic Class octet. [R2474, DSTERMS] 
     (A) "Differentiated Services" is also an "area of use" for QoS 
       policies. It requires policy to define the correspondence 
       between codepoints in the packet's DS-field and individual per-
       hop behaviors (to achieve a specified per-domain behavior). 
       (See also "Quality of Service.") 
  
  $ diffserv 
     See "Differentiated Services." 
  
  $ Directory Enabled Networks (DEN) 
     (M) A data model that is the LDAP mapping of CIM (the Common 
       Information Model). Its goals are to enable the deployment and 
       use of policy by starting with common service and user concepts 
       (defined in the information model), specifying their 
       mapping/storage in an LDAP-based repository, and using these 
       concepts in vendor/device-independent policy rules. [DMTF] (See 
       also "Common Information Model" and "data model.") 
   
  $ domain 
     See "policy domain." 
   
  $ DS 
     See "Differentiated Services." 
   
  $ filter 
     (M) A set of terms and/or criteria used for the purpose of 
       separating or categorizing. "Filters" are often manipulated and 
       used in network policy.   
       - Packet filters are defined in [PIB].  They specify the 
          criteria for matching a pattern (for example, IP or 802  
          traffic criteria) to appear in packets belonging to flows, 
          e.g. microflows or behavior aggregates.  Associated with  
          each filter is a permit/deny flag. 
   


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 6] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ goal 
     See "policy goal." 
       
  $ information model 
     (M) An abstraction and representation of the entities in a managed 
       environment, their properties, attributes and operations, and 
       the way that they relate to each other. It is independent of 
       any specific repository, application, protocol, or platform.   
       
  $ Internet Protocol Security Policy (IPSP)  
     (A) An IETF Working Group chartered to define a standard data 
       model, specification language and exchange protocol for 
       supporting IP Security Policies that are compatible with the 
       existing IPsec architecture [RFC 2401] and IKE [RFC 2409], 
       complementing the standards work achieved by the IPsec Working 
       Group. 
   
  $ IPSP 
     See "Internet Protocol Security Policy." 
   
  $ MPLS 
     See "Multiprotocol Label Switching." 
   
  $ Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) 
     (M) Integrates a label swapping framework with network layer 
       routing [R2702]. The basic idea involves assigning short fixed 
       length labels to packets at the ingress to an MPLS cloud. 
       Throughout the interior of the MPLS domain, the labels attached 
       to packets are used to make forwarding decisions (usually 
       without recourse to the original packet headers). 
  
  $ outsourced policy  
     (P) An execution model where a policy enforcement device issues a 
       query to delegate a decision for a specific policy event to 
       another component, external to it. For example, in RSVP, the 
       arrival of a new RSVP message to a PEP requires a fast policy 
       decision (not to delay the end-to-end setup). The PEP may use 
       COPS-RSVP to send a query to the PDP, asking for a policy 
       decision. [R2205, R2748] "Outsourced policy" is contrasted with 
       "provisioned policy", but they are not mutually exclusive and 
       operational systems may combine the two. 
  
  $ PDP 
     See "Policy Decision Point." 
   
  $ PEP 
     See "Policy Enforcement Point." 
   
  $ PIB 
     See "Policy Information Base." 
   
 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 7] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ policy 
     (P) "Policy" can be defined from two perspectives: 
       - A definite goal, course or method of action to guide and 
          determine present and future decisions.  "Policies" are 
          implemented or executed within a particular context (such 
          as policies defined within a business unit).   
       - Policies as a set of rules to administer, manage, and  
          control access to network resources. [PCIM] 
       Note that these two views are not contradictory since 
       individual rules may be defined in support of business goals. 
       (See also "policy goal", "policy abstraction" and "policy 
       rule.")  
   
  $ policy abstraction  
     (P) Policy can be represented at different levels, ranging from 
       business goals to device-specific configuration parameters. 
       Translation between different levels of "abstraction" may 
       require information, other than policy, such as network and 
       host parameter configuration and capabilities. (See also 
       "configuration" and "policy translation.") 
       
  $ policy action  
     (P) Definition of what is to be done to enforce a policy rule, 
       when the conditions of the rule are met.  Policy actions may 
       result in the execution of one or more operations to affect 
       and/or configure network traffic and network resources.   
       - In [PCIM], a rule's actions may be ordered. 
   
  $ policy condition 
     (P) An expression used to determine whether a policy rule's 
       actions should be performed.  When the set of conditions 
       associated with a policy rule evaluates to TRUE, then the rule 
       should be enforced. A condition may be defined as the occurrence 
       of an event, or a computed expression typically consisting of 
       three elements: a variable, an operator and another variable or 
       constant. [QoSModel]  Some of these elements may be implicit in 
       an implementation or protocol. 
       - In [PCIM], a rule's conditions can be expressed as either an 
          ORed set of ANDed sets of statements (disjunctive normal 
          form), or an ANDed set of ORed sets of statements 
          (conjunctive normal form).  Individual condition statements 
          can also be negated. 
         
  $ policy conflict 
     (P) Occurs when the actions of two rules (that are both satisfied 
       simultaneously) contradict each other. The entity implementing 
       the policy would not be able to determine which action to 
       perform. The implementers of policy systems must provide 
       conflict detection and avoidance or resolution mechanisms to 
       prevent this situation.  "Policy conflict" is contrasted with 
       "policy error." 
   
   

 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 8] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ policy conversion 
     See "policy translation." 
       
  $ policy decision 
     (P) Two perspectives of "policy decision" exist: 
       - A "process" perspective that deals with the evaluation of a 
          policy rule's conditions 
       - A "result" perspective that deals with the actions for 
          enforcement, when the conditions of a policy rule are TRUE  
    
  $ Policy Decision Point (PDP) 
     (P) A logical entity that makes policy decisions for itself or for 
       other network elements that request such decisions. [R2753] 
       (See also "policy decision.")  
   
  $ policy domain 
     (P) A contiguous portion of an Internet over which a consistent 
       set of [..] policies are administered in a coordinated fashion. 
       [R2474] This definition of a policy domain does not preclude 
       multiple sources of policy creation within an organization, but 
       does require that the resultant policies be coordinated.  The 
       definition given in RFC 2474 for Differentiated Services is 
       very close to that of a security domain, defined in [SPSL]. In 
       [SPSL], it is stated:  "A security domain is defined as a 
       connected set of network entities that are protected by policy 
       enforcement points (PEP) placed on every communication path 
       going through the perimeter of the domain.  Every policy 
       enforcement point of the domain works to enforce the common set 
       of security policies associated with the domain."   
   
  $ policy enforcement 
     (P) The execution of a policy decision. 
   
  $ Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) 
     (P) A logical entity that enforces policy decisions. [R2753] (See 
       also "policy enforcement.")  
   
  $ policy error 
     (P) "Policy errors" occur when attempts to enforce policy actions 
       fail, whether due to temporary state or permanent mismatch 
       between the policy actions and the device enforcement 
       capabilities.  This is contrasted with "policy conflict."  
   
  $ policy goal 
     (P) Goals are the business objectives or conditions/states 
       intended to be maintained by a policy system. At the highest 
       level of abstraction of policy, "goals" are most directly 
       related to business rather than technical terms. For example, a 
       "goal" might be that a particular application receives network 
       behavior equivalent to having its own dedicated network, 
       despite using a shared infrastructure. (See also "policy 
       abstraction.") 
   

 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months           [Page 9] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ Policy Information Base (PIB)  
     (M) Collections of related policy rule classes (PRCs), defined as 
       a module. [PIB] 
   
  $ policy negotiation 
     (P) Exposing the desired or appropriate part of a policy to 
       another domain. This is necessary to support partial 
       interconnection between domains, which are operating with 
       different sets of policies.  The need for "policy negotiation" 
       is described in the IPsec Policy Working Group charter [IPSP]:  
       "4) adopt or develop a policy exchange and negotiation 
       protocol. The protocol must be capable of: i) discovering 
       policy servers, ii) distributing and negotiating security 
       policies, and; iii) resolving policy conflicts in both 
       intra/inter domain environments."  
   
  $ policy repository 
     (P) "Policy repository" can be defined from three perspectives: 
       - A specific data store that holds policy rules, their 
          conditions and actions, and related policy data.  A  
          directory would be an example of such a store. 
       - A logical container representing the administrative scope and 
          naming of policy rules, their conditions and actions, and 
          related policy data. A QoS policy domain would be an example 
          of such a container. [QoSModel]  
       - In [PCIM], a more restrictive definition than the prior one 
          exists. PolicyRepository is a model abstraction representing 
          an administratively defined, logical container for reusable 
          policy conditions and policy actions. 
   
  $ policy request 
     (P) Sent by a PEP to a PDP, it is more accurately qualified as a 
       "policy decision request." [R2753] (See also "policy 
       decision.") 
   
  $ Policy Retrieval Point (PRP) 
     (P) A client of a policy repository. [AAA] 
       - Outside of [AAA], this term is not used, since policy 
          retrieval is a necessary function of a policy-based 
          system. For example, a PDP includes both policy retrieval 
          and decision making functionality.    
   
  $ policy rule 
     (P) A basic building block of a policy-based system. It is the 
       binding of a set of actions to a set of conditions - where the 
       conditions are evaluated to determine whether the actions are 
       performed. [PCIM]   
       
  $ Policy Rule Class (PRC)  
     (M) An ordered set of scalar attributes, defined in a PIB. "Policy 
       Rule Classes" are arranged in a hierarchical structure similar 
       to tables in SNMP's SMIv2. [R2578, PIB] 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 10] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ policy server 
     (P) A marketing term whose definition is imprecise.  Originally, 
       [R2753] referenced a "policy server."  As the RFC evolved, this 
       term became more precise and known as the Policy Decision Point 
       (PDP).  Today, the term is used in marketing and other 
       literature to refer specifically to a PDP, or for any entity 
       that uses/services policy. 
    
  $ policy translation 
     (P) The transformation of a policy from a representation and/or 
       level of abstraction, to another representation or level of 
       abstraction.  For example, it may be necessary to convert PIB 
       data to a command line format. This is also known as "policy 
       conversion." 
       
  $ PolicyGroup 
     (M) An abstraction in the Policy Core Information Model [PCIM]. It 
       is a class representing a container, aggregating either policy 
       rules or other policy groups. It allows the grouping of rules 
       into a Policy, and the refinement of high-level Policies to 
       lower-level or different (i.e., converted or translated) peer 
       groups.   
   
  $ PolicyRepository 
     (M) An abstraction in the Policy Core Information Model [PCIM].  
       It is a class representing an administratively defined, logical 
       container for reusable policy conditions and policy actions.  
       (See also "policy repository.") 
   
  $ PRC 
     See "Policy Rule Class." 
   
  $ provisioned policy  
     (P) An execution model where network elements are pre-configured, 
       based on policy, prior to processing events.  Configuration is 
       pushed to the network device, e.g., based on time of day or at 
       initial booting of the device.  The focus of this model is on 
       the distribution of configuration information, and is 
       exemplified by Differentiated Services [R2475].  Based on 
       events received, devices use downloaded (pre-provisioned) 
       mechanisms to implement policy. "Provisioned policy" is 
       contrasted with "outsourced policy." 
   
  $ PRP 
     See "Policy Retrieval Point." 
   
  $ QoS  
     See "Quality of Service." 
    
 




 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 11] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ Quality of Service (QoS) 
     (A) At a high level of abstraction, "Quality of Service" refers  
       to the ability to deliver network services according to the 
       parameters specified in a Service Level Agreement.  "Quality" 
       is characterized by service availability, delay, jitter, 
       throughput and packet loss ratio.  At a network resource level, 
       "Quality of Service" refers to a set of capabilities that allow 
       a service provider to prioritize traffic, control bandwidth, 
       and network latency.  There are two different approaches to 
       "Quality of Service" on IP networks: Integrated Services 
       [R1633], and Differentiated Service [R2475]. Integrated 
       Services require policy control over the creation of signaled 
       reservations, which provide specific quantitative end-to-end 
       behavior for a (set of) flow(s). In contrast, Differentiated 
       Services require policy to define the correspondence between 
       codepoints in the packet's DS-field and individual per-hop 
       behaviors (to achieve a specified per-domain behavior).  A 
       maximum of 64 per-hop behaviors limit the number of classes of 
       service traffic that can be marked at any point in a domain.  
       These classes of service signal the treatment of the packets 
       with respect to various QoS aspects, such as flow priority and 
       packet drop precedence.  Policy controls the set of 
       configuration parameters for each class in Differentiated 
       Service, and the admission conditions for reservations in 
       Integrated Services. (See also "policy abstraction" and 
       "Service Level Agreement.") 
    
  $ Resource reSerVation Protocol (RSVP)  
     (M) A setup protocol designed for an Integrated Services Internet, 
       to reserve network resources for a path. [R2205]  And, a 
       signaling mechanism for managing application traffic's QoS in a 
       Differentiated Service network. [DCLASS] 
  
  $ role   
     (P) "Role" is defined from four perspectives: 
       - A business position or function, to which people and logical 
          entities are assigned [X.500] 
       - The labeled endpoints of a UML (Unified Modeling Language) 
          association.  Quoting from [UML], "When a class participates 
          in an association, it has a specific role that it plays in 
          that relationship; a role is just the face the class at the 
          near end of the association presents to the class at the 
          other end of the association."  The Policy Core Information 
          Model [PCIM] uses UML to depict its class hierarchy.  
          Relationships/associations are significant in the model. 
       - An abstract characteristic assigned to a network element that 
          expresses a notion, such as a political, financial, legal, 
          geographical, or architectural attribute, typically not 
          directly derivable from information stored on the system 
          [SNMPCONF] 
       - A string characterizing a particular function of a network 
          element or interface, that can be used to identify particular 
          behavior associated with that element.  It is a selector for 

 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 12] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

          policy rules, to determine the applicability of the rule to a 
          particular network element. "Roles" abstract the capabilities 
          and/or use of network devices and resources. [PCIM, PIB] 
       Only the latter two definitions are directly related to network 
       policy.  The last is the preferred and recommended definition.  
       The use of the term in [SNMPCONF] contradicts the established 
       usage in references [PCIM] and [PIB].    
         
  $ role combination  
     (P) An unordered set of roles.  Two interpretations of "role 
       combination" currently exist:  
       - The set of roles in a "role combination" must be identical to 
          the set of the roles of the network element or interface 
          [PIB] 
       - The selection process for a "role-combination" chooses 
          policies associated with the combination itself, policies 
          associated with each of its sub-combinations, and policies 
          associated with each of the individual roles in the 
          combination [PCIM] 
       These two interpretations are contradictory and require 
       alignment to prevent confusion across the ISDs. 
   
  $ RSVP 
     See "Resource reSerVation Protocol." 
   
  $ rule 
     See "policy rule."  
   
  $ schema 
     (M) Two different perspectives of schema are defined: 
       - A set of rules that determines what data can be stored in a 
          database or directory service [DirServs] 
       - A collection of data models that are each bound to the same 
          type of repository.  
       The latter is the preferred and recommended one for ISDs. (See 
       also "data model.") 
   
  $ Security Policy Specification Language (SPSL)  
     (M) A language designed to express security policies, security 
       domains, and the entities that manage those policies and 
       domains. It supports policies for packet   filtering, IP 
       Security (IPsec), and IKE exchanges, but may be extended to 
       express other types of policies. [SPSL] 
   
  $ service 
     (P) The behavior or functionality of a network element or host 
       [DMTF, R2216]. Quoting from RFC 2216 [R2216], in order to 
       completely specify a "service", one must define the "functions 
       to be performed à, the information required à to perform these 
       functions, and the information made available by the element to 
       other elements of the system."  Policy can be used to configure 
       a "service" on a network element or host, invoke its 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 13] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

       functionality, and/or coordinate services in an interdomain or 
       end-to-end environment.   
  
  $ Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
     (P) The documented result of a negotiation between a 
       customer/consumer and a provider of a service, that specifies 
       the levels of availability, serviceability, performance, 
       operation or other attributes of the service. (See also 
       "Service Level Objective.") 
   
  $ Service Level Objective (SLO) 
     (P) Partitions an SLA into individual metrics and operational 
       information to enforce and/or monitor the SLA.  "Service Level 
       Objectives" may be defined as part of an SLA, or in a separate 
       document. It is a set of parameters and their values. The 
       actions of enforcing and reporting monitored compliance can be 
       implemented as one or more policies. (See also "Service Level 
       Agreement.") 
   
  $ Service Level Specification (SLS) 
     (P) Specifies handling of customer's traffic by a network 
       provider. It is negotiated between a customer and the provider, 
       and defines DiffServ parameters (such as specific Code Points 
       and the Per-Hop-Behavior, profile characteristics and treatment 
       of the traffic for those Code Points). An SLS is a combination 
       of an SLA (a negotiated agreement) and its SLOs (the individual 
       metrics and operational data to enforce).  [DSTERMS] (See also 
       "Service Level Agreement" and "Service Level Objective.") 
   
  $ SLA 
     See "Service Level Agreement." 
   
  $ SLO 
     See "Service Level Objective." 
       
  $ SLS 
     See "Service Level Specification." 
   
  $ SMIv2 
     See "Structure of Management Information." 
   
  $ SPPI 
     See "Structure of Policy Provisioning Information." 
   
  $ SPSL 
     See "Security Policy Specification Language." 
   
  $ Structure of Policy Provisioning Information (SPPI) 
     (M) An adapted subset of SNMP's Structure of Management 
       Information (SMIv2) that is used to encode collections of 
       related Policy Rule Classes as a PIB. [R2578, SPPI] 
   


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 14] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

  $ Structure of Management Information, version 2 (SMIv2)  
     (M) An adapted subset of OSI's Abstract Syntax Notation One,  
       ASN.1 (1988) used to encode collections of related objects as  
       SNMP Management Information Base (MIB) modules. [R2578] 
   
  $ subject 
     (P) An entity, or collection of entities, which originates a 
       request, and is verified as authorized/not authorized to 
       perform that request.  
   
  $ target 
     (P) An entity, or collection of entities, which is affected by a 
       policy. For example, the "targets" of a policy to reconfigure a 
       network device are the individual services that are updated and 
       configured.    

 4. Intellectual Property 

  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
  intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
  might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
  has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
  IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
  standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. 

  Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any 
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
  such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
  specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 

  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
  rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
  Director. 


 5. Acknowledgements 

  This document builds on the work of previous terminology drafts.  The 
  authors of these drafts were Fran Reichmeyer, Dan Grossman, John 
  Strassner, Ed Ellesson and Matthew Condell.  Also, definitions for 
  the general concepts of policy and policy rule include input from 
  Predrag Spasic. 







 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 15] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

 6. Security Considerations 

  This document only defines policy-related terms. It does not describe 
  in detail the vulnerabilities of, threats to, or mechanisms that 
  protect specific policy implementations or policy-related Internet 
  protocols. 


 7. References 

  [AAA] AAA Authorization Framework.  Internet Draft, draft-ietf-aaa-
     authz-arch-00.txt, J. Vollbrecht, P. Calhoun, S. Farrell, L. 
     Gommans, G. Gross, B. de Bruijn, C. de Laat, M. Holdrege, and D. 
     Spence.  October 1999. 
    
  [DCLASS] Format of the RSVP DCLASS Object.  Internet Draft, draft-
     ietf-issll-dclass-01.txt, Y. Bernet.  October 1999. 
    
  [DecSupp] Building Effective Decision Support Systems.  R. Sprague, 
     and E. Carleson.  Prentice Hall, 1982. 

  [DIAMETER] DIAMETER Framework Document.  Internet Draft, draft-
     calhoun-diameter-framework-08.txt, P. Calhoun, G. Zorn, P. Pan, 
     and H. Akhtar.  June 2000. 
    
  [DirServs] Understanding and Deploying LDAP Directory Services.  T. 
     Howes, M. Smith, and G. Good.  MacMillan Technical Publications, 
     1999. 

  [DMTF] Common Information Model (CIM) Schema, version 2.4.  
     Distributed Management Task Force, Inc. July, 2000.  The 
     components of the CIM v2.4 schema are available via links on the 
     following DMTF web page: 
     http://www.dmtf.org/spec/cim_schema_v24.html.  

  [DSTERMS] New Terminology for Diffserv.  Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
     diffserv-new-terms-02.txt>, D. Grossman.  November 1999. 

  [IPSP] IP Security Policy (ipsp) Working Group Charter.  February 
     2000. http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/ipsp-charter.html. 
    
  [PCIM] Policy Core Information Model - Version 1 Specification.  
     Internet Draft, draft-ietf-policy-core-info-model-07.txt, B. 
     Moore, E. Ellison, J. Strassner, and A. Westerinen.  July 2000.  
    
  [PIB] Quality of Service Policy Information Base.  Internet Draft, 
     draft-mfine-cops-pib-02.txt, M. Fine, K. McCloughrie, J. 
     Seligson, K. Chan, S. Hahn, and A. Smith.  October 1999. 
    
  [QoSModel] Policy Framework QoS Information Model.  Internet Draft, 
     draft-ietf-policy-qos-info-model-01.txt, Y. Snir, Y. Ramberg, J. 
     Strassner, and R. Cohen. April 2000. 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 16] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

    
  [R1633] Integrated Services in the Internet Architecture: An 
     Overview.  R. Braden, D. Clark, and S. Shenker.  June 1994.  

  [R2026] The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3.  S. Bradner.  
     October 1996. 
    
  [R2138] Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS).  C. 
     Rigney, A. Rubens, W. Simpson, and S. Willens.  April 1997. 
    
  [R2205] Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
     Specification.  R. Braden, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, and S. 
     Jamin. September 1997. 
    
  [R2401] Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.  S. Kent, 
     and R. Atkinson.  November 1998. 
    
  [R2409] The Internet Key Exchange (IKE).  D. Harkins, and D. Carrel.  
     November 1998. 
    
  [R2474] Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) 
     in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers.  K. Nichols, S. Blake, F. Baker, 
     and D. Black.  December 1998. 
    
  [R2475] An Architecture for Differentiated Service.  S. Blake, D. 
     Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and W. Weiss.  December 
     1998. 

  [R2578] Structure of Management Information Version 2 (SMIv2).  K. 
     McGloughrie, D. Perkins, J. Schoenwaelder, J. Case, M. Rose, and 
     S. Waldbusser.  April 1999. 
    
  [R2702] Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS.  D. Awduche, 
     J. Malcolm, J. Agogbua, M. O'Dell, and J. McManus.  September 
     1999.  
                                                        
  [R2748] The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol.  D. Durham, 
     J. Boyle, R. Cohen, S. Herzog, R. Rajan, and A. Sastry.  January 
     2000. 
    
  [R2753] A Framework for Policy-based Admission Control.  R. 
     Yavatkar, D. Pendarakis, and R. Guerin.  January 2000. 
    
  [R2828] Internet Security Glossary.  R. Shirey.  May 2000. 
  
  [SNMPCONF] Policy Based Management MIB.  Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
     snmpconf-pm-01.txt, S. Waldbusser, J. Saperia and T. Hongal.  May 
     2000. 
  
  [SPPI] Structure of Policy Provisioning Information (SPPI).  
     Internet Draft, draft-ietf-rap-sppi-00.txt, K. McCloughrie, M. 



 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 17] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

     Fine, J. Seligson, K. Chan, S. Chan, A. Smith, and F. Reichmeyer.  
     March 2000. 
    
  [SPSL] Security Policy Specification Language.  Internet Draft, 
     draft-ietf-ipsp-spsl-00.txt, M. Condell, C. Lynn, and J. Zao.  
     March 2000. 
    
  [UML] The Unified Modeling Language User Guide.  G. Booch, J. 
     Rumbaugh, and I. Jacobson.  Addison-Wesley, 1999.  
    
  [X.500] Data Communications Networks Directory, Recommendations 
     X.500-X.521, Volume VIII - Fascicle VIII.8.  CCITT, IXth Plenary 
     Assembly, Melbourne.  November 1988. 

 8. Authors' Addresses 

   Andrea Westerinen 
       Cisco Systems, Bldg 15 
       170 West Tasman Drive 
       San Jose, CA 95134 
       E-mail:  andreaw@cisco.com  
    
   John Schnizlein  
       Cisco Systems 
       9123 Loughran Road 
       Fort Washington, MD  20744 
       E-mail:  john.schnizlein@cisco.com  
    
   John Strassner 
       Cisco Systems, Bldg 15 
       170 West Tasman Drive 
       San Jose, CA 95134 
       E-mail:  johns@cisco.com 
    
   Mark Scherling 
       Bank One International 
       62 Beaufort Drive 
       Kanata, Ontario, Canada 
       K2L 2G3   
       E-mail:  marks@m3p.ca 
    
   Bob Quinn 
       Celox Networks 
       One Cabot Road 
       Hudson, MA  01749 
       E-mail:  bquinn@celoxnetworks.com 
    
   Jay Perry  
       CPlane, Inc. 
       5150 El Camino Real - B-31 
       Los Altos, CA 94022 
       E-mail:  jay@cplane.com 


 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 18] 
 Internet Draft             Policy Terminology               July 2000 

    
   Shai Herzog  
       IPHighway  
       55 New York Avenue 
       Framingham, MA  01701 
       E-mail:  herzog@iphighway.com 
    
   An-Ni Huynh  
       Lucent Technologies 
       2139 Route 35  
       Holmdel, NJ 07733 
       E-mail:  ahuynh@lucent.com 
    
   Mark Carlson  
       Sun Microsystems 
       2990 Center Green Court South 
       Boulder, CO 80301 
       Email:  mark.carlson@sun.com  


 9. Full Copyright Statement 

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph  
  are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 







 Westerinen, et al.    Expires: Jul 2000 + 6 months          [Page 19] 