


Network Working Group                                        J. Peterson
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Intended status: Best Current                                  June 2007
Practice
Expires: December 3, 2007


                   Normative Language and References
              draft-peterson-informational-normativity-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 3, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document clarifies the definition of normative language, the
   manner in which normative language should be used in Informational
   documents, and the conditions under which a normative dependency
   exists.






Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  What is 'normative'? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Normative Language off the (Standards) Track . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Informational Publication of Protocols . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10







































Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


1.  Introduction

   RFC2119 [1] provides a set of familiar directives to readers of IETF
   specifications, specifically the imperatives: "MUST", "MUST NOT",
   "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL".  This set of normative
   keywords, as they shall be known in this document, consists of a
   number of grammatical variations which ultimately describe three
   degrees of normative compliance: required, recommended, and elective.
   The first two degrees may be used in either prescriptive or
   proscriptive contexts (e.g.  "MUST" and "MUST NOT", "SHOULD" and
   "SHOULD NOT"), while for the third prescriptive statements only are
   permitted (there is a "MAY" but no "MAY NOT", something can be
   "OPTIONAL", but not "NOT OPTIONAL").

   The use of normative keywords is one of the defining characteristics
   of IETF specifications.  Normative keywords remain an indispensable
   tool for evaluating interoperability as specifications advance on the
   standards track, and moreover for pruning unimplemented features as
   protocols mature through deployment and usage.  The application of
   normative keywords to these functions is predicated largely on the
   text of RFC2026 [2].

   RFC2119 does not, however, contain the word 'normative', and nor does
   RFC2026.  The idea that a statement or reference can be 'normative'
   or 'informational' (let alone the requirement that the References
   section of an Internet-Draft be divided between the two) dates from a
   much later time, as does the term 'normative language'.  The
   conditions that render a particular reference or statement
   'normative' have never been specified; although there is a good
   understanding in the community of the common distinctions, practices
   can be very erratic in corner-cases.

   An example of the resulting confusion is the use of normative
   keywords in requirements documents, which here are to be understood
   as Informational documents that apply constraints to future protocol
   specification work, as opposed to implementation work.  Authors of
   standards-track protocol specifications intended to satisfy these
   requirements sometimes include such requirements documents in the
   "Normative References" section of their document, precisely because
   they are referring to statements containing normative keywords.  This
   sort of downward reference is of course formally prohibited in
   RFC2026, and thus must corrected, but the whole situation arises
   needlessly.  In the absence of some clarification, similar
   misconceptions will continue to arise.

   RFC3967 [3] and more recently RFC4897 [4] have revised the guidance
   of RFC2026 regarding the advancement of standards-track documents



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   which refer to documents at a lower maturity level (or those not on
   the standards track at all).  The present document is entirely
   compatible with the useful amendments introduced in those documents.


2.  What is 'normative'?

   Normative keywords are 'normative' in so far as they establish the
   norms that are the foundation of interoperability.  Implementations
   of a particular specification can be considered to be a sort of
   community, and that community has practices that are required and
   prohibited, recommended and counterrecommended, or simply elective -
   hence, they are norms.

   'Normative language' or 'normative statements' are, broadly, passages
   of text in IETF documents which contain normative keywords that
   direct implementers, with varying degrees of stringency, to
   incorporate particular features in order to assure interoperability.

   Normative language, as originally described in RFC2119, is tooled
   solely to describe how implementations are intended to behave.  As
   RFC2119 Section 6 states, in reference to normative keywords:

     In particular, they MUST only be used where it is
     actually required for interoperation or to limit behavior which has
     potential for causing harm (e.g., limiting retransmissions)

   Ironically, this normative statement is not internally consistent.
   It urges authors of specifications to use normative keywords only in
   reference to matters of implementation, but in order to amplify its
   point from mere urging to absolute dictum, it relies on a normative
   keyword.  Therein lies the source of the confusion.  Normative
   keywords are used commonly, but incorrectly, in precisely this
   fashion: for emphasis, in passages of descriptive text that in no way
   could be construed to address implementations.

   When authors of subsequent specifications see such normative keywords
   used in an purely descriptive passage in an RFC, they may assume that
   the document containing those normative keywords should be referenced
   normatively.  This can cause an unnecessary apparent need for a
   downward reference.

   Considering the flip side of the issue, passages that do not contain
   normative keywords cannot be termed normative.  Any statement that is
   non-normative is by definition purely informational.  Informational
   or descriptive statements play a large role in IETF documents,
   providing contextual information that is useful to implementers or
   authors of future specifications but which does not, strictly



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   speaking, detail implementation behavior that will subsequently be
   measured for compliance.


3.  Normative references

   This document follows the terminology of RFC4897 for a 'source
   document' (a document in which the reference to another document in
   embedded) and a 'target document' (the document so referenced).  It
   furthermore defines the 'referencing statement' as the statement in
   the source document which invokes the reference to the target
   document.

   A reference to a document can be normative only if:
      The source document is itself a standards-track document, BCP or
      an Experimental document.
      The reference statement contains one or more normative keywords
      which predicate any degree of compliance upon the target document.
      The target document, and in particular any subset scope designated
      by the referencing statement (a section, or what have you),
      contains normative keywords.

   If any of the above conditions do not apply, then the reference in
   question is non-normative.  One additional possible condition, that
   the target document have an equal or greater standards maturity level
   to the source document, is not strictly speaking a necessary
   condition for a normative reference; however, normative references
   made when this condition prevails must successfully invoke the
   downref exception procedures defined in RFC3976 in order to advance
   on the IETF standards-track.

   While this definition is logically sound, human language is capable
   of many feats that defy logic, and which must be considered in the
   review of IETF documents.  Consider the following:

   The citation of TLS above is merely exemplary; the referencing
   statement does not actually require application developers to
   implement TLS.  Rather, it requires that any underlying transport
   that is implemented have certain properties, though not terribly
   specific ones.  As such, this statement cannot be considered
   normative - it suggests no norm to the implementation community.
   Precisely for this reason, it is an example of poor specmanship.
   Statements of this general form often seem attractive, however, to
   specification authors who hope to reference work-in-progress or
   Informational documents.  The fix for this sort of specmanship is not
   to require TLS to appear in the Normative references section of the
   document, but rather to encourage the authors to make a stronger
   reference statement, one actually conducive to establishing



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   implementation norms.

   Another similar example is the use of disjunctive references like the
   following:

   Is this a normative reference to both SASL and (the fictitious) MB7?
   It seems to read that implementers would only need to implement one
   in order to be compliant, so perhaps only one of them is actually a
   normative reference... but if so, which one?  Again, a specmanship
   issue.

   A final source of ambiguity in determining whether or not a reference
   is normative is the status of Best Current Practices (BCPs, as
   defined in Section 5 of RFC2026).  The BCP designation is a bit of a
   catch-all in the IETF standards process.  A BCP can prescribe
   practices varying from operations, which are indeed critical to the
   interoperability of the Internet, to IETF process, which is of a non-
   technical nature.  As such, it is entirely appropriate, in some
   cases, to provide a normative reference to a BCP, and for a BCP to
   contain normative keywords.  In the case of IETF process documents,
   it is less clear that they should be understood normatively, and
   moreover less clear that it is appropriate for process documents to
   employ normative keywords.  When process documents do employ
   normative keywords, as RFC2119 does in the citation above, it is
   almost always inconsistent with the definition of those terms in
   RFC2119 and their intended use in RFC2026.  This in turn further
   contributes to the perception that it is appropriate for non-
   technical documents in general (such as requirements documents) to
   employ normative keywords.  Unfortunately, this appropriateness of
   using normative language in BCPs must be assessed on a case-by-case
   basis.

   At least the negative test for normativity is straightforward.  By
   definition, all references that are not normative are informational.


4.  Normative Language off the (Standards) Track

   Despite the text of RFC2119, it is commonplace for normative keywords
   to appear in Informational requirements documents today, in
   statements that are intended to constrain the authoring of future
   specifications.  The laudable intent of requirements documents is of
   course to establish consensus on the needs of the implementation
   community prior to the evaluation of candidate protocols that might
   satisfy these needs.  The requirements document becomes a measuring
   stick of the 'compliance' of a candidate protocol.

   Undoubtedly some confusion arises from an accident of the language in



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   RFC2119.  The Abstract of 2119 says that the normative keywords are
   "are used to signify the requirements in the specification", which
   could be read to suggest that Informational requirements that will be
   used to constrain further protocol specifications should use
   normative keywords.  In fact, that interpretation clearly contradicts
   the previously-cited dictum that normative keywords are to be used
   only when required for "interoperation or to limit [implementation]
   behavior."

   Were we to grant that normative keywords apply to protocol
   requirements by analogy, the interpretation of normative keywords in
   this context would remain problematic.  How are we to understand the
   "SHOULD" keyword for protocol requirements.  What does it mean for a
   protocol that satisfies a given set of protocol requirements to be
   merely "conditionally compliant"?

   Along these lines, it might seem compelling to imagine that the
   selection of two protocols X and Y, which were invented to satisfy a
   set of requirements A, might be decided by a single "SHOULD"
   statement specified in A which is support by X but not Y. But of
   course, if that "SHOULD" in A were instead a "MUST", the same
   selection would be made.  The true utility of a "SHOULD" emerges when
   we instead consider two implementations, X and Y, which have been
   implemented to specification A and are attempting to interoperate.
   In this case, if Y fails to implement a "MUST", a very different
   result can occur than if Y fails to implement a "SHOULD".  In short,
   the normative keywords are designed to encourage cooperation, not
   decide competition.  Using them in the latter context is a strained
   analogy, and the resulting strain is communicated to the IETF's
   standards process.

   It is moreover critical to appreciate that the use of normative
   keywords is tied to the functions of 2026: that is, the pruning of
   unused features of a protocol specification.  From the guidance in
   4.1.2 (where we understand 'features' to be at the 'required' degree
   of compliance, and 'options' to be at the 'recommended' or 'elective'
   degrees of compliance):

    The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
    implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
    specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
    have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
    implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft Standard
    level only if those options or features are removed.

   Normative keywords exist to ensure interoperability, and practically
   speaking a requirements document will never be interoperable with
   anything.



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   More rarely, normative keywords appear in other sorts of
   Informational documents, such as frameworks that describe high-level
   or abstract architectures.  In this context they are primarily used
   for rhetorical emphasis.  This practice can still lead authors of
   future specifications to improper referencing.

   Finally, it is also possible for an Informational document to
   redefine normative keywords in lieu of any reference to RFC2119.
   This practice only adds further misery to the confusion surrounding
   the use of normative keywords, and should be avoided.  If there is a
   genuine need for terminology to characterize adherence to a set of
   requirements in the context of specification authoring, those terms
   should be clearly defined and explicitly distinguished, semantically
   and syntactically, from the RFC2119 normative keywords.  A similar
   direction should be taken regarding the use of normative keywords in
   process statements.  Further consideration is left as a possible
   subject for future study.

4.1.  Informational Publication of Protocols

   There are a variety of circumstances in which protocol specifications
   are published as Informational RFCs.  Sometimes authors request
   Informational publication of protocol specifications which were
   rejected as candidates in a working group process in order to
   preserve an historical record.  Parties who do not participate
   directly in the IETF may similarly request publication of their
   designs as an Informational RFC.  Some exceptional IETF procedures,
   for example the SIP change (RFC3427 [5]) process, may stipulate a
   lower bar of review and Informational publication for certain
   protocol work.

   These Informational documents often contain normative keywords, as
   their authors aspire to specify something that will yield
   interoperable implementations.  One need not anticipate, or even
   understand, the eventual intended status of a document in order to
   invoke RFC2119 and use the normative keywords therein.  The
   distinctions between such Informational documents and standards-track
   documents lie more so in the implications about review and community
   consensus which the standards-track entails than in any consideration
   about formatting.

   Because such documents exist, it is not reasonable to bar
   Informational specifications from containing normative keywords.
   Indeed, the downref exception procedures largely exist so that it is
   possible to refer to such documents, under the proper conditions and
   with the required oversight.

   Instead, we should prevent the casual or inappropriate use of



Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


   normative keywords that to refer to matters other the proper
   implementation of protocols.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no considerations for the IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   This is a IETF process document which does not impact the security of
   IETF protocols.


7.  Informational References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
        levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [3]  Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
        Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower Level",
        RFC 3967, December 2004.

   [4]  Klensin, J. and S. Hartman, "Handling Normative References to
        Standards-Track Documents", RFC 4897, June 2007.

   [5]  Mankin, A., Bradner, S., Mahy, R., Willis, D., Ott, J., and B.
        Rosen, "Change Process for the Session Initiation Protocol
        (SIP)", RFC 3427, December 2002.


Author's Address

   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St
   Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   USA

   Phone: +1 925/363-8720
   Email: jon.peterson@neustar.biz
   URI:   http://www.neustar.biz/




Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 Normativity                     June 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Peterson                Expires December 3, 2007               [Page 10]

