

Network Working Group                                        D. Connolly
Internet-Draft                                                       W3C
Expires: June 20, 2003                                          M. Baker
                                                       December 20, 2002


  A Registry of Assignments using Ubiquitous Technologies and Careful
                                Policies
                   draft-connolly-w3c-accessible-registries-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 20, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Registries are a critical part of many of the systems which inhabit
   the Internet today.  Unfortunately, not a lot of the assignments
   within those registries are as accessible as they could be.  This
   document outlines a best current practice approach to improving the
   accessibility of assignments within registries using ubiquitous
   technologies and low cost supporting policies.







Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


1. Introduction

   The success of the World Wide Web project has demonstrated the value
   of dereferencable URIs, and linking information together using them.
   Many registries on the Internet today create assignments whose
   principle identifier is not a URI, preventing the information
   associated with that assignment from being integrated with Web tools
   such as search engines, and from being related to other information,
   for example linking the assignment of the "application/xml" Internet
   media type to RFC 3023.

   On occasion, where an assignment has been provided a URI, it is not
   done so authoritatively, reducing the value of the URI as an
   identifier, as references to the assignment are split between the URI
   and the non-URI form.  For example, the Internet media type
   "application/pdf" could also be identified by the URI "http://
   www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/pdf", such that new
   protocols could use the URI instead of "application/pdf".  Anybody
   inspecting a message would be able to dereference the URI to discover
   that it was in fact a media type, rather than simply a string that
   happens to resemble one.






























Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


2. Proposed Solution

   As the title of this note intimates, we suggest that a combination of
   the use of currently ubiquitous technologies, together with the
   implementation of careful policies, comprises a practical and long-
   term viable solution to this problem.

2.1 Ubiquitous Technologies

   The basis of our proposed solution is for registries to use
   dereferencable URIs, in particular http: scheme URIs, as the
   principle identifier syntax for assignments.  When dereferenced,
   these URIs should return at least some human processable information
   describing the assignment; the requestor, the details of the
   assignment request, URIs of relevant specifications, etc..

   HTTP [1] is our recommended dereferencing mechanism, because it
   includes features specifically for managing the evolution of
   resources (of which registry assignments are one kind), and has been
   highly optimized for the transfer of coarse grained data objects.  In
   particular;

   redirection: permits the registry to communicate the movement of
      assignments, or, should it be required, the splitting of an
      assignment into multiple assignments

   content negotiation: permits the URI of the assignment to be used to
      retrieve different data formats, should it be necessary to support
      more than one

   metadata: information such as that provided by the "Last-Modified"
      header, used with the "If-Modified-Since" method qualifier permits
      efficient dereferencing in the face of mostly static data, such as
      most registry assignments

   FTP is another protocol that could be used if required, but its lack
   of redirection and content negotiation makes URIs in the ftp: URI
   scheme more prone to change over time (and to create additional URIs,
   for example to support additional data formats), in addition to
   requiring an extra network round trip for authentication, even for
   anonymous transfers.

   We also recommend that IANA and IETF use iana.org and ietf.org
   respectively in the authority component of their URIs.  See Appendix
   A for a FAQ on this issue.






Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


2.2 Careful Policies

2.2.1 Dereferenceable

   Assignments, whether using the http: or ftp: URI scheme, should be
   derefenceable (via HTTP GET or FTP RETR, respectively) to some
   information about the assignment.  For example, the assignment for an
   Internet media type would ideally list information such as the RFC
   which includes the IANA required registration form, the date it was
   registered, etc..

   This conclusion was made by the W3C Technical Architecture Group
   (TAG) in a finding entitled "Mapping between URIs and Internet Media
   Types" [2].

2.2.2 Persistence

   The registry must commit to supporting and documenting a persistence
   policy for assignments.  The policy need not be the same for all
   assignments, but should at least include the following;

      Moving assignments will be avoided at almost any cost

      Should moving be required;

         A one year notice will be given and broadly announced

         Redirection services (for http: scheme URIs) will be provided
         for three years after the move






















Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


3. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank the contributions of Larry Masinter,
   as well as the members of the W3C Technical Architecture Group.

   In addition, Tim Berners-Lee's work on the World Wide Web project
   provided significant input to, and motivation for, this draft.












































Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


References

   [1]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
        Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
        HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [2]  Williams, S., "Mapping between URIs and Internet Media Types",
        May 2002, <http://www.w3.org/2001/tag/2002/01-uriMediaType-9>.

   [3]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        One: The Comprehensive DDDS", RFC 3401, October 2002.

   [4]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Two: The Algorithm", RFC 3402, October 2002.

   [5]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403, October
        2002.

   [6]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Resolution
        Application", RFC 3404, October 2002.

   [7]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Five: URI.ARPA Assignment Procedures", RFC 3405, October 2002.

   [8]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R. and P. Falstrom,
        "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition Mechanisms",
        RFC 3406, October 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Daniel W. Connolly
   World Wide Web Consortium
   MIT Laboratory for Computer Science
   545 Technology Square
   Cambridge, MA  02139
   US

   Phone: tel:+1-913-491-0501
   EMail: mailto:connolly@w3.org
   URI:   http://www.w3.org/People/Connolly/








Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


   Mark Baker

   Phone: tel:+1-613-286-4390
   EMail: mailto:distobj@acm.org
   URI:   http://www.markbaker.ca/














































Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


Appendix A. FAQs

A.1 What if 'iana.org' is disputed and reassigned to somebody else?

   It is extremely unlikely that this will happen.  IANA owns its name,
   as ISOC is a legal entity.  The risk of this happening is certainly
   lower than other relevant risks.

A.2 Wouldn't URNs, or some other DNS-independant form of URI be a better
    solution?

   We don't believe so, no.  First, we feel that it is extremely
   important that assignments be dereferenceable using ubiquitous
   technologies so that information about the assignment can be easily
   accessed by anyone (which is not currently the case for URNs).
   Second, any registry of names (such as an URN namespace) that is, or
   becomes important, will eventually find itself facing the same issues
   (e.g.  trademark) that DNS has faced.  DNS, and URI schemes using it,
   are at least "the devil we know".

   Finally, we feel that URNs do not address the issue of "URI
   persistence" as is claimed in RFC 3404 [6], part of the
   DDDS[3][4][5][6][7][8] set of specifications.  Specifically, the
   introduction of RFC 3404 states;

      Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) have been a significant advance
      in retrieving Internet-accessible resources.  However, their
      brittle nature over time has been recognized for several years.
      The Uniform Resource Identifier working group proposed the
      development of Uniform Resource Names (URN) to serve as
      persistent, location-independent identifiers for Internet
      resources in order to overcome most of the problems with URIs.
      RFC 1737 sets forth requirements on URNs.

   We believe that URNs are no less brittle than other URIs as
   persistent identifiers, and that "http://www.w3.org/" is no more
   location-dependant than, for example "urn:w3c", should it ever become
   resolvable.  No URI presents a single point of failure to resolution,
   as the existence of HTTP caches demonstrate, since they can cache
   representations of any resource identified by any URI, not just those
   using the http: URI scheme.

A.3 What if IANA's server goes down?

   XSLT processors don't stop working when the W3C's Web server goes
   offline for a day (as it has in the past), despite referencing the
   w3.org XSLT namespace; they don't generally consult it in real-time.
   Any services that do depend on live access will have to have caching/



Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


   redundancy/failover/robustness mechanisms; the same mechanisms they
   would need to have should their own network go down.

















































Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Accessible Registries on the Web       December 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Connolly & Baker         Expires June 20, 2003                 [Page 10]

