


mass                                                             D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                               Trend Micro
Expires: March 19, 2006                               September 15, 2005


                      MASS impacts upon reputation
                     draft-otis-mass-reputation-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 19, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document responds to findings in the MASS review by Russell
   Housley et al, with additional considerations from the perspective of
   reputation assessment.  This also includes speculations on possible
   solutions and implementations for the MASS proposal: DKIM.








Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Resource Preservation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.   Community Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.   Filtering Erodes Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.   Mailbox-domain Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.   The Hack for Mailbox-Domain Authorization  . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.   Protecting Recipients without using Mailbox-domain
        Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.   Detecting a Path Change  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.   Binding Identifiers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   10.  The next steps in enforcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   11.  PKI certificates per user would burden larger domains  . . .  16
   12.  Key size and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   13.  Border Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   14.  Domain Assertions for Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   15.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   16.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   17.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   18.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     18.1   References - Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     18.2   References - Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  25


























Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


1.  Introduction

   Laws governing email policy do not always prohibit unsolicited
   commercial email (UCE).  It is necessary that more stringent email
   policies are used by sending domains as demanded by recipients.
   Signatures, validated by keys published within DNS, allow recipients
   a stronger means to ascertain those domains most directly accountable
   for policies applied to the messages being offered.  The reputation
   of entities submitting messages often determines acceptance, although
   the assessed identity is normally the IP address.  Many domains use a
   shared outbound IP address and this may result in collateral
   refusals.  Signed messages offer a stronger, and more specific
   accountable domain than that of the IP address.  However, the use of
   domain signed messages is not a panacea.  The current [DKIM]
   specification creates challenges when attempting to squelch policy
   breaches, see [ID-Housley-MASS].  Also, the overhead required to
   implement signatures, as compared to the use of an IP address for
   reputation assessment, requires additional defensive measures.

   Terminology: Terminology conforms to [ID-email-arch].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.  Resource Preservation

   The prevalence of undesirable email reaches levels where a decision
   to refuse a session MUST be made prior to the message exchange as a
   means to conserve network and system resources.  The decision to
   refuse a session is typically based upon accrued reputations, or the
   access type listed by providers for the remote IP address in
   question.  A similar level of protection is possible by basing
   reputations upon verified HELO/EHLO names.  Verifying the HELO/EHLO
   name demands that clients insure requisite DNS information is
   reliably returned, see [ID-CSV].  Accepted practices currently
   forgive HELO/EHLO names that do not verify, as allowed by [RFC2821].
   To establish effective name-based reputations for defending message
   signature verification operations, HELO/EHLO name verification is
   REQUIRED.  Verifiable HELO/EHLO names or domain signatures offer an
   alternative to the use of the IP address as a fair basis for accruing
   reputations.  Name-based reputations may avoid collateral refusals,
   however, verifications of the HELO/EHLO names are then needed to
   provide vital network and system resource protection.

   A signed message permits inclusion of a new identifier that can not
   be falsified.  The signing-domain can add an opaque-identifier
   together with recommendations regarding the use of this identifier in



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   conjunction with mailbox-addresses.  In addition to improving
   protections available to recipients, this identifier can also be used
   to abate abusive message replays.  The lookup required to detect a
   revocation of the opaque-identifier can be mitigated by the HELO/EHLO
   name being within the signing-domain, or by a valid hash of the
   [RFC2821] RCPT TO parameter.

   Resource protection mechanisms SHOULD be based upon a single DNS
   lookup to verify the authorization and authentication of the sending
   SMTP client.  When, by convention, the HELO/EHLO name is normally
   within the signing-domain, then a few other efficiencies are made
   possible.  It becomes possible to skip reputation checks for the
   signing-domain after a reputation check of a HELO/EHLO name that is
   within the signing-domain.  As mentioned, when the HELO/EHLO name is
   within the signing-domain, checking the status of a specific opaque-
   identifier should not be needed.  Had the account been revoked, it
   SHOULD be impossible for these messages to be signed with a revoked
   opaque-identifier.

   Systems suffering a security breach have become a significant vehicle
   for sending abusive email.  Millions of compromised systems may act
   as SMTP clients or utilize automated access to the provider's SMTP
   servers.  Any mechanism enforcing email policy SHOULD verify the
   source domain or use the remote IP address as a basis for reputation
   accrual.  As a result of domain verification, those accountable for
   maintaining security will have been determined when abuse is
   discovered.  Authentication ensures the validity of these identifiers
   used as a basis for network protection.  Assumptions regarding
   sources of abusive email or a presumption of security may injure
   innocent parties and damage the integrity of email delivery.

   With tens of millions of good and bad evolving email domains, it is
   less effective to abate abuse or maintain security where each
   recipient contemporaneously establishes acceptance criteria.  White-
   listing large domains, demonstrating good governance controlling
   abuse, will categorize a major portion of the messages being
   assessed.  While this reduces the number of messages needing
   evaluation, the categorization of remaining sources still represents
   a sizable expense.  Often a community of administrators pool efforts
   and create shared lists that offer histories for an extensive number
   of email sources.

3.  Community Policies

   The pooling of efforts is often accomplished through reputation
   services as a means to establish policy within a community.  Those
   with even a brief history of not adhering to these policies are
   thereby excluded from the community.  Real-time black-hole lists have



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   become a commonly used mechanism to publish IP address related
   reputations, where having no record returned indicates a good
   reputation.  As an example, a community wishing to enforce an Opt-In
   requirement for bulk email often employs an email reputation service
   to establish such community-wide policy.

   Reputation service subscription fees, if any, are typically paid by
   the recipient.  With such a service, those sending abusive levels of
   unrequested email to anyone within the community may find subsequent
   sessions refused with an error response.  This response often
   indicates which reputation service reported their server as not
   having a good reputation with respect to specific polices.  The
   extent of email abuse has made reputation services an integral
   component of network resource protection.

   Some bulk email distributors also utilize a vouching or accreditation
   service which attests their compliance to specific policies.  To
   benefit from the accreditation, the recipient must rely upon the
   service, but fees for this type of service are usually paid by the
   sender.  Mechanisms for accreditation services are often similar to
   real-time black-hole lists, except the record may also assert
   favorable ratings.

   Sender based fee structures for accreditation may provide greater
   latitude for senders, which may then dissuade some domain
   administrators from utilizing these services.  Some providers may
   utilize accreditation services together with their own white-listing
   of bulk email distributors, as an adjunct to real-time black-hole
   listings.  White-listing by IP address is difficult to maintain.
   Accreditation services assist with this white-listing effort for bulk
   distributors where their volumes often mislead filtering algorithms
   that categorize the distributors as abusers.

4.  Filtering Erodes Integrity

   Filter programs often place messages into several categories.
   Placement of messages into suspense pending review, often hides the
   filter's actions, and inhibits challenges by senders.  Often, when
   filtering provides multiple categories, a portion of these categories
   are marked suspicious and left to the recipient to make a final
   determination.  The lack of feedback prevents assurance of email
   delivery.  There MUST be an ability to challenge a categorization to
   ensure the integrity of email delivery.  A filter program's "Junk"
   folder contains email that has not been properly excluded by policy
   enforcement, but is without a strong basis for rejection.

   Even when a filtered message is rejected which provides feedback, it
   may be due to a phrase contained within the message.  A doctor's



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   reply to a patient may be steadfastly rejected regardless of which
   provider is used.  Unfortunately, many of these filter programs have
   evolved to also silently discard messages, once some level of
   heuristics has been achieved.  This mode removes all traces of the
   message for both the sender and the recipient.  As a result of a
   breakdown in policy enforcement and the resulting reliance upon
   filters which silently discard as well as place messages into the
   often ignored "Junk" folder, the integrity of email delivery has been
   reduced.

5.  Mailbox-domain Authorization

   As a basic principle, abuse prevention REQUIRES source verification
   and accrual of reputation.  For effective abuse prevention, sources
   SHOULD resolve to the sending domain to establish an appropriate
   hierarchy of accountability.  However, adding recipient overhead for
   discovering mailbox-domain authorizations increases the risk that the
   recipient's resources will be exhausted.  Furthermore, after the
   recipient expends these efforts to determine a mailbox-domain's
   authorizations, the resulting authorization could be inappropriately
   considered equivalent to having verified the source domain for
   purposes of accruing reputations.

   There have been several schemes proposing accrual of mailbox-domain
   reputations, often using recipient feedback techniques.  This accrual
   erroneously presumes that the mailbox-domain has been authenticated,
   rather than just having authorized the system handling the message.
   When recipients consider path or signing-domain based authorizations
   as being equivalent to verifying the source domain, this creates an
   unfair basis for accruing reputations.  The mailbox-domain owner
   often has no administrative oversight to assure the protection of the
   mailbox-domain owner's reputation.  Instead of authorization records
   preventing harm, these authorization records may actually cause an
   otherwise unevaluated mailbox-domain to create a bad reputation for
   the owner, when a mailbox-domain is still falsified by abusive
   messages.

   Assuming the recipient checks for mailbox-domain authorizations, the
   anticipated benefit of preventing misuse then depends upon the
   mailbox-domain owner accepting additional conditions.  The mailbox-
   domain owner MUST fully depend upon a provider ensuring the
   exclusivity of the outbound mailbox-domain.  Also, the mailbox-domain
   owner MUST accept the loss of emails in some cases.  This loss occurs
   when the authorization mechanisms are limited to using commonly
   visible or determinate mailbox-domains.  Present conventions may
   establish the sending entity with a typically invisible or perhaps
   indeterminate mailbox-domain.  Granting authorization exceptions to
   accommodate differing conventions offers opportunities for exploits.



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   Not granting exceptions increases the support needed for non-
   conforming mechanisms that result in email loss.

   Authorization schemes devise mailbox-domain/signing-domain or
   mailbox-domain/path relationships.  Establishing these relationships
   entails significant administrative effort as well as protocol
   overhead.  Exceptions granted may potentially mislead recipients, by
   offering false assurances when the mailbox-domain authorization
   mechanism indicates success.  Proponents of mailbox-domain
   authorization mechanisms ignore the uncertainty of the mailbox-
   domain's visibility, selection, and origin.  Recipients will still
   confront abuse from mailbox-domains providing authorization.
   Reputations based upon mailbox-domains may create unwarranted email
   delivery failures.  The inappropriate application of reputation
   occurs when recipients use authorization as a basis to hold
   potentially falsified mailbox-domains accountable, as their means to
   abate the abuse.

   Currently abusers control millions of compromised systems, and can
   take advantage of weak mailbox-domain authorizations.  Abusers may
   exploit published records that register permitted mailbox-domain
   paths or signing-domains, to usurp previously good reputations.  When
   abuse occurs that still falsifies the mailbox-domain, the mailbox-
   domain owner's tainted reputation may subsequently cause this
   domain's emails to be blocked.  What is worse, redemption of a
   mailbox-domain owner's reputation may not be practical due to the
   typical mailbox-domain multi-level authorization scheme that follows
   a filtering paradigm.  The mailbox-domain may not receive
   notification their emails are being placed into "Junk" folders.

   There are many weaknesses associated with path or signing-domain
   based authorizations where the mailbox-domain can still be falsified.
   Abusers may take advantage of a mailbox-domain owner's desire to
   ensure emails are delivered by allowing exceptions.  Abusers may also
   take advantage of an email provider's failure to check mailbox-domain
   authorizations, or failure to license mailbox-domain selection
   algorithms.  Nevertheless, with these flawed schemes, the mailbox-
   domain within the selected header is held accountable for having sent
   the message, when this accountability is only supported by
   authorization records.

   Some call this unfair assumption that holds the mailbox-domain
   accountable, "Sender Authentication."  Calling the authorization
   derived from a mailbox-domain "Sender Authentication" would be
   similar to making a declaration that the postal service is authorized
   to deliver letters for John Doe, where recipients then claim any
   letter received from the postal service and bearing John Doe's name
   is authentically or genuinely from John Doe. Of course, that would be



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   a false assumption, and path or signing-domain based authorizations
   are no different.  It is normal for mailbox-domains to employ common
   service providers.  It is also normal for service providers not to
   adopt specific checks requiring extensive support.  Mailbox-domain
   authorizations do not provide a safe or practical solution for
   mailbox-domain falsification.

6.  The Hack for Mailbox-Domain Authorization

   How will abusers take advantage of normal desires and the false
   assumptions surrounding mailbox-domain authorization?  While strictly
   limiting authorization to just an email provider's servers could
   reduce risks of a mailbox-domain being falsified, this could also
   cause some messages to be lost as a result.  The loss could occur
   when recipient's providers select mailbox-domains using an
   incompatible algorithm.  Recipients could also be forwarding messages
   which may result in email losses.  For example, with messages first
   sent to an alma mater's domain, forwarding may make messages appear
   to be unauthorized.  Messages may also be lost when sent through some
   list-servers, or through servers running older versions of email
   applications.

   Why quibble over who is responsible for implementing changes that
   often takes many years?  For the loss of messages due to an
   incompatible authorization scheme, the remedy invariably suggested
   would be to leave mailbox-domain authorization open-ended.  Open-
   ended authorization simply declares a lower level of authorization
   rather than authorization failure.  The multiple levels of
   authorization is intended to alert recipients to increase scrutiny
   given messages with lower levels.  However, this lower level of
   authorization can not ensure the mailbox-domain owner's reputation
   remains protected.  For example, abusers can take advantage of
   automatic image fetching to compile valuable lists of active email
   accounts by using encoded image links.  These abusers don't care
   which folder or level of authorization they obtain.  They don't care
   that recipients fail to respond, and they would be thrilled to see
   recipients make the effort to unsubscribe.

   The mailbox-domain owner's next concern is whether the recipient of a
   message clicks the "spam" button when messages have falsified their
   mailbox-domain.  Conventions remain uncertain for selecting the
   header being checked for authorization.  Email providers rely on
   open-source applications and are understandably reluctant to enter
   into licensing terms that are hostile to the open-source methods of
   software distribution.  It is also understandable some providers will
   only consider using non-proprietary algorithms for basing their
   assumptions of who originated the message.  These providers can not
   inspect some headers without violating claims of intellectual



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   property, when there are also proprietary header selection
   algorithms.  Each selection approach creates compatibility issues
   requiring differing mitigations.

   Some providers will utilize a proprietary algorithm and enforce their
   view by incorporating reputation extensions into MUA plug-ins that
   take an already unfair basis for reputation to a new level of being
   unfair.  With either path or signing-domain authorization records
   being very public, a mailbox-domain owner's reputation will be
   exposed to any possible weakness.  Publishing open-ended
   authorization records may even act as an invitation for this abuse.
   Furthermore, a provider that does not ensure message headers are not
   in conflict with other customers across all possible interpretations,
   may risk the mailbox-domain owner's reputation, especially when this
   provider's limitation becomes known.

   With phishing techniques becoming seemingly epidemic, mailbox-domain
   authorization is often touted as a remedy.  With respect to phishing,
   these authorization schemes may bypass the From header as the basis
   for acceptance, even though this is the header typically assumed as
   verified by recipients.  Some MUAs have made this problem worse by
   displaying user friendly names, known as the "pretty" names, rather
   than the actual mailbox address.  Phishing ploys often use disposable
   domain names with obfuscated links, which could also provide a
   variety of mailbox-domain authorizations as a means to obtain false
   assurances.

   Mailbox-domain authorization records can covertly authorize the
   entire Internet to enable a compromised system anywhere in the world.
   Mailbox-domain authorization, as a phishing deterrent, presumes wide
   adoption of an algorithm by mail clients and providers.  However,
   assurances offered by mailbox-domain authorization "aware"
   applications are dangerous, due to the possible use of hidden
   headers, and reliance upon uncertain interim authorization checks.
   This may actually place consumers in greater peril, when trusting
   false assurances.

   Mailbox-domain authorization requires that mailbox-domain owners
   trust their email providers, although many providers do not
   authenticate their own customers, and do not care what mailbox-domain
   is used.  Such providers will be exposing the mailbox-domain owners
   who publish mailbox-domain authorization records to substantial
   risks.  Mailbox-domain authorization does not identify these
   providers either, so there is no accountability that directly assures
   a provider's diligence.

   Mailbox-domain authorization itself may weaken the integrity of the
   DNS.  One draft risking the integrity of DNS only offers the advice



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   that providers use "properly paranoid DNS resolvers."  Path based
   authorization records catalog all outbound MTAs of a domain and may
   demand a minimum of more than one hundred DNS lookups, while also
   ignoring UDP exponential back-off.  Signed-domain authorization
   records require walking up the DNS label tree from five levels below
   the root.  This occurs for mailbox-domains that have not made an
   indication that a mailbox-domain authorization scheme is supported.
   This will increase DNS traffic and likely obligate root name servers
   to issue negative authorization records to mitigate the authorization
   query overhead.  Mailbox-domain authorization records can not offer
   network resource protection, but actually put these resources at
   risk.

   Publishing mailbox-domain authorization depends upon providers
   inspecting all possible interpretations of the message headers and
   envelope parameters.  To do this, providers may either limit their
   customer's choice of mailbox-domains, or isolate their customers
   outbound servers or IP address.  The mailbox-domain owner suffers
   harm when the provider is negligent at controlling access and
   establishing the needed constraints, since the provider remains
   anonymous.  Furthermore, the mailbox-domain owner will be left in the
   dark as to the cause of their dilemma.

7.  Protecting Recipients without using Mailbox-domain Authorization

   The opaque-identifier is a mechanism being suggested by this
   document.  The term 'opaque' means that only the domain creating the
   identifier understands the relationships described.  There could be
   two modes used for creating the content of the opaque-identifier.
   One mode would be persistent with the account used to access the
   signing-domain, and the other could be sequential for cases where an
   account is not involved.  A prefix could be added to the sequential
   opaque-identifier to prevent collisions with the identifiers used for
   accounts.

   A sequential opaque-identifier may be appropriate for distributing
   bulk mailings.  To identify the abusers that may attempt to stage
   replay attacks, having a unique identifier sent to each recipient
   could be helpful.  These replay attacks could be done using the
   unchanged content of the message, but sending to recipients that
   would consider the information to be unsolicited.  The reason for
   such a replay attack may be to damage the reputation of the signing-
   domain.

   If an identifier were added to an unsigned message, this would invite
   forgery and therefore offer little value.  A standardized opaque-
   identifier, included within the validated content of a signed
   message, would offer significant value.  It would be an opaque-



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   identifier added to the signature header that is valid as a domain
   name label.  A persistent opaque-identifier would be most useful when
   derived from the access server that authenticates the account being
   used.

   The opaque-identifier would greatly aid the correlation of abuse and
   prove most useful for locating compromised systems.  This approach
   could be effective against systems compromised by Trojan programs,
   stolen passwords, and cracked wireless access points, among many
   other nefarious methods.  Abuse reports that catalog signed messages
   and that are correlated with the opaque-identifier, would provide
   incontrovertible evidence of where the source of a problem exists.
   The publishing of the revocation record for the opaque-identifier
   would also provide feedback that actions were taken to rectify a
   policy breach.

   In odd cases, where the HELO/EHLO name is not contained within the
   signing-domain and where the RCPT TO hash is not valid, a single
   lookup of the opaque-identifier returning no record would be an
   indication that this particular opaque-identifier is still authorized
   by the signing-domain.  This mechanism would be most valuable in
   those cases where the message may have been forwarded, such as at the
   typical alma mater, or where a mailing list opts to also forward
   signed messages unaltered.

   If there is a problem, the signature would offer the name of the most
   capable domain to remedy abuse.  People can still safely use their
   forwarding email accounts given to them by their school or society.
   Mailing lists would be given a strong identifier upon which to grant
   the replication of messages.  The best part, complaints would also
   likely be directed to those most able to curtail future episodes of
   bad behavior, i.e. the provider of the abusive account!

   The construction of this revocation record mechanism could take the
   form of a single A record lookup.  The opaque-identifier would be
   composed of 1 to 63 characters and select a record in this fashion:

   Within the signature header, a parameter u=<opaque-identifier> would
   indicate the use of a opaque-identifier.

      <opaque-identifier> ::= <letter> [ [ <ldh-str> ] <let-dig> ]

      <ldh-str> ::= <let-dig-hyp> | <let-dig-hyp> <ldh-str>

      <let-dig-hyp> ::= <let-dig> | "-"

      <let-dig> ::= <letter> | <digit>




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


      <letter> ::= %x41-5A / %x61-7A

      <digit> ::= %x30-39

      <opaque-identifier>._rl.<signing-domain> IN A 127.0.0.2

   When the signing-domain has not revoked authorization for this
   identifier, no record would be returned and the remote DNS cache
   would retain the absence of this record for a brief period of time,
   see [RFC2308].  For the majority of cases, where messages are
   obtained directly from the signing-domain, an exception granted by
   the HELO/EHLO being within the signing-domain allows this revocation
   check to be skipped.  A revocation check would be made for the odd
   cases where the HELO/EHLO is within a different domain and the RCPT
   TO hash is not valid.  This check would be performing nearly an
   identical lookup now ubiquitously done to investigate the status of
   the SMTP client's IP address against a real-time black-hole list.
   Those addresses or identifiers that warrant refusal are granted a
   long lived address record to ensure their immediate refusal and limit
   DNS traffic resulting from abusive sources.  Otherwise, not offering
   a record allows for the prompt cessation of an opaque-identifier's
   authorization when the situation regarding a particular identifier
   changes.  The Time-To-Live for negative DNS caching may be determined
   by the recipient, or represent the lesser of the SOA TTL or the SOA
   MINIMUM field, depending upon the recipient's implementation.

8.  Detecting a Path Change

   There are at least two techniques that can be used to detect when the
   message's path has been altered.  Verifying either check can mitigate
   a need to do a revocation check on a opaque-identifier.  One check
   would be verifying that the hash for the RCPT TO parameter is valid.
   The other would be verifying the HELO/EHLO name and confirming that
   it is within the signing-domain.

   The purpose of the RCPT TO hash would be to provide an indication of
   when to check for the opaque-identifier revocation, as an alternative
   to the HELO/EHLO being within the signing-domain.  There should be
   practical methods used on the RCPT TO line which obfuscates the
   hashed information.  Perhaps, randomly modifying the case of letters
   within the mailbox-domain and modifying the amount of white space
   could act as a type of salt.  The goal is to mitigate extra DNS
   lookups, albeit small in this case.  The RCPT TO hash option would
   also instill a practice that provides better tracking abilities when
   problems occur, without depending upon other steps being taken.

   The RCPT TO could use a white-space sensitive canonicalization that
   combines the RCPT TO parameters into a single SHA-1 hash.  This hash



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   would be added to the signature using base64 encoding as a "r="
   parameter, for example.

   List servers that pass messages unaltered, or recipients that employ
   forwarding accounts could be fairly common scenarios where a
   revocation check would be required.  The reaction deterring the
   replay attack must be rapid, but does not require all abusive
   messages be stopped.  This rapid response will expose participating
   SMTP clients and reduce the profits of the abusive behavior.  The
   loss of the profits and the exposure should act as a deterrent.

9.  Binding Identifiers

   Binding identifiers allows a recipient to recognize a prior
   correspondent without the use of complex and problematic mailbox-
   domain authorizations.  Mailbox-domain authorization problems may
   create support issues that could significantly thwart [DKIM]
   deployment.  The MUA is able to associate visual items from prior
   correspondents and obtain a higher granularity and history of signed
   message sources without using any DNS lookups.  The identification of
   the message source is contained completely within the message itself.

   When assuming legacy MUAs, scant protections are possible by the MTA
   even using many DNS lookups.  Due to limitations of ensuring
   visibility of checked domains, the MTA approach provides an
   alarmingly low level of mailbox-address protections.  There is also a
   potential for an undesired exposure of mailbox-addresses in the 'i='
   parameter.  Mailbox-domain authorizations depend upon the signing-
   domain verifying the validity of the local-part of the mailbox-
   address for the recipient to detect intra-domain spoofing.

   A suggested opportunistic approach could be used to detect when a
   previous correspondent appears to be from a different point of
   origin.  The approach would rely upon the collected relationships
   discovered within signed messages.  The signed message may even
   advise what information should be compared against the mailbox-
   address and perhaps even the pretty-name.  While in most cases the
   collected relationships (bindings) would be made at the behest of the
   recipient and require their approval, some relationships could be
   established automatically.

   To reduce user interaction needed to establish bindings, there would
   be three modes expressed by a scope-width parameter included within
   the signature header.  A value of "w=n" would indicate a narrow
   binding recommendation, and a value of "w=b" would indicate a broad
   binding recommendation.  A Narrow binding would include mailbox-
   address/signing-domain/opaque-identifier, whereas the Broad binding
   would include just the mailbox-domain/signing-domain.  No "w="



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   parameter would indicate that no bindings are recommended.

   A provision should be added to indicate when a key had been
   delegated.  The message signed with a delegated key should not be
   trusted to make recommendations with respect to the scope of a
   binding.  There should be a parameter added to the delegated key
   where "d=n" parameter indicates that the key has been delegated and
   the recommending binding for delegated keys is narrow.  In the case
   of a delegated key, the opaque-identifier and the key selector MUST
   match.

   The suggested binding are recommendations for the type of pseudo-
   certificate created to uniquely identify a correspondent for future
   reference.  One could argue that 'ssh' is one of the most widely used
   cryptographic protocols, which often relies upon "opportunistic
   cryptography" by saving self-signed certificates.  This document is
   suggesting this 'ssh' model could also work for [DKIM].  In the case
   where the "w=b" and the mailbox-domain and signing-domain match, the
   MUA, perhaps even the MTA, could cache the pseudo-certificates for
   the correspondents.

   When the mailbox/signing domains are the same, and when the message
   advises that only the mailbox/signing domains are essential to
   identify the originator of a message, then it should be safe to
   capture this relationship automatically.  With the relationship
   information captured (cached), the MTA or MUA would be able to detect
   when a message violated these expected relationships.

   In the case of a particular domain that recommends only the signing/
   mailbox domains be bound, then after the initial contact by anyone
   within that domain, comparing against the captured signing/mailbox
   domains could indicate when the source of a message appears
   suspicious.  If a subsequent message appeared suspicious coming from
   a list server, then the recipient could merge the list server domain
   within the associated relationship.  This approach would make it more
   advantageous for list servers not to damage initial signatures.

   A recipient could recognize the originator of a message even when
   there are no assurances being made regarding the mailbox-address, by
   using the opaque-identifier that tracks accounts added by the
   signing-domain.  This opaque-identifier would become a part of the
   captured relationship once approved by the recipient.  This approach
   means that providers that do not constrain their customer's use of a
   mailbox-address still offers significant value for their customers.
   Other out-of-band techniques could be used to strengthen the identity
   of the individual without involving the email provider.





Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


10.  The next steps in enforcement

   Reduce reliance upon filtering that either discards or "junks"
   messages.  A growing loss of integrity in email delivery is eroding
   email's value as a method for conducting transactions.  This loss of
   integrity is largely caused by filtering programs that process
   messages based upon weak identifiers.  A filter program's use of
   heuristics with weak identifiers demands growing resources and may
   cost senders the loss of their messages, even to the point where
   their mailbox-domain becomes unusable, with no clear recourse for
   correcting errant behaviors.

   Remove advantages gained by spoofing the bounce-addresses by not
   returning the original content of the bounced message within the
   Delivery Status Notification (DSN).  This should curtail the
   exploitation of an MTA, that performs checks after accepting the
   message with a spoofed bounce-address intended to be bounced.  Reduce
   the exposure to the DSN from messages with spoofed bounce-addresses
   by implementing a time constrained cryptographic signature within the
   local-part of the bounce-address for all messages sent, as described
   in [ID-BATV].

   Improve the integrity of email by using reputations based only upon
   authenticated identities, where messages are either fully accepted or
   refused.  In email, there are only three identities that can be
   authenticated: the IP address of the sending MTA, a somewhat stronger
   HELO/EHLO, and a much stronger message signature.  Authentication of
   identities provides a means to fairly assess the sources for possible
   abuse.  The IP address and HELO/EHLO domain represent the
   administrator for the last step in the message's delivery.  A message
   signature represents the domain administrator granting initial
   access.

   Protect the signature validation process by utilizing an
   authenticated HELO/EHLO name to establish a reputation for the
   session prior to an exchange of messages and prior to the validation
   of signatures, see [ID-CSV].  The authentication and authorization of
   the HELO/EHLO name can be validated within a single DNS lookup.  The
   DNS infrastructure that provides the signature keys also requires
   better protections.  Do not expect the DNS server to handle active
   scripts that demand extensive lookups.  Ultimately, the deployment of
   [RFC4033] [RFC4034][RFC4035]for DNSSEC is required.

   Limit exposure to the replay of signed messages.  Although a message
   signature provides the strongest authentication and offers the
   recipient the best protections from spoofing or phishing, it could be
   abusively repeated beyond the signing domain's control.  As a
   defensive measure, when needed, a message signature should also



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   permit inclusion of an opaque-identifier.  The opaque-identifier
   would both ease correlation of abuse, and enable a means to squelch
   "replay attacks."  For example, when the key or signature remains
   valid for one week, publishing a revocation record within minutes of
   an abuse report would reduce replay exposure by a factor of 2000 to
   1, and would clearly unveil replay sources to all recipients.  While
   message signatures offer little network protection, they indicate the
   administrator most able to prevent future breaches of policy.
   Message signatures also truly afford protections from the initial
   sources being spoofed.

   Assert email policy for the domain, see [ID-CSVCSA].  Currently this
   DNS record allows a domain to assert that all of their SMTP clients
   will be authorized and authenticated using [ID-CSV].  A signed
   message allows safe assessment of the message source by making no
   presumptions of intervening security.  At an administrative border,
   policy assertions, as well as the domains validated, may need to be
   communicated to another MTA within the administrative domain, where
   signature validation may occur.  This document recommends a possible
   structure for transferring this information.

11.  PKI certificates per user would burden larger domains

   The relative simplicity of the DKIM proposal represents an essential
   element needed to sustain the performance demanded by the email
   infrastructure.  While policy enforcement necessitates cancellation
   of access rights, using signatures also necessitates a need to revoke
   user authorization implied by a valid signature.  This is not
   equivalent to a certificate revocation as defined for PKI in
   [RFC3280].  A proposed method in this document achieves the
   revocation mechanism, and only requires a simple exchange for
   infrequent cases.  In fact, certificates would be unsuitable for
   fulfilling this need, as certificates per-user would represent an
   undue burden.

   For large providers, two certificates per user would be needed to
   accommodate the mail transit time during a certificate change-over.
   A domain with 20 million users would then require close to 7 GB of
   data published on-line.  Even when subsequent certificates are
   phased-out in stages, any extended period for such staging would
   increase the size of certificate revocation lists (CRL) which, to be
   effective against abuse, would require frequent polling.  Recipients
   would then need to cache this voluminous information for all users
   exchanging messages.  As an alternative, by adding a persistent
   identifier within the message, the amount of information exchanged
   would represent 6 orders of magnitude reduction, while still
   providing the same capabilities.




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   For the smaller providers, not incurring the added expense of
   acquiring certificates helps reduce barriers to the deployment of
   message signatures.  A certificate authority typically ensures the
   identity of the certificate holder, but is less concerned about
   adherence to various email policies.  There would still be a need to
   verify the reputation of this identity against desired policies, as a
   basis for accepting their messages.  While using DNS to distribute
   keys reduces what could be a substantial expense, this relatively
   simple mechanism is not without risk.

12.  Key size and performance

   RSA keys are used by the proposal and, for this review, are assumed
   to follow the outline in [RFC3447].  The processing to verify a
   signature is roughly dependent upon the square of the key size.  The
   overhead associated with certificate or key handling is ameliorated
   through retention within a cache for extended periods.  In the summer
   of 1995, RSA laboratories recommended a minimum key size of 768 bits
   for user data, 1024 bit keys for enterprise keys, and 2048 bits for
   root keys.  Since that time, with Moore's law providing a doubling of
   performance every 2.5 years, today's system's performance is
   approximately 16 times faster.  At an RSA challenge in August 1999, a
   512-bit value was factored using 35.7 CPU-years.  Other concerns
   regarding the time to factor the key involve the advancement of
   programmable or custom logic.  These hardware advances further
   increases the performance of factoring by thousands of times more,
   especially for smaller keys where the needed memory size remains
   practical.

   Factoring memory requirements: [TWINKLE]

          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+
          | Key Size | Time        | Factor | Sieve | Matrix |
          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+
          | 512      | 1.7 x 10^19 | 3MB    | 128MB | 2GB    |
          | 768      | 1.1 x 10^23 | 240MB  | 10GB  | 160GB  |
          | 1024     | 1.3 x 10^26 | 7.5GB  | 256GB | 10TB   |
          +----------+-------------+--------+-------+--------+

   There are speculative estimates that with as little as $5,000 worth
   of specialized hardware, a 768-bit key could be determined within 95
   days, see [TWIRL].  Extrapolating from this figure, it may take
   $200,000 to do this within 3 days.  With the growing plunder achieved
   by criminal activity that sends email to entice victims, this expense
   may not be an adequate deterrent.  Today's recommended minimum key
   size of 1024-bits seems well justified.  It will change to 2048-bits
   by the year 2015, based on a tentative schedule provided by the NIST,
   see [NIST-Keys].  [RFC3766] provides details relevant to assessing



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   key strength.

   A very rough estimate of processing overhead for signatures assumes
   that memory caching and higher processor performance provide about an
   8 times improvement over memory bus rates.  The following formula was
   used to estimate performance:

      (80,000 + 32 (key-bit-size^2) + 448(message-byte-size)) / bytes/
      second memory-speed

      Note: Once actual results are evaluated, constants within this
      formula will need adjustment and should also vary between
      different architectures.

   At 768-bit keys and a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory, the overhead
   for an 8 KB message estimates to be around 10.7 milliseconds.  The
   same parameters with a 1024-bit key would result in 17.8
   milliseconds.  This suggests that when changing from 768-bit to 1024-
   bit keys, the resulting overhead should increase by a factor of about
   1.6.  Such a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory dedicated to performing
   this operation, could then handle daily about 4.8 million messages
   that average 8 KB in size.

            +--------------+----------------+-------------+
            | Message Size | Signature Time | Message/min |
            +--------------+----------------+-------------+
            |     1,000    |      16 ms     |    3,700    |
            |     5000     |      17 ms     |    3,500    |
            |    10,000    |      18 ms     |    3,300    |
            |    50,000    |      27 ms     |    2,300    |
            |    100,000   |      37 ms     |    1,600    |
            +--------------+----------------+-------------+

   This table is for a CPU using 2100 MB/second memory validating 1024-
   bit keys.  This shows that beyond 100,000 byte messages, the much
   faster hash function becomes predominately the limiting factor.

13.  Border Validation

   To provide the conveyance of information obtained at the receiving
   administrative border, a new header is introduced.  This header
   documents the methods and results of message validations performed.
   It is added at the top of the message solely by the Internet facing
   border MTA.  Any previous Border-Validation header introduced at the
   Internet facing MTA should be stripped and may be viewed as an
   attempt to forge this information and cause the message to be
   rejected.  This header has the following format:




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


      header := "Border-Validation" ":" domain"["address-literal"]"
      1*LWSP *(";" method "=" result)

      domain := Domain as defined in [RFC2821]

      address-literal := Address literal as defined in [RFC2821]

      method := "CSV" | "DKIM" | "RDNS" | "A-RR"

      result := authen "/" author "/" assert "/" time "/" hash

      authen := "VALID" | "INVALID" | "UNKNOWN" | "ERROR"

      author := "VERIFIED" | "MISSING" | "UNKNOWN" | "ERROR"

      assert := hexadecimal presentation of the CSV-CSA port field.

      time := time value defined by recipient

      hash := defined by recipient to cover domain, address-literal,
      method, and result.

      LWSP := 0x20 / 0x09

   "CSV" refers to the procedures defined in [ID-CSV].  "DKIM" refers to
   the procedures defined in [DKIM].  "RDNS" refers to the validation of
   the HELO by using a reverse DNS lookup of the remote client IP
   address and verifying the HELO name, which will provide "UNKNOWN"
   authorization.  "A-RR" refers to using a lookup of an address record
   for the HELO name, which will also provide "UNKNOWN" authorization.

   Authen is for authentication and author is for authorization.  A
   "VALID" authentication indicates the domain has been confirmed by the
   method indicated.  "INVALID" indicates the method attempting
   authentication has failed.  A message that fails authentication
   should be refused.  An authentication returning "UNKNOWN" indicates
   the client does not conform to a standard which assures
   authentication.  Authentication returning "ERROR" indicates a system
   related failure has prevented a determination.

   A "VERIFIED" authorization indicates the client supports [ID-CSV].  A
   "MISSING" authorization indicates the client supports [ID-CSV] or
   [DKIM] but has determined the client or message is not authorized.
   Normally this should cause the message to be refused.  "UNKNOWN"
   authorization indicates the client does not support [ID-CSV].
   Authorization returning "ERROR" indicates a system related failure
   has prevented a determination.




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


14.  Domain Assertions for Signatures

   [ID-CSV] provides a means to make domain-wide assertions.  Currently,
   only the use of CSV itself is defined.  The Port field of the CSV-CSA
   record defined in [ID-CSVCSA] can be extended to make signature
   related assertions.

   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+
   |   Bit Value  | Meaning                                            |
   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+
   |       1      | Explicit: All authorized names have specific       |
   |              | CSV-CSA records.                                   |
   |       2      | All Messages Signed using DKIM.                    |
   |       4      | HELO/EHLO within signing-domain.                   |
   |       -      | Other bit values are reserved for expansion and    |
   |              | must be set to zero. This range of values should   |
   |              | be ignored by the recipient when their function is |
   |              | unknown.                                           |
   +--------------+----------------------------------------------------+

   Asserting that "all messages signed using DKIM" allows other domain
   signatures to be used, but makes an assurance that all messages sent
   by the MTA will be signed.  Asserting all "HELO/EHLO within signing-
   domain" makes an assurance all messages sent by this MTA can be
   identified by a parent domain signature.

15.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations in this draft.

16.  Security Considerations

   Signatures hold the promise of enabling safe and strong methods for
   recipients to assert their own policy requirements.  Signatures
   should be used in conjunction with HELO/EHLO authentication and a
   opaque-identifier to provide a low risk, low impact method to improve
   the integrity of email messages.  Even if consensus can be reached
   regarding which mailbox-domain is to be constrained by a path or
   signing-domain based authorization list, and this mailbox-domain were
   universally checked, this still assumes all systems are secure, for
   any resulting conclusion to be valid.  There can be no open system
   that abates abuse, without the application of reputation or
   accreditation.  Applying reputations against a mailbox-domain puts
   consumers in extreme jeopardy and the email delivery system at risk.
   To ensure consumer safety and the integrity of email delivery,
   reputations MUST only be based upon authenticated entities.

   The stronger the authentication, the safer the mechanism is for



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   providers and consumers alike.  Signatures can be implemented
   unilaterally and are not premised upon adoption of new universally
   applied checks.  The benefit of complaints being directed to the
   appropriate administrator justify the modest costs for signatures.
   Signed messages add value for customers, especially when signatures
   become a minimum requirement for various services.  Rather than being
   a method that targets the current behavior of abusers, signatures
   offer a real means to ensure the source of a message.  The current
   [DKIM] proposal lacks a much needed means to eliminate a replay and
   DoS attack, but this can be addressed through the inclusion of the
   opaque-identifier and conventions establishing the verification of
   the HELO/EHLO.

   The signature's key sizes should be reconsidered, where support for
   512-bit keys should not be required.

   The number of key selectors, when both DNS traffic and protective
   strategies are considered, don't lend themselves to be used on a per-
   user basis, especially for larger domains.  Should such use become
   common, recipient DNS caches could be overwhelmed with key
   information.

   In conclusion, signed messages provide excellent protections for both
   the MTA administrator and the mailbox-domain owner alike.  In
   addition, with a persistent identifier incorporated, signatures offer
   a means to rapidly abate abuse from compromised sources, even within
   large domains.  Using a valid signature, rather than an
   unauthenticated mailbox-domain, for assessing reputation will not
   invite more egregious behavioral changes in criminal activity, nor
   raise legal disputes over who should have been held accountable for
   abuse.

17.  Acknowledgements

   Earl Hood has been making several good suggestions, where I
   incorporated his concept of including a copy of the RCPT TO as a part
   of the message.  This was changed to being a hash of the RCPT TO with
   the intent of discovering whether the path of the message had
   changed.  In the same fashion as adding the RCPT TO hash, Earl also
   suggested adding a body hash to be able to isolate body content
   alteration from header alterations.

18.  References

18.1  References - Normative

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


   [RFC0821]  Postel, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", STD 10,
              RFC 821, August 1982.

   [RFC0822]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
              text messages", STD 11, RFC 822, August 1982.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES",
              RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
              Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

   [RFC2234]  Crocker, D., "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications",
              RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC2308]  Andrews, M., "Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS
              NCACHE)", RFC 2308, March 1998.

   [RFC2538]  Eastlake, D., "Storing Certificates in the Domain Name
              System (DNS)", RFC , March 1999.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

   [RFC3207]  Hoffman, P., "SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over
              Transport Layer Security", RFC 3207, February 2002.

   [RFC3280]  Housley, R., "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
              Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL)
              Profile", RFC 3280, April 2002.

   [RFC3447]  Jonsson, J., "Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) #1:
              RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.1.", RFC 3447,
              February 2003.

   [RFC3766]  Orman, H., "Determining Strengths For Public Keys Used For



Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


              Exchanging Symmetric Keys", RFC 3766, April 2004.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

18.2  References - Informative

   [DKIM]     Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)",
              July 2005.

   [ID-BATV]  Levine, J., Crocker, D., Silberman, S., and T. Finch,
              "Bounce Address Tag Validation (BATV)", September 2004.

   [ID-CSV]   Crocker, D., Otis, D., and J. Leslie, "Certified Server
              Validation (CSV)", February 2005.

   [ID-CSVCSA]
              Otis, D., Crocker, D., and J. Leslie, "SMTP client
              Authorization (CSA)", June 2004.

   [ID-Housley-MASS]
              Housley, R., "Security Review of Two MASS Proposals",
              January 2005.

   [ID-email-arch]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", July 2004.

   [NIST-Keys]
              http://csrc.nist.gov/, "Key Management Guildline, Workshop
              Document (draft)", November 2001.

   [TWINKLE]  Silverman, R., "An Analysis of Shamir's Factoring Device",
              May 1999.

   [TWIRL]    Shamir, A., "Factoring Large Numbers with the TWIRL
              Device, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2003, Springer,
              Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2729", 2003.




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


Author's Address

   Douglas Otis
   Trend Micro
   1737 North First Street, Suite 680
   San Jose, CA  94043
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.453.6277
   Email: doug_otis@trendmicro.com









































Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                  MASS-Rep                  September 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Otis                     Expires March 19, 2006                [Page 25]

