
Internet Draft                                              Bill Manning
April 1996                                                           ISI 
Expires in six months


		How new BGP Attribute Types are defined
		draft-manning-bgpattrib-type-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document wants to be an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).

Process:

   This document describes the process for creating new BGP attribute 
   type codes. Basic attribute type codes are described in RFC1771 
   pages 12 through 15.  These, and new attribute type codes that are 
   used in the internet are expected to be registered with the IANA.

   It is expected that new BGP attribute type codes will be registered 
   in a similar way that DNS RR's and SNMP subtypes are registered.  
   The actual process will involve the documentation of such attribute 
   type codes in FYI RFCs.  There is no intention of segmenting the 
   code space into public/private or IP/OSI or any other sectioning.

   As each attribute type code is in the process of being developed, it 
   will use an octect value of 255, which will be reserved for this use. 
   At the time an attribute type code is assigned a number by the IANA, 
   the documetnation and code base will be updated to reflect the  
   authorized attribute type code value.

   IANA maintained values will be published in the periodically updated 
   assigned numbers STD. The bgp attribute type code list or pointer to 
   the bgp attribute type code list will be added to this STD. Requests 
   for assignment of a new attribute type code should be sent to IANA 
   with a subject that includes the phrase "attribute type code request".

   Currently in use attribute type codes are listed below:


		1       origin
		2       as path
		3       next hop
		4       multi exit disc.
		5       local preference
		6       atomic aggregate
		7       aggregator
		8       community                               cisco ID
		9       originator                              cisco ID
		10      cluster list                            cisco ID
		11      destination preference                  MCI ID
		12	advertiser				Bay ID
		13	rcid_path (cluster id) 			Bay ID
		...
		255	reserved for development


Security considerations of this memo

   None.

Authors' Addresses

        Bill Manning
        USC/ISI
        4676 Admiralty Way 
        Marina del Rey, CA. 90292
        01.310.822.1511
        bmanning@isi.edu

