

Internet Engineering Task Force                    H. Cruickshank 
Internet Draft                                         S. Iyengar 
Document:                                    University of Surrey 
draft-cruickshank-ipdvb-sec-req-01.txt 
                                                     L. Duquerroy 
                                             Alcatel Alenia Space 
            
            
            
Category: Internet Draft                               1 May 2006 
 
 
        Security requirements for the Unidirectional Lightweight 
        Encapsulation (ULE) protocol 
                 
 
Status of this Draft 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
   Abstract 
    
   This document provides a threat analysis and derives security 
   requirements for MPEG-2 transmission links using the Unidirectional 
   Lightweight Encapsulation (ULE). It also provides the motivation for 
   ULE link level security. This work is intended as a work item of the 
   ipdvb WG, and contributions are sought from the IETF on this topic. 




  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 1] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
   Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction 
   1.1 System Components 
   2. Threat Analysis 
   3. Security Requirements for IP over MPEG-2 TS 
   4. IPsec and MPEG-2 Transmission Networks 
   4.1 Tunnel mode use of IPsec for multicast 
   4.2 IPsec and L2 security 
   5. Motivation for ULE link-layer security 
   5.1 Link security below the Encapsulation layer 
   5.2 Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer 
   6. Summary 
   7. Acknowledgments 
   8. Security Considerations 
   9. References 
   9.1 Normative References 
   9.2 Informative References 
   10. Authors' Addresses 
   11. IPR Notices 
   11.1 Intellectual Property Statement 
   11.2 Disclaimer of Validity 
   12. Copyright Statement 
   13. IANA Considerations 
    

























  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 2] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   In the security considerations section of RFC 4259[ipdvb-arch], 
   there is an initial analysis of the security requirements in MPEG-2 
   transmission networks. For example, when the MPEG-2 transmission 
   network is not using a wireline network, the normal security issues 
   relating to the use of wireless links for transport of Internet 
   traffic should be considered [rfc 3819].  RFC 4259 recommends that 
   any new encapsulation defined by the IETF allows Transport Stream 
   encryption and also supports optional link level 
   encryption/authentication of the SNDU payload.  In ULE [ipdvb-ule], 
   this may be provided in a flexible way using Extension Headers.  
   This requires definition of a mandatory header extension, but has 
   the advantage that it decouples specification of the security 
   functions from the encapsulation functions.  This method also 
   supports encryption of the NPA/MAC addresses. 
 
   This document extends the above analysis and derives the security 
   requirements.  
    
   The main objective of this document is to specify the requirements 
   for securing the link between the Encapsulation Gateways (ULE 
   source) and Receivers only.  In addition, this document provides an 
   overview of the threat analysis for an IP network that utilises ULE 
   over an underlying MPEG-2 transmission network.   
           
   The MPEG-2 Transport Stream (TS) has been widely accepted not only 
   for providing digital TV services, but also as a subnetwork 
   technology for building IP networks. The Unidirectional Lightweight 
   Encapsulation (ULE) mechanism described in [ipdvb-ule] for the 
   transport of IPv4 and IPv6 Datagrams, bridged Ethernet frames and 
   other network protocol packets directly over the ISO MPEG-2 Transport 
   Stream as TS Private Data. ULE specifies a base encapsulation format 
   and supports an extension format that allows it to carry additional 
   header information to assist in network/Receiver processing.  
        
   Important characteristics of MPEG-2 transmission networks are that 
   they may provide link-level broadcast capability, and that many 
   support applications that require access to a very large number of 
   subnetwork nodes [ipdvb-arch]. In addition, the majority of MPEG-2 
   transmission networks are bandwidth-limited, encapsulation protocols 
   must therefore add minimal overhead to ensure good link efficiency 
   while providing adequate network services. They also need to be 
   simple to minimize processing, robust to errors and security 
   threats, and extensible to a wide range of services.  
    
   In MPEG-2 transmission network there are several signalling messages 
   that broadcast by the Network Control Centre (NCC).  Examples of 
   these signalling messages or SI tables) are PAT - Program Association 
   Table, PMT - Program Map Table and NIT - Network Information Table.   
  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 3] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
   transmission network, these messages are broadcast in clear (no 
   encryption or integrity checks).  The integrity of these messages is 
   important for the correct working of the ULE network.  However, 
   securing these messages is out of scope for ULE security.  
         
   1.1 System Components  
        
   There are several entities within the MPEG-2 transmission network 
   architecture, as defined in [ipdvb-arch]). These include (ULE) 
   Encapsulation Gateways, TS multiplexers (including re-multiplexers), 
   modulators and Receivers.  
        
   The ULE link security focuses on security between the Encapsulation 
   Gateways (ULE source) and Receivers only. 
        
 
2. Threat Analysis 
 
   The simplest type of network threat is a passive threat. Passive 
   attacks include eavesdropping or monitoring of transmissions, with a 
   goal to obtain information that is being transmitted. In broadcast 
   networks (especially those utilising widely available low-cost 
   physical layer interfaces, such as DVB) passive threats are 
   considered the major threats. An example of such a threat is an 
   intruder monitoring the MPEG-2 transmission broadcast and being able 
   to extract traffic communicated between IP hosts. Another example an 
   intruder trying to gain information about the communication parties 
   by monitoring their Layer 2 MAC/NPA addresses; an intruder can gain 
   some information by just knowing the identity of the communicating 
   parties and the volume of their traffic. This is a well-known issue 
   in the security field; however it is more problematic in the case of 
   broadcast networks such as MPEG-2 transmission networks.  
        
   Active threats (or attacks) are, in general, more difficult to 
   implement successfully than passive threats, and usually require 
   more sophisticated resources and may require access to the 
   transmitter. Examples of active attacks are:   
        
      - Masquerading: where an entity pretends to be a different            
        entity. This includes masquerading other users and subnetwork 
        control plane messages  
      - Modification of messages in an unauthorised manner.  
      - Repudiation: Repudiation of origin occurs when a party denies 
        being the originator of a message and repudiation of 
        destination occurs when a party denies the reception of a 
        message.  
      - Replay attacks: When an intruder sends some old (authentic) 
        messages to the Receiver.  


  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 4] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
      - Denial of service attacks:  When an entity fails to perform its 
        proper function or acts in a way that prevents other entities 
        from performing their proper functions.   
        
   Active threats such as replay masquerading, replay, modification of 
   messages and injecting IP packet attacks are major security concerns 
   for the Internet community and several of these attacks have been 
   described [Bellovin].  The defence against such attacks is data 
   integrity using cryptographic techniques and sequence numbers.   
        
   In the context of active threats in MPEG-2 transmission networks, 
   ULE source authentication (i.e. verification that packets are being 
   sent by the expected Encapsulation Gateway) is required by the ULE 
   Receivers. Although attacks such as masquerading, modification of 
   messages and injecting IP packets are more difficult. However such 
   attacks on individual ULE Receivers are possible and can pass 
   unnoticed by the ULE network operators or ISPs.  Therefore ULE 
   authentication and integrity checks are required. Of course IPsec 
   can used for source authentication, further analysis on IPsec is 
   presented in section 4. 
    
    
3. Security Requirements for IP over MPEG-2 TS 
    
   From the above analysis, the following security requirements can be 
   derived:  
        
      - Data confidentiality is the major requirement against passive 
        threats (using encryption).  L2 encryption or L3 (IPsec) 
        encryption can satisfy this requirement.  
    
      - For active threats: ULE source authentication and data 
        integrity are required, using techniques such as message 
        authentication code and digital signatures.  Sequence numbers 
        are required to stop replay attacks.  Therefore, L2 data 
        integrity/authentication is optional, but still important in 
        environments in which several independent networks share a 
        single transmission resource.  In addition, functions to 
        determine the integrity of control and management messages in 
        MPEG-2 transmission networks such as SI tables are another 
        optional requirement, but are outside the scope of ULE 
        security. 
    
      - Optional hiding of Layer 2 MAC/NPA address.  This is needed 
        particularly in the MPEG-2 broadcast networks to stop an 
        intruder gaining information by observing the identity of the 
        communicating parties and the volume of their traffic.    
             - Layer L2 terminal authentication. This will be part of 
        the key management. It will be performed during the initial  
        key exchange and authentication phase. 
    


  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 5] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
      - End-to-end security (such as IPsec and TLS) and ULE link 
        security should work in parallel without obstructing each 
        other.  
        
      - Decoupling of ULE key management functions from ULE encryption.   
        This will allow the independent definition of these systems 
        such as the re-use of existing security management systems ( 
        e.g. GSAKMP [msec-gsakmp] and GDOI [msec-gdoi]), if there is a 
        IP infrastructure, or other systems such as DVB-RCS [etsi-
        dvbrcs] and/or the development of new systems, as required.      
        
      - Other general requirements are:  
         
        * Operational issues: Because of the possible large coverage of 
        a broadcast transmission network, it may be required to deliver 
        data to many different countries that may have different 
        security legislation (related to authorized encryption 
        algorithms and the length of keys). Therefore the ULE security 
        system should allow a wide range of security parameters during 
        the negotiation phase in order to offer flexibility to 
        operators.  In ULE security, the choice of such algorithms will 
        be decided by the key management system in use.  
          
        * Compatibility with other networking functions: Other 
        networking functions such as NAT (Network Address Translation) 
        [rfc 3715] or TCP acceleration can be used in a wireless DVB 
        networks. The ULE security solution should be compatible with 
        functions such as NAT/NAPT, IPsec, TLS, etc.   
          
        * Traceability (such as using intrusion detection systems): To 
        monitor transmission network (e.g. using log files to record 
        the activities on the network).  This is out of scope for ULE 
        security. 
    
    
4. IPsec and MPEG-2 Transmission Networks  
     
   IPsec supports two modes of use: transport mode and tunnel mode. In 
   transport mode, AH and ESP provide protection primarily for next 
   layer protocols; in tunnel mode, AH and ESP are applied to tunnelled 
   IP packets. In both modes, data integrity is provided and in 
   addition, ESP provides the data privacy service as well.   
        


  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 6] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
   It is possible to use IPsec to secure ULE links.  The major 
   advantage of IPsec is its wide implementation in IP routers and 
   hosts. The Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol [rfc 4301] 
   describes security services for traffic at the IP layer. That 
   architecture primarily defines services for Internet Protocol (IP) 
   unicast packets, as well as manually configured IP multicast 
   packets.  
    
   However IPsec is not well-suited to protect the identity of the ULE 
   encapsulator/Receivers to provide this.  The interfaces of these 
   devices also do not necessarily have IP addresses (they can be L2 
   devices). 
        
   In addition, IP Multicast is considered as a major service over 
   MPEG-2 Transmission Networks. A document produced by the IETF msec 
   Working Group on IPsec extensions for multicast [msec-ipsec-ext] 
   describes extensions to [rfc 4301] that further define the IPsec 
   security architecture for packets that carry a multicast address in 
   the IP destination field, allowing these to remain IP multicast 
   packets.  
            
   4.1 Tunnel mode use of IPsec for multicast  
        
   In the context of MPEG-2 transmission links, if IPsec is used to 
   secure a ULE link, then the ULE gateways and Receivers are 
   equivalent to the security gateways in IPsec terminology. A security 
   gateway implementation of IPsec using the multicast extensions MUST 
   use tunnel mode. In particular, the security gateway must use the 
   tunnel mode to encapsulate incoming fragments.   
        
   With IPsec tunnel mode, there are two challenges: First, if the 
   destination of an IP multicast packet is changed it will no longer 
   be properly routed.  Secondly, IP multicast routing protocols also 
   typically create multicast distribution trees based on the source 
   address. An IPsec security gateway that changes the source address 
   of an IP multicast packet, again this will cause multicast routing 
   problems. The [msec-ipsec-ext] document defines a way for retaining 
   both the IP source and destination addresses of the inner IP header 
   to allow IP multicast routing protocols to route the packet 
   irrespective of the packet being IPsec protected. This 
   interpretation of tunnel mode is known as tunnel mode with address 
   preservation.  
        
   4.2 IPsec and L2 security  
        
   IPsec in transport mode can be used for end-to-end security 
   transparently of MPEG-2 transmission links with no impact.  
        
   However, if IPsec is used to secure ULE links, then it must be used 
   in tunnel mode. Such usage has the following disadvantages:  
  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 7] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
        
      - There is a need to protect the identity of ULE 
        encapsulator/Receivers over the ULE broadcast medium; IPsec is 
        not suitable for providing this service.  
        
      - There is an extra overheads associated with using IPsec in 
        tunnel mode, i.e. the extra IP header (IPv4 or IPv6).  
        
      - Multicast is considered as a major service over ULE links. The 
        current IPsec specifications [rfc 4301] only define a pairwise 
        tunnel between two IPsec devices with manual keying. Work in 
        progress [msec-ipsec-ext] is defining the extra detail needed 
        for multicast and to use the tunnel mode with address 
        preservation as described in section 4.1.   
    
   In the ULE link context, in addition to the IPsec tunnelling 
   overhead, the source and destination address preservation means that 
   these IP addresses are broadcast in the clear.  This provides an 
   opportunity to intercept the traffic information (weakening the 
   ability to provide the identity hiding).  However [msec-ipsec-ext] 
   mentions the possibility that multicast data is sent through a 
   service provider network, and is encapsulated under a different IP 
   multicast address while in the provider network. The source address 
   of the encapsulating (outside) IP header could be changed to that of 
   the ULE gateway.  
     
  
5. Motivation for ULE link-layer security  
 
   Examination of the threat analysis and security requirements in 
   sections 2 and 3 has shown that there is a need to provide link-
   layer (L2) security in MPEG-2 transmission networks employing ULE, 
   particularly when network-layer and transport-layer security (e.g. 
   IPsec, TLS) are insufficient. 
     
   ULE link security is therefore considered an additional security 
   mechanism to IP, transport, and application layer security, not a 
   replacement. It should provide similar functions to that of IPsec 
   [IPsec], but in addition provides link confidentiality and Receiver 
   identity hiding.  
    
   End-to-end security, IPsec and ULE link security should work in 
   parallel:  IPsec providing the end-to-end security between hosts and 
   ULE providing the security over the MPEG-2 transmission link.  
   However, no direct interaction between the IPsec and the ULE 
   security system is envisaged.   
        
   A modular design to ULE Security may allow it to use and benefit 
   from IETF key management protocols, such as the MSEC [msec-gsakmp] 

  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 8] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
   and GDOI [msec-gdoi, rfc 3547]. This does not preclude the use of 
   other key management methods in scenarios that benefit from this.  
            
   5.1 Link security below the Encapsulation layer  
        
   Link layer security can be provided in the MPEG-TS level (below 
   ULE). MPEG-TS encryption encrypts all TS Packets sent with a 
   specific PID value. However MPEG-TS may multiplex several IP streams 
   using a common PID. Therefore all multiplexed traffic will share the 
   same security keys.    
        
   This has the following advantages:  
        
      - The bit stream sent on the broadcast network does not expose 
        any L2 or L3 headers, specifically all addresses, type fields, 
        and length fields are encrypted prior to transmission.  
     
      - This method does not preclude the use of IPsec, or any other 
        form of higher-layer security.  
        
      However it has the following disadvantages:  
        
      - Each ULE Receiver needs to decrypt all MPEG-2 TS Packets with a 
        matching PID, possibly including those that are not required to 
        be forwarded.  
        
      - ULE Receivers will be able to see the private traffic destined 
        to other ULE Receivers, since they share a common key.   
    
      - If the key is compromised, then this will impact several ULE 
        Receivers. Existing access control mechanisms have limited 
        flexibility in terms of controlling the use of key and 
        rekeying.  IETF based key management are not used in existing 
        systems. 
            
   5.2 Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer  
        
   Therefore major advantages for ULE link security are:  
        
      - The protection of the complete ULE Protocol Data Unit (PDU) 
        including IP addresses.  
        
      - Ability to protect the identity of the Receiver within the 
        MPEG-2 transmission network.  
     
      - Efficient protection of IP multicast over ULE links.  
     
      - Transparency to the use of Network Address Translation (NATs) 
        [rfc 3715] and TCP Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEP) 

  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 9] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
        [rfc 3135], which require the ability to inspect and modify the 
        packets sent over the ULE link.  
        
      - This method does not preclude the use of IPsec. IPsec also 
        provides a proven security architecture defining key exchange 
        mechanisms and the ability to use a range of cryptographic 
        algorithms. ULE security can make use of these mechanisms and 
        algorithms.  
     
   In some current encapsulation methods, e.g. MPE [etsi-dat], 
   encryption of the MAC address requires each Receiver to decrypt all 
   encrypted data sent using a TS Logical Channel (PID), before it can 
   then filter the PDUs that match the set of MAC/NPA addresses that 
   the Receiver wishes to receive, therefore encryption of the MPE MAC 
   address is not permitted in such systems. For ULE security, an 
   optional support for Layer 2 MAC/NPA address hiding should be 
   provided.  
         
   Examining the threat analysis in section 2, has shown that 
   protection of ULE link from eavesdropping and ULE Receiver identity 
   hiding are major requirements. Such requirements can be met using 
   ULE link encryption.  
        
   In the context of active threats in MPEG-2 transmission networks, 
   ULE source authentication is required by the ULE Receivers. Attacks 
   such as masquerading, modification of messages and injecting IP 
   packets are more difficult. However, such attacks on individual ULE 
   Receivers are possible, and can pass unnoticed by the ULE network 
   operators or ISPs. Therefore using HMACs is one possibility which 
   has associated overheads per ULE packets.  Another possibility is to 
   use lightweight data integrity methods or procedures that can be 
   provided by the ULE security system.  In addition sequence numbers 
   can provide protection against replay attacks.  
    
           
6. Summary  
     
   This document analyses a set of threats and security requirements. 
   It also defines the requirements for ULE security and states the 
   motivation for Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer.  
   In summary, there is a need for L2 encryption, ULE Receiver identity 
   hiding, L2 source authentications and protection against insertion 
   of other data into the ULE stream.  
     
  
7. Acknowledgments  
     
   The authors acknowledge the help and advice from Gorry Fairhurst 
   (University of Aberdeen) in the preparation of this draft. 

  
Expires November 2006                                    [page 10] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
    
8. Security Considerations  
     
   Link-level (L2) encryption of IP traffic is commonly used in 
   broadcast/radio links to supplement End-to-End security (e.g. 
   provided by TLS, SSH, Open PGP, S/MIME, IPsec). A common objective 
   is to provide the same level of privacy as wired links. An ISP or 
   User may also wish to provide end-to-end security services to the 
   end-users (based on the well known mechanisms such as IPsec).   
        
   This document provides a threat analysis and derives the security 
   requirements to provide optional link encryption and link-level 
   integrity / authentication of the SNDU payload.   
     
     
9. References  
     
   9.1 Normative References   
         
        [etsi-dat] EN 301 192, "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB 
        Specifications for Data Broadcasting", European 
        Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).
        
        [rfc 2119] Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate 
        Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.
        
        [ipdvb-ule] Fairhurst, G., Collini-Nocker, "Ultra Lightweight 
        Encapsulation (ULE) for transmission of IP datagrams over an 
        MPEG-2 Transport Stream", <draft-ietf-ule-06.txt>, IETF Work 
        in Progress.
        [ipdvb-arch] M.J. Montpetit ed., et al, "Framework for 
        transmission of IP datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks", <draft-
        ietf-ipdvb-arch-04.txt>, IETF Work in Progress.

   9.2 Informative References 
   
        [Bellovin] Bellovin, S., "Problem Area for the IP Security  
        Protocols", Computer Communications Review 2:19, pp. 32-48, 
        April 989. http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~smb/  
        
        [etsi-dvbrcs] "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) -- interaction      
        channel for satellite distribution systems", ETSI EN 301 790 
        V1.4.1 (2005-04)  
        
        [IPsec] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-
        dir.html#Security%20Area. RFCs 2401, 2402 and 2406  
        
        [msec] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/msec-charter.html  
        
        [msec-gsakmp] H Harney (SPARTA), et al, "GSAKMP: Group Secure  
        Association Group Management Protocol", <draft-ietf-msec-
        gsakmp-sec-10.txt>, IETF Work in Progress.  
        
        [msec-gdoi], RFC 3547] M. Baugher, et al, "GDOI: The Group 
        Domain of Interpretation", RFC 3547.  
		   
Expires November 2006                                    [page 11] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
        [msec-ipsec-ext] Weis B., et al, "Multicast Extensions to the  
        Security Architecture for the Internet", <draft-ietf-msec-
        ipsec-extensions-01.txt>, IETF Work in Progress.  
        
        [nat, rfc 3715] B. Aboba and W Dixson, "IPsec-Network Address  
        Translation (NAT) Compatibility Requirements"  
        
        [tls] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/tls-charter.html  
 
        [rfc 3135] Border, J., Kojo, M., Griner, J., Montenegro, G., and 
        Z. Shelby, "Performance Enhancing Proxies Intended to Mitigate 
        Link-Related Degradations", RFC 3135, June 2001.  
        
        [rfc 2401] Kent, S., et al, "Security Architecture for the 
        Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.  
        
        [rfc 4301] Kent, S. and Seo K., "Security Architecture for the  
        Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2006.  
        
        [rfc 3819] Karn, P., Bormann, C., Fairhurst, G., Grossman, D.,  
        Ludwig, R., Mahdavi, J., Montenegro, G., Touch, J., and L. 
        Wood, "Advice for Internet Subnetwork Designers", BCP 89, RFC 
        3819, July 2004.  
        
     
10. Authors' Addresses  
        
   Haitham Cruickshank    
   Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)    
   University of Surrey   
   Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH    
   UK    
   Email: h.cruickshank@surrey.ac.uk    
     
   Sunil Iyengar    
   Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)    
   University of Surrey   
   Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH    
   UK    
   Email: S.Iyengar@surrey.ac.uk    
     
   Laurence Duquerroy    
   Research Department/Advanced Telecom Satellite Systems   
   Alcatel Space, Toulouse   
   France   
   E-Mail: Laurence.Duquerroy@space.alcatel.fr   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Expires November 2006                                     [page 12] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB     May 2006 
 
 
   11. IPR Notices   
   
   11.1 Intellectual Property Statement   
         
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.
         
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.   
         
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.   
             
   11.2 Disclaimer of Validity   
         
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.   
         
         
12. Copyright Statement   
         
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
        
        
13. IANA Considerations    
        
   This document does not define any protocol and does not require any 
   IANA assignments.  
        


  
Expires November 2006                                     [page 13] 
