

Network Working Group                                        L. McIntyre
Internet Draft                                         Xerox Corporation
Document: <draft-ietf-fax-tiff-fx-reg-00.txt>                G. Parsons 
                                                         Nortel Networks
                                                             J. Rafferty
                                                   Brooktrout Technology
                                                        November 2, 2001
 
 
         Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended (TIFF-FX) - image/tiff-fx 
                       MIME Sub-type Registration 
                                     
                  <draft-ietf-fax-tiff-fx-reg-00.txt> 
                                     
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be 
   updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It 
   is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to 
   cite them other than as a "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This document describes the registration of the MIME sub-type 
   image/tiff-fx.  The encodings are defined by File Format for Internet
   Fax [TIFF-FX] and its extensions.  
    
    
    
2.  Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [REQ]. 

McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 1]



Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001


3.  Overview 
    
   This document describes the registration of the MIME sub-type 
   image/tiff-fx.  The encodings are defined by File Format for Internet
   Fax [TIFF-FX] and its extensions. 
   
    
4.  Internet Fax Working Group 
    
   This document is a product of the IETF Internet Fax Working Group.  
   All comments on this document should be forwarded to the email 
   distribution list at <ietf-fax@imc.org>. 
    
    
5.  TIFF-FX Definition 
    
   TIFF-FX (Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended), is defined in detail by
   RFC 2301 "File Format for Internet Fax" [TIFF-FX]. 
    
   RFC 2301 "File Format for Internet Fax", January 1998 
   McIntyre, L., Zilles, S., Buckley, R., Venable, D., Parsons, G., 
   and J. Rafferty.
        
   While a brief scope and feature description is provided in this 
   section as background information, the reader is directed to the 
   original TIFF-FX specification (File Format for Internet Fax) to
   obtain complete feature and technical details. 
    
    
5.1  TIFF-FX Scope 
    
   This document defines a TIFF-based file format specification for
   enabling standardized messaging-based fax over the Internet. It
   specifies the TIFF fields and field values required for compatibility
   with the existing ITU-T Recommendations for Group 3 black-and-white,
   grayscale and color facsimile. TIFF has historically been used for
   handling fax image files in applications such as store-and-forward
   messaging.  Implementations that support this file format
   specification for import/export may elect to support it as a native
   format. This document recommends a TIFF file structure that is
   compatible with low-memory and page-level streaming implementations.








  
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 2] 




Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001


   Unless otherwise noted, the current TIFF specification [TIFF] and
   selected TIFF Technical Notes [TTN1, TTN2] are the primary references
   for describing TIFF and defining TIFF fields. This document is the
   primary reference for defining TIFF field values for fax
   applications.

5.2  TIFF-FX Features 
    
    
   Some of the features of TIFF-FX are: 
    
    - TIFF-FX is capable of describing bilevel, grayscale, palette- 
      color, full-color and mixed content image data. 
    
    - TIFF-FX includes a number of compression schemes that allow  
      developers to choose the best space or time tradeoff for their
      applications. 
    
    - TIFF-FX is designed to be extensible and to evolve gracefully as 
      new needs arise.  
    
 
6.  MIME Definition 
 
   This document defines the image/tiff-fx MIME sub-type to refer to
   TIFF-FX Profiles J, C, L and M encoded image data and any future
   TIFF-FX extensions, or a subset. The image/tiff-fx content type may
   be used when black-and-white image data is encoded using TIFF-FX
   Profiles S or F, or a subset.
     

7.  IANA Registration 
    
    
        To: ietf-types@iana.org 
        Subject: Registration of Standard MIME media type image/tiff-fx 
    
        MIME media type name: image 
    
        MIME subtype name: tiff-fx 
    
        Required parameters: none 
    
        Optional parameters: none  
    
        Encoding considerations: Binary or Base-64 generally preferred 
    


  
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 3] 




Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001


        Security considerations:  
    
           TIFF-FX utilizes a structure which can store image data and 
           attributes of this image data. The fields defined in the 
           TIFF-FX specification are of a descriptive nature and provide
           information that is useful to facilitate viewing and 
           rendering of images by a recipient.  As such, the fields 
           currently defined in the TIFF-FX specification do not in 
           themselves create additional security risks, since the 
           fields are not used to induce any particular behavior by the
           recipient application. 
            
           TIFF-FX has an extensible structure, so that it is 
           theoretically possible that fields could be defined in the 
           future which could be used to induce particular actions on 
           the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional 
           security risks, but this type of capability is not supported
           in the referenced TIFF-FX specification. Indeed, the 
           definition of fields which would include such processing 
           instructions is inconsistent with the goals and spirit of the 
           TIFF-FX specification. 

        Interoperability considerations:  

           The ability of implementations to handle all the defined 
           applications (or profiles within applications) of TIFF-FX may
           not be ubiquitous. As a result, implementations may decode 
           and attempt to display the encoded TIFF-FX image data only to
           determine that the image cannot be rendered. 
    
        Published specification: 
    
           TIFF-FX (Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended) is defined in: 

           RFC 2301 "File Format for Internet Fax", January 1998 
           McIntyre, L., Zilles, S., Buckley, R., Venable, D.,
           Parsons, G., and J. Rafferty.
    
        Applications which use this media type:  
    
           Imaging, fax, messaging and multi-media 
    
        Additional information: 
    
           Magic number(s):    
                II (little-endian):  49 49 42 00 hex 
                MM (big-endian):     4D 4D 00 42 hex 
           File extension(s): .TFX 
           Macintosh File Type Code(s): TFX 
    
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 4]



Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001


        Person & email address to contact for further information: 
    
           Lloyd McIntyre
           lmcintyre@xerox.com

           Glenn W. Parsons 
           gparsons@nortelnetworks.com  
            
           James Rafferty 
           jraff@brooktrout.com  
    
        Intended usage: COMMON 
    
        Change controller: Lloyd McIntyre
  
8. References 
    
    
   [REQ] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
        Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [MIME1] N. Freed and N. Borenstein,  "Multipurpose Internet Mail  
        Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", 
        RFC 2045, Innosoft, First Virtual, Nov 1996. 
    
   [MIME4] N. Freed and N. Borenstein,  "Multipurpose Internet Mail  
        Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", RFC 
        2048, Innosoft, First Virtual, Nov 1996. 
    
   [TIFF] Adobe Developers Association, TIFF (TM) Revision 6.0 - Final,  
        June 3, 1992.
    
   [TPC.INT] C. Malamud, M. Rose, "Principles of Operation for the  
        TPC.INT Subdomain:  Remote Printing -- Technical Procedures", 
        RFC 1528, 10/06/1993 

   [TIFF-FX] McIntyre, L., Zilles, S., Buckley, R., Venable, D.,
        Parsons, G., and J. Rafferty, "File Format for Internet
        Fax", RFC 2301, January 1998.










  
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 5] 



Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001
   
    
9. Author's Addresses 
    
      Lloyd McIntyre
      Xerox Corporation
      3400 Hillview Avenue
      Palo Alto, CA 94304
      USA
      Phone: +1-650 813 6762
      Fax:   +1-650 813 5850
      Email: lmcintyre@pahv.xerox.com

      Glenn W. Parsons 
      Nortel Networks 
      P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
      Ottawa, ON  K1Y 4H7 
      Canada 
      Phone: +1-613-763-7582 
      Fax:   +1-613-763-2697 
      Email: gparsons@nortelnetworks.com 
    
      James Rafferty 
      Brooktrout Technology 
      410 First Avenue 
      Needham, MA  02494 
      USA 
      Phone: +1-781-433-9462 
      Fax:   +1-781-433-9268 
      Email: jraff@brooktrout.com 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.



  
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 6] 



Internet Draft                   image/tiff-fx           November  2001

 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 








































  
McIntyre, Parsons & Rafferty   Expires April 2002               [Page 7] 



