



Network Working Group                                        R. Van Rein
Internet-Draft                                                 ARPA2.net
Intended status: Standards Track                          April 22, 2016
Expires: October 24, 2016


                   Pseudonymity Support for Kerberos
                draft-vanrein-kitten-krb-pseudonymity-01

Abstract

   Kerberos either retains client identity in all its ticket
   transformations, or it applies rigorous anonymity.  When crossing
   over to another realm, an intermediate privacy measure is often
   desired, namely pseudonymity, as described in this specification.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 24, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Principles and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Procedures and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Efficiency Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   Kerberos' privacy model is not always well-suited for connections to
   other realms, especially when these are previously unencountered
   realms that have not earned the client's trust with respect to
   privacy.  Normally, the client identity as obtained during an AS
   exchange is always retained by Kerberos.  There is one exception, and
   that is anonymity [RFC6112], which completely conceals the client's
   principal name and possibly also its realm.

   Where anonymity is obvious in concealing the client identity, this
   specification describes a more covert alternative based on
   pseudonymity.  By using a pseudonym, the ticket changes to another
   client identity, and the chosen identity may be selected specifically
   for dealing with a particular remote realm.  As a result, that remote
   realm can distinguish return visits without knowing what login name
   was used by the client, and what pseudonym it used when accessing
   other realms and/or services.  As far as the remote realm is
   concerned, the pseudonym is just a client identity.  As far as the
   client is concerned, the pseudonym may be specific for that one
   remote realm, or for a particular group of realms.

   Pseudonyms can be useful to replace a personal login with that of a
   group or role, in which case a client can act on behalf of an entity
   for which it has been authorised and for which the service has
   established access rights.  This is in the interest of the remote
   realm, which is given a more concise view on the client than a mere
   personally identifying name of an individual client.  For instance, a
   remote realm may authorise a client named purchasing@EXAMPLE.COM and
   it is up to the administrators of EXAMPLE.COM which of its individual
   users are permitted to change their client identity to that pseudonym
   (or, informally, which users belong to the purchasing group).  This
   separate administration of group membership and authorisation is
   often a desirable distribution of responsibilities.





Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


2.  Principles and Definitions

   TODO: Typical phases: (1) after AS, cliream==tgtrealm and ticket flag
   is set; KDC may change the realm to something local and may pull
   client along to stay in this state without clearing the ticket flag;
   (2) after realm crossover, clirealm!=tgtrealm and ticket flag set;
   skip this phase is ticket flag is reset; remote KDC may change
   cliname, will then also pull in clirealm but MUST clear the ticket
   flag; (3) clirealm==tgtream and ticket flag is cleared; client is
   user of remote realm; remote KDC may change cliname but not clirealm.

   Pseudonymity is applied during a TGS exchange.  The client requests
   or permits the KDC to change its identity supplied in the TGT into
   another identity in the returned ticket.  Without pseudonymity (or
   anonymity) the KDC falls back to its default behaviour, which usually
   [RFC4120] means that it copies this identity from the TGT to the
   returned ticket.

   Clients can make implicit or explicit requests for a new client
   identity.  An implicit request permits the KDC to apply whatever
   policies it has for a TGS, and an explicit request asks the KDC to
   set a particular client principal name.  Explicit pseudonymity
   requests can be used with restrictive KDC policies, such as demanding
   a client identity to be selected from a set of possibilities.

   The application of pseudonymity can be realm-neutral or realm-
   changing.  Realm-neutral means that the realm of the TGT included in
   the TGS-REQ is the same as the client identity's realm.  Realm-
   changing means that those realms differ.  When applying pseudonymity,
   the client realm is replaced with the TGT realm, which only has an
   impact in the realm-changing case.  It is not permitted to apply
   prealm-changing seudonimity more than once, to avoid arbitrary
   proxying between realms; a remote realm shall only welcome a client
   identity from its login realm and a client shall not accept arbitrary
   relaying of its identity to realms beyond the ones it uses directly.
   There is no restriction on realm-neutral pseudonymity, neither before
   nor after realm-changing pseudonymity.

   TODO: Consider distinguishing local / foreign realm changes, and only
   constrain foreign realm changes to once.  Local means that the TGT
   service realm and TGT client realm are the same while the ticket flag
   on the TGT is set.  A local realm changes is permitted with or
   without clearing the ticket flag; foreign realm changes MUST clear
   the ticket flag and MUST move to the TGT service realm.  This permits
   setting a realm to something spontaneous internally, such as
   john@EXAMPLE.COM to purchasing@PUBLIC.EXAMPLE.COM where the realm is
   a side-effect change of user john becoming group purchasing.  Perhaps
   a better name for a foreign realm change is "pulling the client into



Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


   a foreign realm", which may be done only once, and MUST therefore
   reset the ticket flag.

   To test whether a KDC is willing to support pseudonymity, the client
   may set the "pseudonymity" flag in the kdc-options field of its AS-
   REQ.  When the KDC produces a ticket, it MAY respond to this KDC
   option by setting the "pseudonymity" ticket flag; if it does, it is a
   statement that the KDC is supportive of pseudonymity.

   To request that pseudonymity is applied by the KDC, a client can set
   the "pseudonymity" flag in a TGS-REQ.

   For explicit pseudonymity, the requested client principal name is
   included in the optional cname field of the TGS-REQ; this field is
   not normally included in this message, but may be used after assuring
   that the KDC supports pseudonyms.  Explicit requests are unacceptable
   after applying realm-changing pseudonymity; this leaves room for a
   last realm-neutral change of the client identity just before crossing
   over to anoter realm, namely when a TGS-REQ returns a server
   referral.

3.  Procedures and Requirements

   TODO:PLACE: The server SHOULD welcome TGS exchanges that are only
   meant to change the client identity; these would request a service
   that matches the existing TGT, for instance the one originally
   obtained by the client, but possibly also aimed at another service
   realm.

   A client MAY always send a TGS-REQ with a "pseudonymity" KDC option,
   even when there is no "pseudonymity" ticket flag.  KDCs unsupportive
   of pseudonymity will silently ignore the unknown KDC option.

   The KDC MUST NOT apply pseudonymity without "pseudonymity" KDC
   Options in the TGS-REQ; however, if pseudonymity is required by local
   policy, it MAY return a KRB-ERROR with code TODO to indicate that the
   client should retry with the "pseudonymity" flag set.

   A number of rules MUST be applied by the KDC if it receives a TGS-REQ
   with the "pseudonymity" KDC option:

   1.  For explicit pseudonymity, so when the cname field is included in
       the TGS-REQ, the TGT must have the "pseudonymity" flag set; if
       not, the KDC responds like a KDC without pseudonymity support.

   2.  For realm-changing pseudonymity, the TGT must have the
       "pseudonymity" flag set; otherwise, the KDC respondes like a KDC
       without pseudonymity support.



Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


   3.  The KDC may apply local policy; for implicit pseudonymity, it
       silently ignores disapproved requests; for explict pseudonymity,
       it responds to disapproved requests with KRB-ERROR code
       KDC_ERR_C_PRINCIPAL_UNKNOWN if policy forbids the use of
       pseudonymity, or KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE (TODO:e-data) if it
       is permitted but lacks guidance on what to choose.  The latter
       error message may also be generated if zero or one potential
       principals were found, but other things stop it, such as an
       explicit confirmation of setup by the end user through an
       external mechanism.

   4.  As a special case of the foregoing, external pseudonymity with
       the special name of type NT-UNKNOWN and zero components in the
       name string is permitted by default policy and cannot be setup
       with a pseudonym by the user, so it always triggers the
       aforementioned KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE error reply.

   5.  TODO: Define special error codes for pseudonymity; overloading
       existing ones isn't proper

   6.  When the KDC applies realm-changing pseudonymity, it MUST clear
       the "pseudonymity" flag in the returned ticket.  This serves two
       purposes.  First, it drops the knowledge of KDC-supported
       pseudonymity for the new realm.  Second, it ensures that realm-
       changing pseudonymity is applied at most once.  In all other
       cases, when the KDC returns a ticket it MUST copy the
       "pseudonymity" ticket flag from the TGT in the TGS-REQ.

   Clients supportive of pseudonymity MUST ensure that the
   "pseudonymity" flag in a TGS-REP is never set by the KDC unless the
   "pseudonymity" KDC option was set in the corresponding TGS-REQ.

   Clients supportive of pseudonymity SHOULD process the "pseudonymity"
   flag in the TGS-REP.  When it is set, the client identity in the TGS-
   REP may have changed, and give rise to somewhat different handling of
   the returned ticket.  (TODO:WHY?  Those clients MUST also verify that
   the client identity is unchanged when the "pseudonymity" flag in the
   TGS-REP is not set.)

   Clients supportive of pseudonymity MUST notice realm-changing
   pseudonymity in a TGS-REP, and then ensure that the "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag is reset on the returned ticket; they MUST NOT accept
   realm-changing pseudonymity based on TGTs without "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag, and they MUST NOT request explicit pseudonymity based on
   TGTs without "pseudonymity" ticket flag.  They could request realm-
   changing implicit pseudonymity based on TGTs without "pseudonymity"
   ticket flag, but this will be silently ignored by the KDC.




Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


   These specifications permit arbitrary rewrites of client principal
   names within the local realm to which the client signed up, always at
   the initiative of the client, with a principal provided by the client
   KDC.  This means that a database of pseudonyms can be set up in the
   client and/or the KDC.  The KDC is probably most useful when it
   applies pseudonymity during a request for a service ticket,
   especially when it finds that realm crossover is involved in
   procuring that ticket.

   There are two situations in which the KDC explicitly lists pseudonyms
   that are acceptable for a request, as part of an error message
   KDC_ERR_PRINCIPAL_NOT_UNIQUE with an e-data field containing an ASN.1
   SEQUENCE OF PrincipalName in DER encoding.  TODO: encryption?  This
   reply can be sent when the client needs it, to which end it sends an
   explicit pseudonymity request with a cname holding an NT-UNKNOWN name
   type.  Alternatively, the KDC may generate this message when its
   policy requires pseudonymity but lacks policies to select one
   pseudonym; this requires that the "pseudonymity" KDC option is set in
   the TGS-REQ; it is especially of interest when the KDC is about to
   release a realm crossover ticket from the client's realm to a service
   realm.  The e-data may hold an empty sequence to indicate that no
   options exist; it may contain one or more PrincipalNames when its
   policy is not sufficiently deterministic to make a choice.

   Although it may seem unnatural to offer pseudonymity to foreign
   realms, it can actually be quite helpful.  First, since it is always
   implicit pseudonymity, the remote KDC cannot create a "more unique"
   representation of the client identity; it is however able to group
   clients.  Think of time-constrained test rides in public or free-
   trial accounts, or think of (temporary) gold or silver service.  This
   sort of use case enables the service to provide previews without
   demanding clients to setup accounts upfront.  This provides a
   friendlier, and more useful way to explore new services.  The service
   profits from this mechanism by not accruing a long list of one-time
   users that never return because they don't like the functionality on
   offer.  With this in mind, it is recommended to continue to send the
   "pseudonymity" KDC option on any TGS-REQ to a remote realm, so long
   as the TGT has the "pseudonymity" flag set.

   TODO: Use Anonymous Kerberos [RFC6112] as a checklist, for instance
   refer to it for its handling of AuthorizationData.

4.  Efficiency Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; lightweight mechanism, choice of central setup in KDC






Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Kerberos Pseudonymity Support           April 2016


5.  Privacy Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; pseudonym appears like the right person; identities
   tailored to targeted service; choice of decentral setup in client;
   remote realm cannot run away and make us move from realm to realm;
   remote realm can hardly store interesting information in the tickets

   Foreign realms may hide information in the tickets that they return,
   but this is not likely to be very useful; tickets are not constantly
   updated during use, and they are discarded after a brief usage
   period.  These properties makes them far less potent than other
   privacy alerts, such as browser cookies.

6.  Security Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; impersonation guarded by KDC (TODO: spec); remote realm
   might do this in hidden ticket info anyway, or may use another
   identity, which seems harmless?

7.  IANA Considerations

   TODO:WRITE; "pseudonymity" KDC option; "pseudonymity" ticket flag

8.  Normative References

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4120, July 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4120>.

   [RFC6112]  Zhu, L., Leach, P., and S. Hartman, "Anonymity Support for
              Kerberos", RFC 6112, DOI 10.17487/RFC6112, April 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6112>.

Author's Address

   Rick van Rein
   ARPA2.net
   Haarlebrink 5
   Enschede, Overijssel  7544 WP
   The Netherlands

   Email: rick@openfortress.nl








Van Rein                Expires October 24, 2016                [Page 7]
