
   Network Working Group                                     M. Jork 
   Internet Draft                                 NextPoint Networks 
   Category: Informational                                Alia Atlas 
   Expires: December 2008                            British Telecom 
                                                             L. Fang 
                                                 Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                                     
                                                       June 28, 2008 
 
 
                          LDP IGP Synchronization  
                    draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-igp-sync-02.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
       
Copyright Notice 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
 
Abstract 
    
   In certain networks there is a dependency on edge-to-edge LSPs setup 
   by LDP, e.g. networks that are used for MPLS VPN applications. For 
   such applications it is not possible to rely on IP forwarding if the 
   MPLS LSP is not operating appropriately. Blackholing of labeled 
   traffic can occur in situations where the IGP is operational on a 
   link but LDP is not operational on that link. While the link could 
   still be used for IP forwarding, it is not useful for MPLS 
     
   M. Jork, A. Atlas, and L. Fang                             [Page 1]       
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   forwarding, for example, MPLS VPN; BGP route free core; or IP 
   address carried in the packet is out of the RFC1918 space. This 
   document describes a mechanism to avoid traffic loss due to this 
   condition without introducing any protocol changes. 
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Proposed Solution.............................................3 
   3. Applicability.................................................4 
   4. Interaction With TE Tunnels...................................5 
   5. Security Considerations.......................................5 
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................5 
   7. Normative References..........................................6 
   8. Informational References......................................6 
   9. Author's Addresses............................................6 
   10.  Acknowledgements............................................8 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   LDP [RFC5036] establishes MPLS LSPs along the shortest path to a 
   destination as determined by IP forwarding.  In a common network 
   design, LDP is used to provide label switched paths throughout the 
   complete network domain covered by an IGP such as OSPF [RFC2328] or 
   IS-IS [ISO.10589.1992], i.e. all links in the domain have IGP as 
   well as LDP adjacencies. 
    
   A variety of services a network provider may want to deploy over an 
   LDP enabled network depend on the availability of edge to edge 
   label switched paths.  In a L2 or L3 VPN scenario for example, a 
   given PE router relies on the availability of a complete MPLS 
   forwarding path to the other PE routers for the VPNs it serves.  
   This means that along the IP shortest path from one PE router to 
   the other, all the links need to have operational LDP sessions and 
   the necessary label binding must have been exchanged over those 
   sessions.  If only one link along the IP shortest path is not 
   covered by an LDP session, a blackhole exists and services 
   depending on MPLS forwarding will fail. This might be a transient 
     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 2] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   or a persistent error condition.  Some of the reasons for it could 
   be 
    
      - A configuration error 
      
      - An implementation bug 
      
      - The link has just come up and has an IGP adjacency but LDP has 
        either not yet established an adjacency or session or 
        distributed all the label bindings. 
 
   LDP protocol has currently no way to correct the issue, LDP is not 
   a routing protocol; it can not re-direct traffic to an alternate 
   IGP path. 
 
    
2. Proposed Solution  
    
   The problem described above exists because LDP is tied to IP 
   forwarding decisions but no coupling between the IGP and LDP 
   operational state on a given link exists.  If IGP is operational on 
   a link but LDP is not, a potential network problem exists.  So the 
   solution described by this document is to discourage a link from 
   being used for IP forwarding as long as LDP is not fully 
   operational.   
    
   This has some similarity to the mechanism specified in [RFC3137] 
   which allows an OSPF router to advertise that it should not be used 
   as a transit router.  One difference is that [RFC3137] raises the 
   link costs on all (stub) router links, while the mechanism 
   described in here applies on a per-link basis. 
    
   In detail: when LDP is not "fully operational" (see below) on a 
   given link, the IGP will advertise the link with maximum cost to 
   avoid any transit traffic over it if possible.  In the case of 
   OSPF, this cost is LSInfinity (16-bit value 0xFFFF) as proposed in 
   [RFC3137]. In the case of ISIS, the max matrix value is 0xFFFFFE 
   per [RFC 3784]. Note that the link is not just simply removed from 
   the topology because LDP depends on the IP reachability to 
   establish its adjacency and session.  Also, if there is no other 
   link in the network to reach a particular destination, no 
   additional harm is done by making this link available for IP 
   forwarding at maximum cost. 
    
   LDP is considered fully operational on a link when an LDP hello 
   adjacency exists on it, a suitable associated LDP session (matching 
   the LDP Identifier of the hello adjacency) is established to the 
   peer at the other end of the link and all label bindings have been 
     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 3] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   exchanged over the session. At the present time, the latter 
   condition can not generally be verified by a router and some 
   estimated may have to be used. A simple implementation strategy is 
   to use a configurable hold down timer to allow LDP session 
   establishment before declaring LDP fully operational. The default 
   timer is not defined in this document due to the concerns of the 
   large variations of the LIB table size and the equipment 
   capabilities. In addition, this is a current work in progress on LDP 
   End-of-LIB as specified in [LDP End-of-LIB], it enables the LDP 
   speaker to signal the completion of its initial advertisement 
   following session establish. When LDP End-of-LIB is implemented, the 
   configurable hold down timer is no longer needed. The neighbor LDP 
   session is considered fully operational when the End-of-LIB 
   notification message is received. 
 
   This is typically sufficient to deal with the link when it is being 
   brought up. LDP protocol extensions to indicate the complete 
   transmission of all currently available label bindings after a 
   session has come up are conceivable but not addressed in this 
   document. 
    
   The mechanism described in this document does not entail any 
   protocol changes and is a local implementation issue.   
 
   The problem space and solution specified in this document have also 
   been discussed in an IEEE Communications Magazine paper [LDP-Fail]. 
    
    
3.  Applicability 
    
   In general, the proposed procedure is applicable in networks where 
   the availability of LDP signaled MPLS LSPs and avoidance of 
   blackholes for MPLS traffic is more important than always choosing 
   an optimal path for IP forwarded traffic. Note however that non-
   optimal IP forwarding only occurs for a short time after a link 
   comes up or when there is a genuine problem on a link.  In the 
   latter case an implementation should issue network management alerts 
   to report the error condition and enable the operator to address it. 
    
   Example network scenarios that benefit from the mechanism described 
   here are MPLS VPNs and BGP-free core network designs where traffic 
   can only be forwarded through the core when LDP forwarding state is 
   available throughout. 
    
   The usefulness of this mechanism also depends on the availability 
   of alternate paths with sufficient bandwidth in the network should 
   one link be assigned to the maximum cost due to unavailability of 
   LDP service over it. 
    
     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 4] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   On broadcast links with more than one IGP/LDP peer, the cost-out 
   procedure can only be applied to the link as a whole and not an 
   individual peer.  So a policy decision has to be made whether the 
   unavailability of LDP service to one peer should result in the 
   traffic being diverted away from all the peers on the link. 
 
    
4. Interaction With TE Tunnels 
    
   In some networks, LDP is used in conjunction with RSVP-TE which sets 
   up traffic-engineered tunnels.  The path computation for the TE 
   tunnels is based on the TE link cost which is flooded by the IGP in 
   addition to the regular IP link cost.  The mechanism described in 
   this document should only be applied to the IP link cost to prevent 
   any unnecessary TE tunnel reroutes. 
    
   In order to establish LDP LSPs across a TE tunnel, a targeted LDP 
   session between the tunnel endpoints needs to exist.  This presents 
   a problem very similar to the case of a regular LDP session over a 
   link (the case discussed so far): when the TE tunnel is used for IP 
   forwarding, the targeted LDP session needs to be operational to 
   avoid LDP connectivity problems.  Again, raising the IP cost of the 
   tunnel while there is no operational LDP session will solve the 
   problem. When there is no IGP adjacency over the tunnel and the 
   tunnel is not advertised as link into the IGP, this becomes a local 
   issue of the tunnel headend router. 
 
5. Security Considerations 
 
   A DoS attack brings down LDP service on a link or prevents it from 
   becoming operational on a link could be one of the possibilities 
   that causes LDP related traffic blackholing. This document does not 
   address how to prevent LDP session failure. The mechanism described 
   here is to prevent the link to be used when LDP is not operational 
   while IGP is. Assigning the IGP cost to maximum on the link where 
   LDP is failed and IGP is not should not introduce new security 
   threats. The operation is internal in the router to allow LDP and 
   IGP to communicate and react. Making many LDP links unavailable, 
   however, is a security threat which can cause traffic being dropped 
   due to limited available network capacity. This may be trigged by 
   operational error or implementation error. They are considered as 
   general Security issues and should follow the current best security 
   practice. 
    
    
6. IANA Considerations 
    
     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 5] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   This document has no actions for IANA. 
    
    
7. Normative References 
    
   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., Fredette, A., 
   and B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007. 
    
   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998. 
    
    
8. Informational References 
 
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [RFC3137]  Retana, A., Nguyen, L., White, R., Zinin, A., and D. 
   McPherson, "OSPF Stub Router Advertisement", RFC 3137, June 2001. 
    
   [RFC 3784] Smit, H., Li, T., Intermediate System to Intermediate 
   System (IS-IS) Extension for Traffic Engineering, June 2004. 
     
   [ISO.10589.1992]International Organization for 
   Standardization,"Intermediate system to intermediate system intra-
   domain-routing routine information exchange protocol for use in 
   conjunction with the protocol for providing the connectionless-mode 
   Network Service (ISO 8473)", ISO Standard 10589, 1992. 
    
   [LDP-Fail] Fang, L., Atlas, A., Chiussi, F., Kompella, K., and 
   Swallow, G., "LDP Failure Detection and Recovery", IEEE 
   Communications Magazine, Vol.42, No.10, October 2004. 
    
   [LDP End-of-LIB] Asati, R., LDP End-of-LIB, draft-asati-mpls-ldp-
   end-of-lib-01.txt, November 2007. 
    
    
    
9. Author's Addresses 
    
   Markus Jork 
   NextPoint Networks 
   3 Fedral St. 
   Billerica, MA 01821 
   USA 
   Email: mjork@nextpointnetworks.com 
    
   Alia Atlas 
   British Telecom 
   Email: alia.atlas@bt.com 
     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 6] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
 
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough, MA 01719 
   USA 
   Email: lufang@cisco.com 
    
 
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 

     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 7] 
    
    
   LDP IGP Synchronization                             June 2008 
    
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Intellectual Property 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
    
10.     Acknowledgements 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
    
   The authors would like to thank Loa Andersson for his review and 
   comments, and thank Bruno Decraene for his in depth discussion, 
   comments and helpful suggestions. 
    










     
   M. Jork, Alia Atlas, and L. Fang                           [Page 8] 
    
