

Network Working Group                                Tissa Senevirathne
Internet Draft                                        Waldemar Augustyn
Document: draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt
Category: Informational                                       June 2002


Architecture and Framework for Wireless Virtual Private Networks (VPN)


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   For potential updates to the above required-text see:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt



1. Abstract

   In this document we present Architecture and Framework for Wireless
   VPN services. The wireless VPN services discussed here focus on
   mobility users of GSM and 3G services. This document does not
   discuss Wireless LAN services provided by 802.11 standard.

   In this document wireless VPN services are presented as a VPN
   service with special requirements, underlying physical layer
   characteristics are considered out of scope.

   The purpose of the document is to initiate the discussion on WVPN
   with the possibility of expanding the PPVN charter to include WVPN.








Senevirathne,       Informational - December 2002                   1

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002


   RELATED DOCUMENTS

      Cited in the reference below

   WHERE DOES THIS FIT IN THE PICTURE OF SUB-IP AREA

      PPVPN

  WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG

      The charter of the PPVPN WG is centered around Provider
   Provisioned VPN. Wireless VPN services provided by service
   providers, are in theory Provider Provisioned VPN.

   The PPVPN charter may be eventually expanded to include WVPN as a
   specific WG item.

  JUSTIFICATION

   Wireless VPN is an emerging technology. WVPN has its own set of
   issues. The framework, architecture and requirements of WVPN needed
   to be addressed in order to ensure future interoperability of the
   service.

   This document is intended as a starting point of discussion on
   Wireless VPN.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

3. Introduction

   Wireless services are gaining popularity as a convenient alternative
   to more classical wired networks. There are two variants of wireless
   users; They are Local Area Network Wireless users and Mobility based
   wireless users (e.g. cell phone users). In this document we only
   discuss mobility based wireless services.

   Mobility based users access service provider networks via VPN
   services. The VPN services provided to mobility users are defined,
   in this document, as wireless VPN services. For mobility users,
   wireless VPN appears as provider provisioned VPN. However, Wireless
   VPN has different architecture, framework and requirements than
   classical, wire line, VPN services. In this document we present,
   wireless VPN architecture and framework.


4. Terminology

   WVPN    - Wireless Virtual Private Networks

Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   2

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002



   MT      - Mobile Terminal

   WVPN-G  - WVPN Gateway

   WVPN-PE - WVPN Provider Edge device

   GPRS    - General Packet Radio Services

   WAP     - Wireless Access Protocol

6. Wireless VPN Architecture Requirements

   Wireless VPN services has significant similarities to more
   traditional wire line VPN services. However, it differs  in two
   areas - degree of mobility of users and the architecture of service
   plane (as opposed to device wide service plane in wire line VPN).
   WVPN tend to have a network wide service plane.

6.1 Mobility user support

   WVPN users MAY migrate from one location to another. WPN service
   MUST support mobility of users.

6.2 Service preservation

   WPN service SHOULD not disrupt user sessions when users move from
   WPVN Gateway to another. Seamless migration of services from one
   WVPN Gateway to another is important to maintain end-to-end
   connectivity, and thus services.

6.3 Multiprotocol Support

   IPV6 is seen as the ultimate protocol in WVPN networks. However, due
   to large install base of IPV4 on the Internet, it will be a while
   until entire Internet becomes IPv6 (may be never). Hence, WVPN
   gateways SHOULD have ability to support both IPV6 and IPV4.

6.4 Quality of Services

   3G wireless standard provides strong Quality of Service features.
   WVPN gateway nodes SHOULD have ability to support QoS features as
   required by the overlay wireless services. WVPN services MUST have
   ability to provide required QoS levels as user move from one WPN
   Gateway to another.

6.5 Service Plane

   WVPN services can be divided into two broad classes; Wireless access
   specific services and traditional Internet services. Some of these
   services MAY not required to be migrated with the users. With that
   requirements the service plane can be further classified to portal
   specific services and global services.

Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   3

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002



   WVPN service MUST maintain global services across mobile users'
   migration path.

   WVPN service SHOULD maintain portal services across mobile users'
   migration path.

6.6 Scalability

   WVPN gateways require having two different scalability matrixes.
   That is global scalability and portal scalability. Global
   scalability arises from the fact that, entire WVPN services require
   to support user mobility and hence need to share the information
   across WVPN devices. The global scalability provides an upper bound
   to the number of WVPN session that a given provider can maintain at
   one given time.
   Portal scalability is defined as the upper bound of the local
   device. It may further be divided to active upper bound and
   concurrent upper bound. Active upper bound indicates maximum number
   of active sessions the given device can maintain. Concurrent upper
   bound is upper bound of anticipated services due to user mobility,
   but users who are not connected yet.

6.7 Security

   In order to provide non-disruptive service over mobility, WVPN
   service is required to share the security and other information
   among WVPN Gateways.  Such distribution of information MUST not
   compromise the security requirements specified by the standard of
   that protocol or service.

   Packet miss routing MUST not occur when user portal migrates from
   one WVPN gateway to another.

6.8 Access

   Wireless VPN use different tunnel protocols to forward packed data
   on voice circuits. General Packet Radio Services (GPRS) is commonly
   used to carry packets in GSM (Global System for Mobile
   Communications) networks. WVPN Gateways MUST support selected tunnel
   protocol. The exact protocol depends on the wireless service
   standard chosen.

6.9 Gateway Services

   Wireless VPN gateways MUST support Wireless Access Protocol (WAP) to
   HTTP gateways. Wireless Gateways SHOULD have ability to maintain the
   session integrity across WAP gateways when users migrate.

6.10 Topology

   WVPN Gateways MUST at minimum support hub and spoke topology.
   Support for other topology variations are optional.

Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   4

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002



6.11 General Properties

     - Wireless VPN users require access to public/private networks.
   Hence wireless PE device is the gateway to the public networks
     - Wireless VPN users require secure access to the Wireless
   Provider Edge device.

     - Wireless VPN users are mobile, but require to be "always
   connected" irrespective of the mobility


     - Wireless PE devices require to provide extensive set of
   services.




               --------------------------------------
              |                                      |
              |         Global Service Plane         |
              |                                      |
               --------------------------------------
                -------- ----           ---------- ----
               |        |    |         |          |    |
               | WVPN-G |P-S |         |WVPN-G    |P-S |
               |        |    |         |          |    |
                -------- ----           ---------- ----
               | Access |              | Access   |
                --------                ----------
   P-S     - Portal Services
   WVPN-G  - Wireless VPN gateways

   Access  - Access specific services

   Fig: Service Model for Wireless VPN services


















Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   5

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002



4. Network Reference Model


                ----             --------
      ---      |    |-.-.-.-.-.-|        |
     |MT |-----|WVPN-PE         |Service Node(s)
      ---      |    |------     |        |
                ----   .-.- | .-|        |
                |           |    --------
                |     /     |
     ----_      |    .      |
    | MT |------    /   -----------------------
     ----          .   |                       |
                  /    | Provider Core         |===> Internet
                 .     |                       |
                ----   -----------------------
      ---      |    |      |
     |MT |-----|WVPN-PE    |
      ---      |    |------
                ----
                |
     ----_      |
    | MT |------
     ----

   Fig: Wireless VPN Reference Model


   MT-WVPN-PE indicates a network. Most often this is the GPRS access
   network.

   Service Node is one or more nodes that provide required services.
   Some of the functionality may be integrated into WVPN-PE itself.
   Service Node is integral part of the Global service plane. It may
   also participate in the portal Service plane.

8. Security Considerations

   Related security issues are discussed above.


9. References


   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997




Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   6

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002





10.  Acknowledgments

   Not provided


11. Author's Addresses

   Tissa Senevirathne

   1567 Bellevile Way
   Sunnyvale , CA 94087
   Phone:408-245-5897
   Email: tsenevir@hotmail com

   Waldemar Augustyn
   waldemar@nxp.com



































Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   7

                      draft-tsenevir-wvpn-00.txt             June 2002



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into







































Senevirathne        Informational - December 2002                   8

