Routing Working Group                                          V. Manral
Internet-Draft                                                         SiNett Corp
Expires: May 29, 2006                                        
                                                                 






                     Operational issues with Tiny Fragments in IPv6
                       draft-manral-v6ops-tiny-fragments-issues-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   IPv6 fragmentation allows fragments to be sent only by the source of
   a  packet. The Fragment  header is used by an IPv6 source to send a 
   packet larger than would fit in the path MTU to its   destination. 

   Firewalls generally use 5-tuples to filter out packets. However there
   are cases where  fragmentation can be used to disguise TCP  packets 
   from IP filters used in routers and hosts. This document specifies
   where tiny fragments can be issues.

Manral                                                                                                               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].




1.  Problem Statement

   With many IP implementations it is possible to impose a fragment
   small  enough to force some of a packet's Upper Layer e.g. TCP header
   fields  into the second fragment. 

   This can cause all middlebox's like firewall and NAT-PT which expect
   the fields header information in the first fragment to not work properly.

   Though the NAT Behave draft, states that NAT box should reassemble
   the packets, a lot of new issues can result. Keeping state could result 
   in easy DoS attacks. Besides the jury is still out about how many NAT
   boxes do reassembly.

   All policy based devices where packets are forwarded or sent on a
  tunnel based on some policy are also affected.

2.  Issues with Firewalls

   There are different types of firewalls and state can be created in
   these firewalls through different methods.  Independent of the
   adopted method, firewalls typically look at five parameters of the
   traffic arriving at the firewalls:

   o  Source IP address

   o  Destination IP address

   o  Protocol type

   o  Source port number

   o  Destination port number

   Based on these parameters, firewalls usually decide whether to allow
   the traffic or to drop the packets.  

   However in cases where the first fragment does not have the upper
   layer header information, the firewall is not able to get the port
   information and other upper layer information, thus allowing the 
  packets to be sent to the protected side.


Manral                                                                                                               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         

  
   This can lead to attacks to the network and the firewall not being
   able to block such an attack.
  

3.  Issues with NAT-PT

    NAT-PT [RFC2766] assumes that for NAPT-PT operation the ports are
    visible to the translator. However if the Upper Layer Header is not 
    there in the first fragment. This causes the visibility ot the port to
    be lost. This can cause the translation process to fail.

    When the translator gets a tiny IPv6 fragment which has to be
   translated  to an IPv4 packet. The translator will have to reassemble 
   the packets as the IPv4 non last  fragment needs to have a datagram 
   size of 68 octets  atleast.
  
    STD 5, RFC 791 states:

      Every internet module must be able to forward a datagram of 68
      octets without further fragmentation.  This is because an internet
      header may be up to 60 octets, and the minimum fragment is 8
      octets.

4. Issues with Policy Boxes 

    Tiny Fragments could cause issues to Policy boxes which look further
    inside the packet, to make decisions.

    For IPsec Security Policy Database (SPD) specifies what services are
    to be offered to IP datagrams and in what fashion.  The draft 
    [RFC2401bis] states:

     "Non-initial" vs "Initial" Fragments

      Throughout this document, the phrase "non-initial" fragments is
      used to mean fragments that do not contain all of the selector
      values that may be needed for access control.  And the phrase 
     "initial" fragment is used to mean a fragment that  contains all 
     the selector values needed for access control.

    However, it should be noted that for IPv6, which fragment contains 
    the Next Layer Protocol and ports (or ICMP message type/code or 
    Mobility Header type) will depend on the kind and number of extension 
    headers present.

     Having tiny fragments could mean that none of the fragments would
     be the Initial Fragment. So any access control/ tunneling based on
    that may not work unless reassembly is done, or extra state like next
    Header  and previous header length remaining are kept across 
    fragments.

   
Manral                                                                                                               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         

5. Proposed solutions to the problem

    a. Impose a minimum packet size for the non-last fragment.
  
    b. Reassemble the packet, translate the header fields and, glean
       relevent information and then pass the original fragments ahead
       after modifying the relevent fields.
 
    c. If upper layer protocol present then the header must be there in
       the first fragment.

    The above is just a first summary and the proposal are expected to
    be changed as the draft matures.


6. Issues with fragment size of Minimum MTU

    The minimum fragment size of the non last fragment could be
    specified to be 1280 octets, the minimum link MTU [RFC2460]. 

    However if the IPv6 packet has to be further tunnelled the packet
    may have to be fragmented. To prevent such a case a minimum packet 
    size of the non-last fragment should be less then 1280.


7.  IANA Considerations

    This document makes no request of IANA.

    Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
    RFC.





















Manral                                                                                                               [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         



8.  Security Considerations

     This draft outlines security issues arising if "Tiny Fragments" are
     sent. This draft raises no new security issues.















































Manral                                                                                                               [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         

9.  Acknowledgements
     
    This draft borrows text heavily from
    draft-ietf-mip6-firewalls-03.txt and RFC1858. Thanks to Brian 
   Carpenter, Pekka Savola, Stig Venaas,Fred Baker, Pyda 
   Srisuresh and Radhakrishnan.S for the helpful discussion.















































Manral                                                                                                               [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         


10.  References

10.1  Normative References

  [RFC2460] Deering & Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
            Specification", RFC2460, December 1998

  [RFC2766] Tsirtsis & Srisuresh, "Network Address Translation -
            Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC2766, February 2000

  [RFC2401bis] Kent & Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
            Protocol", Work in Progress, September, 2005


10.2  Informative References

  [RFC1858] Ziemba, Reed & Traina ,  "Security Considerations - IP 
            Fragment Filtering", RFC1858, October 1995


Authors' Addresses

   Vishwas Manral
   SiNett Corp
   Bangalore
   India

   Phone: +91-80-5137-7023
   Fax:   +91-80-5137-7001
   Email: vishwas@sinett.com





















Manral                                                                                                               [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Operational issues with Tiny       November, 2005
                                                     Fragments in IPv6         


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.


Manral                                                                                                               [Page 8]
