



Network Working Group                                            M. Sato
Internet-Draft                                               M. Shimaoka
Intended status: Informational                             SECOM IS Lab.
Expires: January 26, 2019                               H. Nakajima, Ed.
                                                             Mercari R4D
                                                           July 25, 2018


      General Security Considerations for Crypto Assets Custodians
          draft-vcgtf-crypto-assets-security-considerations-02

Abstract

   This document discusses technical and operational risks of crypto
   assets custodian and its security controls to avoid the unintended
   transactions for its customers.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 26, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 1]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Scope of this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Basic description of a model online system of a crypto assets
       custodian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     5.1.  General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     5.2.  A basic model of online system of a crypto assets
           custodian and its functional components . . . . . . . . .   4
     5.3.  The flow leading to the sending of the transaction  . . .   6
     5.4.  Types of keys that are used for signature and encryption    6
       5.4.1.  Type of keys  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       5.4.2.  Flow for the key generation and the key usage . . . .   7
       5.4.3.  On the usage of multiple keys . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.4.4.  On the suspension of keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.5.  On the characteristics of crypto assets on Blockchain and
           distributed ledger technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.5.1.  The importance of the private key used for signing  .   8
       5.5.2.  Diversity of implementations  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.5.3.  On the possibility of the forking of the Blockchain .   8
       5.5.4.  Risk on the unapproved transactions . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Basic objectives for the security management of crypto assets
       custodians  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Approaches to basic security controls . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Risks of Crypto Assets Custodian  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.1.  About this section  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.2.  Risks related to the system of the crypto assets
           custodian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       8.2.1.  Risks related to signing keys . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       8.2.2.  Risks related to asset data . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       8.2.3.  Risks related to suspension of systems and operations  18
     8.3.  Risks from external factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       8.3.1.  Risks related to the Internet infrastructure and
               authentication infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       8.3.2.  Troubles due to block chains of crypto assets . . . .  20
       8.3.3.  Risks arising from external reputation databases  . .  21
     8.4.  Financial Crime Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       8.4.1.  Risk of being abused in criminal acts . . . . . . . .  22
       8.4.2.  Anti Money Laundering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       8.4.3.  Counter Financing of Terrorism  . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   9.  Consideration on security controls at crypto assets custodian  22
     9.1.  General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     9.2.  Consideration on security controls  . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       9.2.1.  Security controls on signing keys . . . . . . . . . .  23
       9.2.2.  Security controls at crypto assets custodian  . . . .  26
     9.3.  Countermeasures against risks caused by blockchain and



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 2]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


           network environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     9.4.  Risk mitigation against crimes  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   10. Remaining issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   13. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     13.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     13.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28

1.  Introduction

   This document gives guidance as to what security measure should the
   crypto assets custodians consider and implement to protect the asset
   of its customers.  The management of the secret key for the crypto
   assets especially has different aspects than other types of
   information systems and requires special attention.

   This document reports especially on the appropriate management of the
   secret key by the crypto assets custodians to avoid the unintended
   transactions for its customers.

2.  Scope of this document

   This document discusses the threat, risk, and controls on the
   followings:

   o  Online system of crypto assets custodian that provides the
      custodian service to its customer (consumers and trade partners);

   o  Assets information (including the private key of the crypto
      assets) that the online system of a crypto assets custodian
      manages;

   o  Social impact that can arise from the discrepancy in the security
      measures that are implemented in the online system of a crypto
      assets custodian.

   This document is applicable to the crypto assets custodians that
   manages the private key that corresponds to the crypto assets.  It
   includes the organizations that outsources the key management to
   another organization.  In such a case, the certain recommendations
   applies to those outsourcers.







Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 3]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


3.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

4.  Terminology

   Terms used in this document are defined in
   [I-D.nakajima-crypto-asset-terminology]

5.  Basic description of a model online system of a crypto assets
    custodian

5.1.  General

   In this section, a model online system of a crypto assets custodian
   that is used to explain the concepts and provisions in this document
   are explained.

5.2.  A basic model of online system of a crypto assets custodian and
      its functional components

   Followings are the basic model of a crypto assets custodian that this
   document deals with.

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VCGTF/draft-crypto-assets-security-considerations/master/CryptoAssetCustodiansSystemModeling.svg

             Figure 1: Basic Model of Crypto Assets Custodian

   Figure 1 Basic Model of Crypto Assets Custodian

   o  Customer Interface
      Provides screen and input functions such as login process, account
      management (deposit/withdrawal instruction etc.) and trade
      instruction for the customers(users).  Web application, API, etc.

   o  Customer Authentication Function
      Performs user authentication process for login to the crypto
      assets custodians.

   o  Customer Credential Database
      Manages required IDs for login and verification information
      related to user authentication process (f.g password verification
      info.).




Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 4]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   o  Customer Assets Management Function
      A group of functions to manage customer accounts.  Receive
      instructions for deposit or withdrawal (outgoing coins) and
      perform processing according to the user instructions.  Refer or
      update asset data.

   o  Blockchain Node
      Connects to another blockchain nodes to retrieve blockchain data.

   o  Incoming transaction management Function
      Checks transaction stored in blockchain and confirm whether
      incoming coins are involved in the specified addresses.

   o  Order processing function
      A group of functions that receives sales instructions from
      customers and performs processing related to trading of crypto
      assets.  Refers and updates asset data based on asset data.

   o  Assets Database
      Manages holdings of fiat currencies and crypto assets.  It does
      not include the private keys for signing transactions.  Managed
      separately from the assets of the custodian for each customer.

   o  Transaction Singing Function

      *  Transaction Generator
         Generates transactions to be sent to the blockchain based on
         instructions from the customer asset management system or the
         exchange management system.

      *  Transaction Broadcaster
         Sends the signed transaction to the blockchain.  Connects to
         nodes of the another nodes on the blockchain.

      *  Transaction Signing Function
         Generates digital signatures based on the instructed
         transaction contents and the private signature key (with IDs
         and addresses).

      *  Address Management
         Manages public keys with related to the private signature keys,
         or addresses (such as values calculated from the public keys).

      *  Private Signature Key Management Function
         Manages the signing keys of the crypto assets (the keys used
         for the transaction signing).  Sometimes it is separated into
         the cold-wallet as security sountermeasure.  "Signature key
         generator" creates signature keys.  The generated keys are



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 5]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


         registered in the signature key management unit, and the public
         keys and addresses are registered in the address management
         units.

   o  Exchange Operation Modules
      A group of functions for custodians' administrators.  Based on
      operations from administrators, instructs generation of generating
      new signature keys or transfer crypto assets.

   o  Operator Authentication Function
      Authenticates the administrator users.

   o  Operator Audit Database
      Manages verification data related to the authentication processes
      of the administrators.

   We defined each functional element to distinguish functions
   logically, and do not show the actual arrangement on the actual
   system.  For example, in our actual system, address management unit
   may be managed by an integrated database.  Also, there are
   implementations with multiple functions packaged together.  For
   example, each functional element of the transaction signature system
   may be integrated with the customer property management system, or
   the transaction signature system may be operating as another system.

   When using existing implementations such as bitcoin wallet, bitcoin
   wallet is thought to provide the functions of transaction signature
   system as just one implementation as a whole.  It is also conceivable
   that some functions are provided by a remote subcontractor as in a
   form in which the function of the transaction signature system is
   provided by an remote server.

5.3.  The flow leading to the sending of the transaction

5.4.  Types of keys that are used for signature and encryption

5.4.1.  Type of keys














Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 6]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   +-----------------------+-------------------------------------------+
   | Types                 | Description                               |
   +-----------------------+-------------------------------------------+
   | Signature Key         | A private key for signing transactions    |
   |                       | (asymmetric key cryptography)             |
   |                       |                                           |
   | Verification Key      | A public key for verification of          |
   |                       | transactions (asymmetric key cryptography |
   |                       | Recipient address of transactions are     |
   |                       | unique value calculated from verification |
   |                       | key                                       |
   |                       |                                           |
   | Encryption/decryption | Secret key to keep confidentiality of     |
   | key for signature key | signature key (symmetric key              |
   |                       | cryptography)                             |
   |                       |                                           |
   | Master Seed           | A seed to generate a signature key in     |
   |                       | decisional wallet                         |
   +-----------------------+-------------------------------------------+

5.4.2.  Flow for the key generation and the key usage

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VCGTF/draft-crypto-assets-security-considerations/master/SignaureKeyLifeCycle.svg

        Figure 2: Lifecycle of signature key, verification key and
                encryption/decryption key for signature key

   After a pair of a signature key and a verification key (hereafter
   "key pair") is generated, an address to receive transactions is
   generated from the verification key.  By notifying a sender of crypto
   assets this address, the sender is able to transfer the asset to the
   address.  When the recipient transfers the asset to the other
   address, the original recipient signs the transaction data which
   includes the transfer order.  Inactive state of the signature key is
   the state such that the signature key is stored in confidential
   manner in the signature key management function of Figure 1.  An
   example of inactivation is encryption by encryption/decryption key
   (e.g. pass phrase), that is, the signature key is encrypted.  In
   contrary, activation is the process to make the key usable to sign,
   by decrypting the inactivated key.  The activation is assumed to be
   executed in transaction signing function if Figure 1.  Activation and
   inactivation may be executed in an implementation of wallet, when the
   wallet have both functions.  The signature key is not needed after
   its generation until execution of signing to transaction.  Thus,
   there is a way to manage the signature key in offline manner with
   storing the verification key and address online (see Section 9.2.2).





Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 7]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


5.4.3.  On the usage of multiple keys

   In some crypto assets system, it is recommended not to use the same
   key pair twice, thus it produces multiple key pairs.  This feature is
   for preventing trace and not relevant to the business efficiency of a
   crypto assets custodian.  However, a crypto assets custodian should
   manage addresses for each customer.  Thus it should manage multiple
   key pairs for the same crypto assets.

5.4.4.  On the suspension of keys

   Suspension of key usage is only an operation inside a crypto assets
   custodian.  By definition of blockchain based crypto assets system,
   any user cannot cancel transaction once it is made.  As another case,
   it is difficult to revoke signature key even after the suspension of
   key.  For example, a customer accidentally operate some crypto assets
   for suspended address.  In such case, the suspended signature key is
   needed to make an reimbursement.  Thus, suspension of keys should be
   conducted with considering such cases.

5.5.  On the characteristics of crypto assets on Blockchain and
      distributed ledger technologies

   In this sub-clause, following items will described as characteristics
   of crypto assets over blockchain and distributed ledger technology in
   preparation for Section 8 and Section 9.

5.5.1.  The importance of the private key used for signing

5.5.2.  Diversity of implementations

5.5.2.1.  On the cryptographic algorithms used by crypto assets

5.5.3.  On the possibility of the forking of the Blockchain

5.5.3.1.  Rollback by reorganization

5.5.3.2.  The treatment of the forked crypto assets

5.5.4.  Risk on the unapproved transactions

5.5.4.1.  General

5.5.4.2.  The handling of the unapproved transactions







Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 8]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


5.5.4.3.  Transaction failures caused by the vulnerabilities of the
          implementation or the specification of the crypto assets

6.  Basic objectives for the security management of crypto assets
    custodians

   At crypto assets custodians, it is mandatory to establish, conduct,
   maintain and continuously improve security management.  As
   requirements in term os security management, items described in
   [ISO.27001:2013] are sufficiently considered according to the
   business process of each crypto assets custodian.  Especially,
   following items should be carefully considered, because a crypto
   assets custodian retains customer's asset and should deal with issues
   specific to crypto assets.

   o  On stakeholders (Related to [ISO.27001:2013] Clause 4)

   It is needed to consider protection of customer's assets, as well as
   division of responsibility with outsourcers including security of
   private key management for crypto asset, and mattes by which a crypto
   assets custodian may give social impacts like money laundering.

   o  On security policy (Related to [ISO.27001:2013] Clause 5)

   A crypto assets custodian should define a security policy which
   includes security objectives and controls described in and after
   clause 7.  Especially, it is recommended to disclose the security
   policy on the management of crypto assets to customers to facilitate
   self evaluation.

   o  Continuous risk evaluation and improvement (Related to
      [ISO.27002:2013] Clause 6, 8, 9 and 10)

   A crypto assets custodian should watch security risks of crypto
   assets in addition to aligning the general security management
   framework, because the risks change and increase due to rapid
   development of related technology as described in clause 5.3.2.  It
   is especially important to continuously evaluate risk and improve
   security objectives, policy and controls to keep effectiveness of
   security controls after starting their operations.

7.  Approaches to basic security controls

   A crypto assets custodian should decide security objectives and
   controls with considering all of following viewpoints.

   o  Countermeasure to threat as lost, theft, leak and abuse of
      customer's assets data and private key for crypto assets



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019                [Page 9]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   o  Requirements for actual business

   o  Compliance to laws and rules

   o  Social responsibilities to prevent crimes in use of crypto assets
      like scam and money laundering

   The crypto assets custodian conducts threat analysis, vulnerability
   evaluation, risk evaluation and defining security objectives and
   controls according to its actual business and system.  Security
   objectives and controls should be decided with considering threats
   and risks specific to crypto assets described in clause 5, as well as
   general security objectives and controls described in
   [ISO.27002:2013].

   Followings are items of security objectives and controls described in
   [ISO.27002:2013].

   o  Information Security Policies

   o  Organization of information security

   o  Human resource security

   o  Assets management

   o  Access control

   o  Cryptography

   o  Physical and environmental security

   o  Operations security

   o  Communications security

   o  System acquisition, development and maintenance

   o  Supplier relationships

   o  Information security incident management

   o  Information security aspects of business continuity management

   o  Compliance

   Consideration of above items is mandatory.  Next close describes
   specific items to be considered by a crypto assets custodian.



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 10]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


8.  Risks of Crypto Assets Custodian

8.1.  About this section

   The main risks to be noted as a crypto assets custodian office are
   roughly classified into those related to the system of the crypto
   assets custodian office, those caused by external factors such as a
   block chain outside the control of the crypto assets custodian
   office, and risks leading to abuse such as criminal acts Enumerate.
   Risks related to the system of the crypto assets custodians are
   organized in terms of threats and factors, actors that pose a threat.
   Organize in terms of possible incidents in risks caused by external
   factors such as block chains and risks of misuse.  There may also be
   risks inherent in systems and operations that are different for each
   operator.  Each business operator needs to identify the risks to be
   dealt with while taking into consideration the risks shown in this
   section, taking into consideration different systems and operations
   for each business operator.  After that, it is desirable to determine
   the priority of the control measures by evaluating the impact each
   risk can have on the business.

8.2.  Risks related to the system of the crypto assets custodian

   Here are the typical risks to the information assets held by the
   system of the crypto assets custodian.  In the basic model of
   Section 5.2, pay attention to the signing secret key and the asset
   data as an information asset which is particularly important from the
   viewpoint of protecting customer assets.  If the signing secret key
   and the surrounding environment are not secure, it is also possible
   for a malicious person to create an illegal transaction and send it
   to the node in the block chain.  Once an illegal transaction is sent
   to the node and written to the block chain it is nearly impossible to
   cancel the transaction.  Therefore, prior measures to prevent illegal
   transactions being created are particularly important.  It is
   necessary to carefully evaluate the risks related to management of
   signing secret keys and illegal transaction creation and to consider
   appropriate safety measures.  In addition, it is necessary to
   consider the loss of the signing secret key.  When the signing secret
   key is lost, it becomes impossible to use the Crypto Assets stored in
   the address corresponding to the signing private key.  As for the
   risk concerning the signing secret key, consider the secret key for
   signature and the environment surrounding it based on the basic model
   in Section 5.2 in Section 8.2.1.  As for the asset data, since the
   contents of data, data format, management form, and details of
   processing vary from custodians to custodians, this document
   considers the model more abstracted.  Common contents of asset data
   to be protected include the total amount of Crypto Assets and legal
   currency deposited by the customer at the custodians, the amount of



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 11]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   Crypto Assets and legal currency held by the custodians, customer
   account number and Crypto Assets An address and so on are
   conceivable.  If such asset data is illegally rewritten by a
   malicious one, it will also cause damage to customers and impede the
   work of the custodians.  The asset data is discussed in
   Section 8.2.2.  In addition to protecting important information such
   as transaction signature private key and asset data, it is also
   necessary to consider risks such as system outage so that customers
   can smoothly control their own assets.  Risks related to system
   outages are discussed in Section 8.2.3.  In addition to the
   information and risks mentioned in this section, there are risks
   inherent to each system of the crypto assets custodian and risks in
   cooperation with external business operators.  It is necessary to
   conduct a detailed risk assessment on the actual system of the crypto
   assets custodian.

8.2.1.  Risks related to signing keys

   In the crypto assets custodian, the role and risk of the signing key
   are extremely large.  This is not only to enable the transfer of
   coins but also to disappear due to the anonymity of the Crypto Asset,
   the property that it is impossible to revocation the signing key
   against leakage / theft or roll back the transaction by.  In this
   section, we show the risk of fraudulent use that could lead to the
   loss of the signing key, leakage / theft, and damage of value.  It
   also shows supply chain risk etc. when introducing Wallet related to
   signature key.

8.2.1.1.  Risk analysis of signing secret key

   Risk analysis differs depending on the assumed threats, system
   configuration, threat modeling, and so on.  In this section, we show
   a case study based on the following assumption as an example.  Here,
   the threat concerning the signature secret key and the factors that
   can cause the threat are assumed as follows.  In addition, we assumed
   the following as the actor giving input to the signing secret key
   based on Figure 1 in Section 5.

   o  Threats:

      *  lost

      *  leakage, theft

      *  fraudulent use

   o  Factors of Threats:




Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 12]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


      *  mis-operations

      *  Legitimate users' malice

      *  Spoofing

      *  Intrusions from outside

      *  Unintended behaviors of implementations

   o  Actors:

      *  exchange operation modules

      *  Transaction Signing modules

      *  customer asset management function implementation

      *  incoming coin management function implementation

   Factors of threats are organized as follows.

   Mis-operation: An act that an authorized user (including an
   administrator) of the system accidentally operated by mistake.  For
   example, it is incorrectly supposed that an operation to coin 100,000
   yen is incorrectly dispatched for 1 million yen.

   Legitimate users' malice: Acts performed by a legitimate user of the
   system (including administrator etc) with malicious intent.  For
   example, theft or unauthorized use of the signature private key due
   to internal fraud.  In this case, it is the purpose of identifying
   acts that can be factors, and the purpose and incentive of the act
   are not limited here.

   Spoofing: An act other than an authorized user of the system
   impersonating a legitimate user (more accurately impersonating some
   kind of operation).  For example, an internal burglar without
   administrator privilege accesses the system with administrator
   authority.

   Intrusions from outside: an act of an outsider accessing the system
   maliciously in a manner other than spoofing.  For example, by using
   malicious intrusion from the outside by exploiting the system's
   vulnerability, incorporating malware into the exchanging system via
   targeted e-mail to the custodians administrator or the like and
   generating a private signature private key (or transaction creation)
   from the outside, Allow remote control of etc.




Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 13]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   Unintended behaviors of implementations: The system behaves
   unexpectedly by the designer or operator irrespective of the
   intention or malice of the operation.  For example, a signature
   private key leaks due to a bug in the exchange management system.

   Of these threat factors, theft and fraudulent use are regarded as
   threats that can only be caused by explicit malicious factors.  As a
   result, the possible risks for signing key to be assumed are the
   following:

   1.  Threat by lost - Risk of Unauthorized operation (with legitimate
       path)

       *  End-user's malice

       *  Operator's malice in Custodian

       *  Spoofing to end users

       *  internal frauds (spoofing to operators) - Risk of Intrusion
          from the outside

       *  Intrusion into the transaction signing modules

       *  Intrusion into the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the exchange operation modules - Risk of System
          Behaviors different from human operation

       *  Unintended behaviors of the transaction signing modules

       *  Unintended behaviors of the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Unintended behaviors of the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Unintended behaviors of the exchange operation modules - Risk
          of mis-operation (by human error)

       *  Mis-operation of end user

       *  Mis-operation of operator




Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 14]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   2.  Threat by leakage - Risk of Unauthorized operation (with
       legitimate path)

       *  End-user's malice

       *  Operator's malice in Custodian

       *  Spoofing to end users

       *  internal frauds (spoofing to operators) - Risk of Intrusion
          from the outside

       *  Intrusion into the transaction signing modules

       *  Intrusion into the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the exchange operation modules - Risk of System
          Behaviors different from human operation

       *  Unintended behaviors of the transaction signing modules

       *  Unintended behaviors of the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Unintended behaviors of the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Unintended behaviors of the exchange operation modules - Risk
          of mis-operation (by human error)

       *  Mis-operation of end user

       *  Mis-operation of operator

   3.  Threat by theft - Risk of Unauthorized operation (with legitimate
       path)

       *  End-user's malice

       *  Operator's malice in Custodian

       *  Spoofing to end users





Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 15]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


       *  internal frauds (spoofing to operators) - Risk of Intrusion
          from the outside

       *  Intrusion into the transaction signing modules

       *  Intrusion into the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the exchange operation modules

   4.  Threat by fraudulent use - Risk of Unauthorized operation (with
       legitimate path)

       *  End-user's malice

       *  Operator's malice in Custodian

       *  Spoofing to end users

       *  internal frauds (spoofing to operators) - Risk of Intrusion
          from the outside

       *  Intrusion into the transaction signing modules

       *  Intrusion into the incoming coin management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the customer asset management function
          (implementation)

       *  Intrusion into the exchange operation modules

   The following sections outline each risk, and their security controls
   are shown in Section 9.2.2.

8.2.1.2.  Risk of loss of signing secret key

   The disappearance risk shown in Table 8-2 is an enumeration of events
   having a possibility of causing disappearance, paying attention to
   the input (operation instruction) to the signature secret key.  As a
   typical risk, loss of the secret key for signature due to erroneous
   operation by the administrator may be considered.






Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 16]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


8.2.1.3.  Leakage / theft risk of signing private key

   Intentional operation by malicious intention is essential, but
   leakage can be caused by negligence without malice.  For this reason,
   leakage risk and theft risk need to be sorted out.

   The leakage risk shown in Table 8-2 lists events that have the
   possibility of causing leakage including negligence, paying attention
   to the input (operation instruction) to the signing secret key.
   Typically, an internal criminal, leakage risk due to unintentional
   behavior, illegal invasion, etc. can be considered.  Likewise, the
   theft risk enumerates events that have the possibility of being woken
   up by some sort of malicious intention, paying attention to the input
   (operation instruction) to the signature secret key.  Typically,
   there is a risk of leakage from internal criminals or unauthorized
   intrusion from the outside.

   Both leaks and theft are similar in terms of leakage of sensitive
   information to the outside, and the control measures are common.
   This will be described later in Section 9.3.2.

8.2.1.4.  Risk of unauthorized use of signing private key

   The fraudulent use risk shown in Table 8-2 is an enumeration of
   events having a possibility of being caused by something with a
   malicious intention, paying attention to the input (operation
   instruction) to the signature secret key.  Typically, there is a risk
   of illegal use due to illegal invasion or impersonation from the
   outside.

8.2.1.5.  Other related risks

   Supply chain risk of hardware wallet As a product having a secret key
   management function, there is a so-called hardware wallet.  Many
   hardware wallets connect to the management terminal such as PC via
   USB and perform key management operation from the management
   terminal.  FIPS 140-2, etc. as a security certification of products
   with key management function, etc.  However, since most of
   cryptographic algorithms handled by Crypto Assets are not subject to
   certification, the security of hardware wallet for Crypto Assets
   Unfortunately it is inevitable that the third-party accreditation
   system on insurance is inadequate.  For this reason, while there are
   products with sufficient safety in the hardware wallet that generally
   available, it is necessary to recognize that there are products with
   insufficient safety.  Furthermore, even with products with certain
   safety, safety may be impaired by being crafted on the distribution
   route.  For example, a hardware wallet that is loaded with malware in
   the middle of a sales channel, even if the purchaser newly generates



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 17]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   a signing secret key in the hardware wallet, the attacker can use the
   signature secret It becomes possible to restore the key.

8.2.2.  Risks related to asset data

   The asset data is data for managing assets such as Crypto Assets and
   statutory currency held by customers and custodians.  The secret key
   of the transaction signature shall not be included (see Section 5.2).
   As mentioned above, since asset data varies from custodians to
   custodians, we consider this as a more abstracted model in this
   document.  Since detailed threat analysis and risk assessment need to
   be performed on the asset data handled by the actual custodian
   system, only the way of thinking is shown here.  The main threats of
   asset data may be illegal rewriting, loss, or leakage.  The factors
   include mis-operation by the manager, malice of the righteous person,
   spoofing the legitimate person, malicious intent of the outsider,
   unintended behavior of the system.  In the example of the basic model
   in Section 5.2, there is a route from the exchange management system,
   the customer property management system, and the incoming coin
   determination unit.  Among the threats of asset data, the following
   examples are considered as incidents due to illegal rewriting.  A
   customer asset management system referring to unauthorized asset data
   may create an illegal transaction and flow through the normal process
   to the block chain (Section 8.2.1.4).  For example, it is possible to
   rewrite the holding amount recorded in the asset data, change the
   Crypto Assets transfer destination address, or the like.  For
   example, by rewriting the list of addresses associated with the
   customer, illegal recombination of the amount held between customers
   or between customers and custodians within the asset data within the
   custodian will be made.  As a transaction in the block chain the
   result is not reflected, assets that a customer or custodian should
   have had is lost.  Risks related to asset data can be thought of as a
   problem similar to general financial and settlement systems, but
   transactions can be canceled if transactions are written to the block
   chain as a result of fraud against asset data It is necessary to
   consider it on the premise that there is no property.

8.2.3.  Risks related to suspension of systems and operations

   The system of the crypto assets custodian office is software,
   hardware, network, and the like constituting the crypto assets
   custodian.  In addition, the term "operation" refers to an operation
   performed manually, such as operation monitoring of a switching
   center system, account opening, remittance instruction, wallet
   deposit / withdrawal.  It is conceivable that the system and work may
   be stopped due to various factors.  Risks related to suspension of
   systems and operations can be regarded as problems similar to general
   financial and payment systems.  However, the fact that the crypto



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 18]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   assets custodian office is connected to the Internet all the time,
   not the dedicated communication network at all times, that it is
   operating 24 hours a day, 365 days, that many crypto assets
   custodians are built on the public cloud infrastructure, crypto
   assets custodian It is necessary to consider it based on the fact
   that the operating situation of the place has a large effect on the
   crypto assets price and it tends to be an object of attack.

8.2.3.1.  Risks related to network congestion

   Crypto assets custodians frequently receive denial of service
   attacks.  As a target of a denial-of-service attack, publicly-
   released top page, API endpoint, etc. are common, but when an
   attacker knows the system configuration and a business system or
   operation monitoring system is placed on the Internet, A case of
   receiving a denial of service attack may be considered.

8.2.3.2.  Risk of system outage

   It is conceivable that the data center, the cloud infrastructure,
   etc. where the system is installed are stopped, and the system and
   operations are stopped.  The system can be stopped due to various
   factors such as power outage due to natural disasters and disruption
   of communication, large scale failure due to mistake by cloud
   infrastructure operator, large scale system failure due to mistake of
   infrastructure operation, failure of software release.

8.2.3.3.  Risks related to Operator

   Even if the system itself is in operation, if operations monitoring
   and tasks of personnel responsible for the operation are hindered,
   the work will be suspended.  For example, regular inspections of
   power facilities at operation bases, disruption of transportation
   means due to catastrophic changes and strikes, protest activities and
   rush of press reporters may hinder the entrance and exit of buildings
   and halt operations.  In addition, when personnel are using the same
   transportation method or participating in the same event, there is a
   risk that many personnel can not operate due to the same accident
   such as traffic accident or food poisoning.

8.2.3.4.  Regulatory risks

   In countries where the crypto assets custodian office is stipulated,
   licensing system or registration system, business may be suspended
   due to business improvement order, business suspension order,
   deletion of registration etc etc.





Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 19]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


8.3.  Risks from external factors

   Even if the systems and operations of the crypto assets custodian are
   appropriately operated, if the blockchain / network in which the
   crypto assets operates and the Internet infrastructure supporting the
   connection between the nodes are attacked, On the other hand, the
   service cannot be continued or the transaction can not be handled
   properly.

8.3.1.  Risks related to the Internet infrastructure and authentication
        infrastructure

8.3.1.1.  Internet routing and name resolution attacks

   An attacker interferes with routing of the Internet such as route
   hijacking and domain name resolution (Domain Name Service), hindering
   the reachability to the custodians and guiding it to a fake custodian
   office or block chain It is possible to intentionally cause a branch
   by hindering synchronization.  This method can be considered not only
   by malicious attackers but also by ISP etc. based on instructions
   from the government.

8.3.1.2.  Attacks on Web PKI

   Many crypto assets custodian offices provide services on the Web, and
   TLS and server certificates are used for user authenticity
   verification and encryption of sites.  When a certificate authority
   issuing a server certificate is attacked, it may be possible to
   impersonate the site, or if the server certificate is revoked, the
   service cannot be provided.

8.3.1.3.  Attack on Messaging

   By intervening with an e-mail or other messaging system, an attacker
   can fraud and block SMS / MMS of e-mails and mobile phones used for
   interaction with users and delivery of one-time passwords.  When a
   user's message is fraudulent, it is possible to log in as a user and
   reset the password.

8.3.2.  Troubles due to block chains of crypto assets

8.3.2.1.  Crypto assets blockchain fork, split

8.3.2.2.  Re-org of Blockchain by 51% attack and selfish mining







Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 20]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


8.3.2.3.  Compromise of hash function and cryptographic algorithm

8.3.2.4.  Inadequate consensus algorithm

   By misusing a bug in the agreement algorithm, fake transaction
   information is sent to a specific node and disguised as to whether or
   not to send money to the counter party.  For example, in the case of
   the MtGOX case in 2014, double payment attacks abusing Transaction
   Malleability occurred frequently in piggybacking.

8.3.3.  Risks arising from external reputation databases

8.3.3.1.  Establishment of Bank Account Elimination and Freezing

   As a part of AML / CFT, there are cases where banks refuse to open
   accounts related to the work of the crypto assets custodian office,
   the risk that the bank accounts will be frozen, such as receiving
   guidance from the regulatory authorities or accident is there.  In
   the event that the account is frozen, the business of depositing and
   withdrawing a legal currency with the user as a crypto assets
   custodian office is stopped.

8.3.3.2.  Crypto assets address

   As a part of AML/CFT, when another crypto assets custodian trader
   remittles to another crypto assets address, there are cases where it
   is checked whether the remittance destination address does not
   correspond to a high risk transaction.  In the case where the address
   of the hot wallet of the custodian office is registered as a
   problematic address, it is assumed that the custodian of the crypto
   assets with such a service can not be performed smoothly.  Since it
   is common in many cases that criminal remit crypto assets stolen for
   disturbance to a known address, there is a risk that the address of
   the hot wallet of the crypto assets custodian office will be
   classified as a high risk customer by mistake.

8.3.3.3.  Filtering and blocking for Web sites

   There is a risk that the URL of the crypto assets custodian office is
   filtered by the network or blocked by the ISP so that the user can
   not access it.  Also, if it is recognized as a malware distribution
   site or the like, there is a risk that it will not be displayed as a
   search result or it will be impossible to browse from the browser.








Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 21]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


8.3.3.4.  Email

   As a measure against spam mails, most of mail servers provide mail
   rejection based on reputation and classification function of spam
   mails.  If the e-mail delivered by the custodian is judged as spam,
   it may be impossible to contact the user.

8.3.3.5.  Appraisal of a smartphone application

   Depending on the platform, there are cases where handling of crypto
   assets by the application is restricted.  If the examination of the
   smartphone application is dropped, the user may not be able to
   download the smartphone application for accessing the custodian and
   may be unable to use the service.

8.4.  Financial Crime Risks

8.4.1.  Risk of being abused in criminal acts

8.4.1.1.  Identity Theft

8.4.1.2.  Scams

8.4.1.3.  Ransom

8.4.1.4.  Utilization for transactions in the dark market

8.4.2.  Anti Money Laundering

8.4.3.  Counter Financing of Terrorism

9.  Consideration on security controls at crypto assets custodian

9.1.  General

   In this clause, considerations from the ISMS viewpoint in
   implementing security controls to crypto assets custodians for risks
   described in clause 8 are described.  They included issues caused by
   specific characteristics to crypto assets.  This clause also
   describes relationship to [ISO.27001:2013] and [ISO.27002:2013] for
   each consideration.

9.2.  Consideration on security controls

   ### Direction of the information security management

   Objectives of security management at a crypto assets custodian
   contain secure protection of customer's asset, compliance to business



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 22]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   requirements, laws and rules, and realization of social
   responsibility.  Security policies and execution statements derived
   from such objectives are recommended to be publicly available for
   consumers, business partners, auditor and regulators to help their
   judge.

9.2.1.  Security controls on signing keys

9.2.1.1.  Basics of key management

   In general, followings are required in management of private
   cryptographic keys.

   o  They should be Isolated from other informational assets.  Rigorous
      access control is mandatory.

   o  Limit the number of access to private keys as minimum as possible.

   o  Be prepared for unintentional lost of private keys.

   Followings are three basic security control to realize above.
   Additional security controls specific to crypto assets custodians are
   described in and after sub-clause Section 9.2.2.

   1.  State management of private keys
       As described in Figure 2, a private key has one of multiple
       states, and it may be active or inactive state in its operation.
       The private key should be in active state when it is used for
       signing or decryption.  It is recommended to enforce to input
       some secret information to activate an inactive private key.
       This makes keep the inactive private key away from abuse, if the
       adversary does not have the secret information.  This method
       ensure security of the private key against leakage and lost.
       It is also recommended to minimize the term of activation to
       limit the risk of abuse as minimum as possible.  Unnecessary
       activation of secret key increases the risk of abuse, leakage and
       theft, though keeping the activation state is efficient from
       business viewpoint.  On the other hand, frequent activation/
       inactivation may give impact to business efficiency.  It is
       important to consider the trade-off between the risk and business
       efficiency and provide clear key management policy to customers.

   2.  Administrator role separation and mutual check-and-balance
       It is fundamental form of operation of a critical business
       process which uses private key to perform cryptographic
       operations by multiple party to prevent internal frauds and
       errors.  For example, by setting isolated rights on digitally
       signing and approval to go into the area of signing operation, it



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 23]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


       becomes difficult for single adversary to give an malicious
       digital signature without known by the third party.
       Additionally, the enforcement of attendance of other person is
       effective security control to internal frauds and mis-operations.

   3.  Backup of private key
       Lost of private key makes signing operations by using the key
       impossible any more.  Thus backup of private key is an important
       security control.  On the other hand, risks of leakage and theft
       of backup keys should be considered.  It is needed to inactivate
       the backup key.

9.2.1.2.  Backup

   Backup is the most fundamental and effective measure against lost of
   signing key.  On the other hand, there are risks of leakage and lost
   of backup device.  These risks depend on the kind backup device, thus
   security controls on such devices should be considered independently.
   Followings describe typical backup devices and leakage/theft risks
   associated with them.

   o  Cloning to tamper-resistant cryptographic key management device

   If a signing key is managed by a tamper-resistant key management
   device (device X) and X has cloning function, cloning the key to
   another device Y is the most secure way to backup the key, where the
   cloning function is the technique to copy the key with keeping
   confidentiality to other devices than X and Y.  The implementation of
   the function is recommended to be evaluated/certified by
   certification program like CMVP or FIPS 140.  Note that, the
   cryptographic algorithms supported by such tamper-resistant key
   management devices are limited and all crypto assets systems can
   utilize it, but it is one of the most secure way of backup.

   o  Backup to storage for digital data

   Here, it is assumed to backup keys to storage like USB memory and
   DVD.  There are two types of operations; one is backup data is stored
   in movable devices in offline manner, the other is backup data is
   stored in online accessible manner.  If the device is movable, the
   possibility of steal and lost increases, thus the device should be
   kept in a cabinet or a vault with key, and the access control to such
   cabinet/vault should be restrict.

   Of the backup storage is online, risks of leakage and theft should be
   assumed as same as the key management function implementation inside
   the crypto assets custodian.  In general, the same security control
   is recommended to such backup storage.  If there is some additional



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 24]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   operation, for example the backup device is inactivated except for
   the time of restore, the security control may be modified with
   considering operation environment.  When it is not avoided the raw
   key data is be outside of the key management function implementation,
   the custodian should deal with the problem of remained magnetics.

   o  Backup to paper

   There is a way to backup keys in offline manner, to print them to
   papers as a QR code or other machine readable ways.  It is movable
   than storage for digital data and easy to identify.  There remains
   some risk of leakage and theft by taking a photo by smartphone and so
   on.

9.2.1.3.  Offline management

   There is a type of offline key management (as known as "cold wallet")
   which isolates private keys from the system network to prevent
   leakage and theft caused by intrusion.

   In this case, some offline operation is needed to make the system use
   the key.  Examples are, keys are usually stored inside a vault and
   connected to the system only when it is utilized, and USB memory is
   used to data transportation between an online system and an offline
   system.  If there is not explicit approval process in the offline
   operation for key usage, anyone cannot stop malicious transaction.
   That is, this solution can prevent lost and theft, however, an
   explicit approval process is needed to prevent abuse of keys.

9.2.1.4.  Distributed management

   It is also a good security control to distribute the right to use
   private key to multiple entity.  There are two examples; division of
   secret key and multi-signature.

   o  Division of secret key&#12288; Division of the signing key to
      multiple parts, then manage them by multiple isolated system is an
      effective measure to protect the keys against leakage and theft.
      This document does not recommend a specific technique, but
      recommends to implement this control based on a certain level of
      security evaluation like secret sharing scheme.  In that case,
      secure coding and mounting penetration test are needed to
      eliminate the implementation vulnerabilities.  This method is also
      effective to backup devices.

   o  Multi-Signature
      This is a signature scheme which requires multiple isolated
      signing keys to sign a message.  It is effective to protect each



Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 25]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


      key hold by an entity and signing mechanisms.  There are many
      different realization of multi-signature and they are different
      according to specific crypto assets system.  Thus, consideration
      on preparing multiple implementations and their interoperation is
      need when a crypto assets custodian operate multiple crypto
      assets.

9.2.1.5.  Other issues

   In this sub-clause, following topics will be described.

   o  Security of wallet implementation

   o  Monitoring of private key access

   o  Log audit

9.2.2.  Security controls at crypto assets custodian

   Following security controls addition to kay management in sub clause
   Section 9.2.2 will be described in this sub clause.

   o  Organization of information security

   o  Category and management of assets

   o  Access control

   o  Communications security

   o  Operations security

   o  Physical and environmental security

   o  System acquisition, development and maintenance

   o  Consideration in user authentication and providing API

   o  Flow control in transaction generation

   Above controls are described with aligning to [ISO.27002:2013] and
   considering security controls specific to crypto assets custodians.
   The structure of this sub clause aligns the structure of
   [ISO.27002:2013].







Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 26]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


9.3.  Countermeasures against risks caused by blockchain and network
      environment

9.4.  Risk mitigation against crimes

10.  Remaining issues

11.  Security Considerations

   Security Considerations are included in main section of this
   document.

12.  IANA Considerations

   None.

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [ISO.27001:2013]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information technology -- Security techniques --
              Information security management systems -- Requirements",
              ISO/IEC 27001:2013, October 2013,
              <https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html>.

   [ISO.27002:2013]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information technology -- Security techniques -- Code of
              practice for information security controls", ISO/
              IEC 27002:2013, October 2013,
              <https://www.iso.org/standard/54533.html>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

13.2.  Informative References







Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 27]

Internet-DraGeneral Security Considerations for Crypto Assets  July 2018


   [I-D.nakajima-crypto-asset-terminology]
              Nakajima, H., Kusunoki, M., Hida, K., Suga, Y., and T.
              Hayashi, "Terminology for Crypto Asset", draft-nakajima-
              crypto-asset-terminology-00 (work in progress), July 2018.

Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Masanori Kusunoki, Yasushi Matsumoto, Natsuhiko Sakimura,
   Yuji Suga, Tatsuya Hayashi, Keiichi Hida and other members of the
   Security Working Group of Virtual Currency Governance Task Force.

Authors' Addresses

   Masashi Sato
   SECOM Co., Ltd. Intelligent System Laboratory
   SECOM SC Center
   8-10-16 Shimorenjaku
   Mitaka, Tokyo  181-8528
   JAPAN

   Email: satomasa756@gmail.com


   Masaki Shimaoka
   SECOM Co., Ltd. Intelligent System Laboratory
   SECOM SC Center
   8-10-16 Shimorenjaku
   Mitaka, Tokyo  181-8528
   JAPAN

   Email: m-shimaoka@secom.co.jp


   Hirotaka Nakajima (editor)
   Mercari, Inc. R4D
   Roppongi Hills Mori Tower 18F
   6-10-1 Roppongi
   Minato, Tokyo  106-6118
   JAPAN

   Email: nunnun@mercari.com










Sato, et al.            Expires January 26, 2019               [Page 28]
