
None.                                                          C. Morrow
Internet-Draft                                        UUNET Technologies
Expires: August 16, 2005                                        G. Jones
                                                   The MITRE Corporation
                                                       February 12, 2005


          Filtering Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure
                      draft-morrow-filter-caps-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 16, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   [I-D.practices] lists operator practices related to securing
   networks.  This document lists filtering capabilities needed to
   support those practices.

   Capabilities are defined without reference to specific technologies.



Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


   This is done to leave room for deployment of new technologies that
   implement the capability.  Each capability cites the practices it
   supports.  Current implementations that support the capability are
   cited.  Special considerations are discussed as appropriate listing
   operational and resource constraints, limitations of current
   implementations, tradeoffs, etc.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.1  Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2  Capabilities or Requirements ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.3  Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.4  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.   Functional Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.1  Basic Filtering Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.1  Ability to Filter Traffic on All Interfaces  . . . . .   6
       2.1.2  Ability to Filter Traffic To the Device  . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.3  Ability to Filter Traffic To the Device - Minimal
              Performance Degradation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.1.4  Ability to Filter To the Device - Specify Filter
              Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       2.1.5  Ability to Filter To the Device - Log Filter Actions .   9
       2.1.6  Ability to Filter To the Device - Specify Log
              Granularity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.1.7  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter
              Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       2.1.8  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter
              Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       2.1.9  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter
              Protocol Header Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       2.1.10   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Filter Inbound and Outbound  . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       2.1.11   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Accurately Count Filter Hits . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       2.1.12   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Display Filter Counters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       2.1.13   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Display Per Rule Counters  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       2.1.14   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Display Filter Counters per Filter Application . . .  14
       2.1.15   Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to
                Reset Filter Counters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       2.1.16   Ability to Filter To the Device - Filter Counters
                are Accurate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   3.   Additional Operational Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     3.1  Profile Current Traffic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     3.2  Block Malicious Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17



Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


     3.3  Limit Sources of Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   5.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     5.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     5.2  Non-normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   A.   Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  21











































Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


1.  Introduction

   This document is defined in the context of [I-D.practices].
   [I-D.practices] defines the goals, motivation, scope, definitions,
   intended audience,threat model, potential attacks and give
   justifications for each of the practices.  Many of the capabilities
   listed here refine or add to capabilities listed in [RFC3871]

1.1  Threat Model

   Threats in today's networked environment range from simple packet
   floods with overwhelming bandwidth toward a leaf network to subtle
   attacks aimed at subverting known vulnerabilities in existing
   applications.  The attacked network or host might not be an end user,
   it may be the networking device or links inside the provider core.

   Networks must have the ability to place mitigation in order to limit
   these threats.  These mitigation steps could include routing updates,
   traffic filters, and routing filters.  It is possible that the
   mitigation steps might have to affect transit traffic as well as
   traffic destined to the device on which the mitigation steps are
   activated.

   The scope of the threat includes simply denying services to an
   individual customer on one side of the scale to exploiting a newly
   discovered protocol vulnerability which affects the entire provider
   core.  The obvious risk to the business requires mitigation
   capabilities which can span this range of threats.

   Threat: An indication of impending danger or harm to the network or
   its parts.  This could be formed from the projected loss of revenue
   to the business.  Additionally, it could be formed from the increased
   cost to the business caused by the event.  (more interfaces, more
   bandwidth, more personnel to support the increased size or
   complexity)

   Risk: The possibility of suffering harm or loss of network services
   due to a threat.

   Attack: To set upon with violent force the network or its parts.
   Typically this is a form of flood of packets to or through a network.
   This could also be a much smaller stream of packets created with the
   intent of exploiting a vulnerability in the infrastructure of the
   network.

   Asset: Either a customer, network device or network link.  Any of
   these could be assets from a business perspective.




Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


1.2  Capabilities or Requirements ?

   Capabilities may or may not be requirements.  That is a local
   determination that must be made by each operator with reference to
   the policies that they must support.  It is hoped that this document,
   together with [I-D.practices] will assist operators in identifying
   their security capability requirements and communicating them clearly
   to vendors.

1.3  Format

   Each capability has the following subsections:
   o  Capability (what)
   o  Supported Practices (why)
   o  Current Implementations (how)
   o  Considerations (caveats, resource issues, protocol issues, etc.)

   The Capability section describes a feature to be supported by the
   device.  The Supported Practice section cites practices described in
   [I-D.practices] that are supported by this capability.  The Current
   Implementation section is intended to give examples of
   implementations of the capability, citing technology and standards
   current at the time of writing.  See [RFC3631].  It is expected that
   the choice of features to implement the capabilities will change over
   time.  The Considerations section lists operational and resource
   constraints, limitations of current implementations, tradeoffs, etc.

   [EDITORS NOTE: this is a first draft.  At least two editing passes
   will be made over the capabilities listed below in future drafts: one
   will break out compound capabilities into individual capabilities,
   the other will try to allign the supported practices with the
   practices listed in [I-D.practices]]

1.4  Definitions
   RFC 2119 Keywords
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
      in this document are to be interpreted as described in  [RFC2119].
      The use of the RFC 2119 keywords is an attempt, by the editor, to
      assign the correct requirement levels ("MUST", "SHOULD",
      "MAY"...).  It must be noted that different organizations,
      operational environments, policies and legal environments will
      generate different requirement levels.








Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


2.  Functional Capabilities

   The capabilities in this section are intended to list testable,
   functional capabilities that are needed to operate devices securely.

2.1  Basic Filtering Capabilities

2.1.1  Ability to Filter Traffic on All Interfaces

   Capability.

      The device provides a means to filter IP packets on any interface
      implementing IP.

   Supported Practices.

      *  Profile Current Traffic ([I-D.practices] Section x.x.x)
      *  Block Malicious Packets (Section 3.2)
      *  Limit Sources of Management (Section 3.3)

   Current Implementations.

      Many devices currently implement access control lists or filters
      that allow filtering based on protocol and/or source/destination
      address and or source/destination port and allow these filters to
      be applied to interfaces.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.2  Ability to Filter Traffic To the Device

   Capability.

      It is possible to apply the filtering mechanism to traffic that is
      addressed directly to the device via any of its interfaces -
      including loopback interfaces.

   Supported Practices.

      *  This allows the operator to apply filters that protect the
         device itself from attacks and unauthorized access.







Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


   Current Implementations.

      Many devices currently implement access control lists or filters
      that allow filtering based on protocol and/or source/destination
      address and or source/destination port and allow these filters to
      be applied to services offered by the device.
      Examples of this might include filters that permit only BGP from
      peers and SNMP and SSH from an authorized management segment and
      directed to the device itself, while dropping all other traffic
      addressed to the device.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.3  Ability to Filter Traffic To the Device - Minimal Performance
      Degradation

   Capability.

      The device provides a means to filter packets without significant
      performance degradation.  This specifically applies to stateless
      packet filtering operating on layer 3 (IP) and layer 4 (TCP or
      UDP) headers, as well as normal packet forwarding information such
      as incoming and outgoing interfaces.
      The device is able to apply stateless packet filters on ALL
      interfaces (up to the maximum number possible) simultaneously and
      with multiple filters per interface (e.g., inbound and outbound).
      The filtering of traffic destined to interfaces on the device,
      including the loopback interface, should not degrade performance
      significantly.

   Supported Practices.

      *  This enables the implementation of filters on whichever
         services necessary.  To the extent that filtering causes
         degradation, it may not be possible to apply filters that
         implement the appropriate policies.

   Current Implementations.

      Another way of stating the capability is that filter performance
      should not be the limiting factor in device throughput.  If a
      device is capable of forwarding 30Mb/sec without filtering, then
      it should be able to forward the same amount with filtering in
      place.




Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


   Considerations.

      The definition of "significant" is subjective.  At one end of the
      spectrum it might mean "the application of filters may cause the
      box to crash".  At the other end would be a throughput loss of
      less than one percent with tens of thousands of filters applied.
      The level of performance degradation that is acceptable will have
      to be determined by the operator.
      Repeatable test data showing filter performance impact would be
      very useful in evaluating this capability.  Tests should include
      such information as packet size, packet rate, number of interfaces
      tested (source/destination), types of interfaces, routing table
      size, routing protocols in use, frequency of routing updates, etc.
      This capability does not address stateful filtering, filtering
      above layer 4 headers or other more advanced types of filtering
      that may be important in certain operational environments.


2.1.4  Ability to Filter To the Device - Specify Filter Actions

   Capability.

      The device provides a mechanism to allow the specification of the
      action to be taken when a filter rule matches.  Actions include
      "permit" (allow the traffic), "reject" (drop with appropriate
      notification to sender), and "drop" (drop with no notification to
      sender).

   Supported Practices.

      *  This capability is essential to the use of filters to enforce
         policy.

   Current Implementations.

      Assume that your management devices for deployed networking
      devices live on several subnets, use several protocols, and are
      controlled by several different parts of your organization.  There
      might exist a reason to have disparate policies for access to the
      devices from these parts of the organization.
      Actions such as "permit", "deny", "drop" are essential in defining
      the security policy for the services offered by the network
      devices.

   Considerations.






Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005



      While silently dropping traffic without sending notification may
      be the correct action in security terms, consideration should be
      given to operational implications.  See [RFC3360] for
      consideration of potential problems caused by sending
      inappropriate TCP Resets.


2.1.5  Ability to Filter To the Device - Log Filter Actions

   Capability.

      It is possible to log all filter actions.  The logging capability
      is able to capture at least the following data:
      *  permit/deny/drop status
      *  source and destination IP address
      *  source and destination ports (if applicable to the protocol)
      *  which network element received the packet (interface, MAC
         address or other layer 2 information that identifies the
         previous hop source of the packet).


   Supported Practices.

      *  Logging is essential for auditing, incident response, and
         operations

   Current Implementations.

      Actions such as "permit", "deny", "drop" are essential in defining
      the security policy for the services offered by the network
      devices.  Auditing the frequency, sources and destinations of
      these attempts is essential for tracking ongoing issues today.

   Considerations.

      Logging can be burdensome to the network device, at no time should
      logging cause performance degradation to the device or services
      offered on the device.


2.1.6  Ability to Filter To the Device - Specify Log Granularity

   Capability.







Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


      It is possible to enable/disable logging on a per rule basis.

   Supported Practices.

      *  The ability to tune the granularity of logging allows the
         operator to log the information that is desired and only the
         information that is desired.  Without this capability, it is
         possible that extra data (or none at all) would be logged,
         making it more difficult to find relevant information.

   Current Implementations.

      If a filter is defined that has several rules, and one of the
      rules denies telnet (tcp/23) connections, then it should be
      possible to specify that only matches on the rule that denies
      telnet should generate a log message.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.7  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter Protocols

   Capability.

      The device provides a means to filter traffic based on the value
      of the protocol field in the IP header.

   Supported Practices.

      *  Being able to filter on protocol is necessary to allow
         implementation of policy, secure operations and for support of
         incident response.

   Current Implementations.

      Some denial of service attacks are based on the ability to flood
      the victim with ICMP traffic.  One quick way (admittedly with some
      negative side effects) to mitigate the effects of such attacks is
      to drop all ICMP traffic headed toward the victim.

   Considerations.

      None.






Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


2.1.8  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter Addresses

   Capability.

      The function is able to control the flow of traffic based on
      source and/or destination IP address or blocks of addresses such
      as Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) blocks.

   Supported Practices.

      *  The capability to filter on addresses and address blocks is a
         fundamental tool for establishing boundaries between different
         networks.

   Current Implementations.

      One example of the use of address based filtering is to implement
      ingress filtering per [RFC2827].

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.9  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter Protocol
      Header Fields

   Capability.

      The filtering mechanism supports filtering based on the value(s)
      of any portion of the protocol headers for IP, ICMP, UDP and TCP.
      It supports filtering of all other protocols supported at layer 3
      and 4.  It supports filtering based on the headers of higher level
      protocols.  It is possible to specify fields by name (e.g.,
      "protocol = ICMP") rather than bit- offset/length/numeric value
      (e.g., 72:8 = 1).

   Supported Practices.

      *  Being able to filter on portions of the header is necessary to
         allow implementation of policy, secure operations, and support
         incident response.

   Current Implementations.







Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


      This capability implies that it is possible to filter based on TCP
      or UDP port numbers, TCP flags such as SYN, ACK and RST bits, and
      ICMP type and code fields.  One common example is to reject
      "inbound" TCP connection attempts (TCP, SYN bit set+ACK bit clear
      or SYN bit set+ACK,FIN and RST bits clear).  Another common
      example is the ability to control what services are allowed in/out
      of a network.  It may be desirable to only allow inbound
      connections on port 80 (HTTP) and 443 (HTTPS) to a network hosting
      web servers.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.10  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Filter Inbound and
       Outbound

   Capability.

      It is possible to filter both incoming and outgoing traffic on any
      interface.

   Supported Practices.

      *  This capability allows flexibility in applying filters at the
         place that makes the most sense.  It allows invalid or
         malicious traffic to be dropped as close to the source as
         possible.

   Current Implementations.

      It might be desirable on a border router, for example, to apply an
      egress filter outbound on the interface that connects a site to
      its external ISP to drop outbound traffic that does not have a
      valid internal source address.  Inbound, it might be desirable to
      apply a filter that blocks all traffic from a site that is known
      to forward or originate lots of junk mail.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.11  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Accurately Count
       Filter Hits





Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


   Capability.

      The device supplies a facility for accurately counting all filter
      hits.

   Supported Practices.

      *  Accurate counting of filter rule matches is important because
         it shows the frequency of attempts to violate policy.  This
         enables resources to be focused on areas of greatest need.

   Current Implementations.

      Assume, for example, that a ISP network implements anti-spoofing
      egress filters (see [RFC2827]) on interfaces of its edge routers
      that support single-homed stub networks.  Counters could enable
      the ISP to detect cases where large numbers of spoofed packets are
      being sent.  This may indicate that the customer is performing
      potentially malicious actions (possibly in violation of the ISPs
      Acceptable Use Policy), or that system(s) on the customers network
      have been "owned" by hackers and are being (mis)used to launch
      attacks.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.12  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Display Filter
       Counters

   Capability.

      The device provides a mechanism to display filter counters.

   Supported Practices.

      *  Information that is collected is not useful unless it can be
         displayed in a useful manner.

   Current Implementations.

      Assume there is a router with four interfaces.  One is an up-link
      to an ISP providing routes to the Internet.  The other three
      connect to separate internal networks.  Assume that a host on one
      of the internal networks has been compromised by a hacker and is
      sending traffic with bogus source addresses.  In such a situation,
      it might be desirable to apply ingress filters to each of the



Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


      internal interfaces.  Once the filters are in place, the counters
      can be examined to determine the source (inbound interface) of the
      bogus packets.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.13  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Display Per Rule
       Counters

   Capability.

      The device provides a mechanism to display filter counters per
      rule.

   Supported Practices.

      *  This makes it possible to see which rules are matching and how
         frequently.

   Current Implementations.

      Assume that a filter has been defined that has two rules, one
      permitting all SSH traffic (tcp/22) and the second dropping all
      remaining traffic.  If three packets are directed toward/through
      the point at which the filter is applied, one to port 22, the
      others to different ports, then the counter display should show 1
      packet matching the permit tcp/22 rule and 2 packets matching the
      deny all others rule.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.14  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Display Filter
       Counters per Filter Application

   Capability.

      If it is possible for a filter to be applied more than once at the
      same time, then the device provides a mechanism to display filter
      counters per filter application.






Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


   Supported Practices.

      *  It may make sense to apply the same filter definition
         simultaneously more than one time (to different interfaces,
         etc.).  If so, it would be much more useful to know which
         instance of a filter is matching than to know that some
         instance was matching somewhere.

   Current Implementations.

      One way to implement this capability would be to have the counter
      display mechanism show the interface (or other entity) to which
      the filter has been applied, along with the name (or other
      designator) for the filter.  For example if a filter named
      "desktop_outbound" applied two different interfaces, say,
      "ethernet0" and "ethernet1", the display should indicate something
      like "matches of filter 'desktop_outbound' on ethernet0 ..." and
      "matches of filter 'desktop_outbound' on ethernet1 ..."

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.15  Ability to Filter To the Device - Ability to Reset Filter
       Counters

   Capability.

      It is possible to reset counters to zero on a per filter basis.
      For the purposes of this capability it would be acceptable for the
      system to maintain two counters: an "absolute counter", C[now],
      and a "reset" counter, C[reset].  The absolute counter would
      maintain counts that increase monotonically until they wrap or
      overflow the counter.  The reset counter would receive a copy of
      the current value of the absolute counter when the reset function
      was issued for that counter.  Functions that display or retrieve
      the counter could then display the delta (C[now] - C[reset]).

   Supported Practices.

      *  This allows operators to get a current picture of the traffic
         matching particular rules/filters.

   Current Implementations.






Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005



      Assume that filter counters are being used to detect internal
      hosts that are infected with a new worm.  Once it is believed that
      all infected hosts have been cleaned up and the worm removed, the
      next step would be to verify that.  One way of doing so would be
      to reset the filter counters to zero and see if traffic indicative
      of the worm has ceased.

   Considerations.

      None.


2.1.16  Ability to Filter To the Device - Filter Counters are Accurate

   Capability.

      Filter counters are accurate.  They reflect the actual number of
      matching packets since the last counter reset.  Filter counters
      are be capable of holding up to 2^32 - 1 values without
      overflowing and should be capable of holding up to 2^64 - 1
      values.

   Supported Practices.

      *  Inaccurate data can not be relied on as the basis for action.
         Underreported data can conceal the magnitude of a problem.

   Current Implementations.

      If N packets matching a filter are sent to/through a device, then
      the counter should show N matches.

   Considerations.

      None.















Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


3.  Additional Operational Practices

   This section describes practices not covered in [I-D.practices].
   They are included here to provide justification for capabilities that
   reference them.

3.1  Profile Current Traffic

   Discuss practice.  Use same format as [I-D.practices].

3.2  Block Malicious Packets

   Discuss practice.  Use same format as [I-D.practices].

3.3  Limit Sources of Management

   Discuss practice.  Use same format as [I-D.practices].


































Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


4.  Security Considerations
   General
      Security is the subject matter of this entire memo.  The
      capabilities listed cite practices in [I-D.practices] that they
      are intended to support.  [I-D.practices] defines the threat
      model, practices and lists justifications for each practice.













































Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


5.  References

5.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

5.2  Non-normative References

   [I-D.practices]
              Kaeo, M., "Operational Security Current Practices",
              Internet-Draft (to be published)
              draft-ietf-opsec-current-practices-00, February 2005.

   [RFC3631]  Bellovin, S. and J. Schiller, "Security Mechanisms for the
              Internet", RFC 3631, December 2003.

   [RFC3871]  Jones, G., "Operational Security Requirements for Large
              Internet Service Provider (ISP) IP Network
              Infrastructure", RFC 3871, September 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Christopher L. Morrow
   UUNET Technologies
   21830 UUNet Way
   Ashburn, Virginia  21047
   U.S.A.

   Phone: +1 703 886 3823
   Email: chris@uu.net


   George M. Jones
   The MITRE Corporation
   7515 Colshire Drive, M/S WEST
   McLean, Virginia  22102-7508
   U.S.A.

   Phone: +1 703 488 9740
   Email: gmjones@mitre.org









Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The editors gratefully acknowledges the contributions of:
   o  xxx
   o  yyy
   o  The MITRE Corporation for supporting development of this document.
      NOTE: The editor's affiliation with The MITRE Corporation is
      provided for identification purposes only, and is not intended to
      convey or imply MITRE's concurrence with, or support for, the
      positions, opinions or viewpoints expressed by the editor.
   o  Others who have provided significant feedback are: zzz
   o  This listing is intended to acknowledge contributions, not to
      imply that the individual or organizations approve the content of
      this document.
   o  Apologies to those who commented on/contributed to the document
      and were not listed.



































Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           Filtering Capabilities            February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Morrow & Jones           Expires August 16, 2005               [Page 21]

