

Internet Research Task Force                                  P. Sherbin
Internet-Draft                                                       RCI
Intended status: Informational                           August 10, 2007
Expires: February 11, 2008


              Elements of The Internet Architecture
                       draft-sherbin-eia-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 11, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

















Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


Abstract

   This document outlines the Internet architecture that can scale to
   interconnect a very large number of communicating devices. It aims
   at presenting a holistic view of the Internet various parts from
   routing to number management as well as their interdependencies. The
   draft also indicates the Internet cost drivers and cost vectors.

1.  Introduction

   "Report from the IAB Workshop on Routing and Addressing" at 67th IETF
   (RAWS-REPORT) has highlighted the routing scalability problem in the
   current Internet. A series of drafts submitted over the last 7 months
   (LISP, EFIT, SIX-ONE, APT, IDLOC, PROBLEM,…) indicates a strong
   interest in resolving the issue. Other factors such as the expected
   deployment of IPv6 that may increase the number of interconnected 
   devices by orders of magnitude, Provider Independent addressing,
   Multihoming, Traffic Engineering, etc. signify urgency of the issue.
   The problem itself is not new and has an extended and well
   documented history (NIMROD, GSE, 8+8, ENDPOINTS,…].

   This document defines the basic elements of the Internet leveraging
   128 bit IPv6 address [RFC2460], [RFC4291] as well as the current
   address distribution [ARIN]. The draft also indicates how and what
   cost drivers have an impact on interdependent components of the
   Internet. The draft does not discuss specific business or pricing
   models as such topics belong outside of IETF.

2.  Definition of Terms and Roles

   Communicating Entity (CE): an individual or a group willing to send
      or receive messages via the Internet. General public or
      businesses are the example.

   Object of Interest (OI): any object that a CE may have an interest
      in identifying.

   Communicating Device (CD): an engineered system serving as an
      original source or an ultimate destination of packets.
   
   The Internet: integration of otherwise distinct parts
      1. CDs
      2. routers
      3. physical links connecting 1. and 2.
      4. numeric identifiers
      5. power sources

   The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA): a body that allocates
      numeric identifiers for the actual use on the Internet.


Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


   Regional Internet Registry (RIR): an organization that receives
      numeric identifiers from IANA for further distribution to CEs and
      ISPs residing in the RIR’s serving area.

   Internet Services Provider (ISP): a business that owns a part of the 
      Internet, except for numeric identifiers, and provides CEs with
      an access to it in exchange for a fee.

   Autonomous System (AS): a routing domain under a single
      administration that aggregates all its subnets to its Autonomous
      System Number.
      
   Autonomous System Number (ASN): a globally unique 16 bit identifier
      of an AS used in the exchange of exterior routing information
      between adjacent ASes.

   Universal Identification Number (UIN): a globally unique 96 bit
      integer assigned to a person or an object. 4 most significant bits
      of UIN specify geography of its origin. 34 next significant bits
      identify a CE to which the UIN is assigned. 58 least significant
      bits of UIN are used by the CE for assignments to OIs.

   IP Address: a globally unique 128 bit integer composed by a CD as a 
      part of IP packet header. Source IP address includes 16 bit ASN,
      16 bit subnet and 96 bit UIN of the sending CD. Destination IP
      address includes 16 bit ASN, 16 bit subnet and 96 bit UIN of the
      receiving CD.

3.  Elements and principles of the Internet Architecture

3.1.  Universal Identification Numbers (UINs)

      o IANA allocates UINs to RIRs from the global UIN space.

      o A RIR assigns UINs to a requesting CE or an ISP on a permanent
        basis.

      o A CE obtains a UIN from a RIR serving the area of the CE's 
        permanent residence in a form of 96 bit integer with 58 least 
        significant bits represented by zeroes.

      o A CE modifies 58 least significant bits of an UIN to uniquely
        identify one or more OIs.

3.2.  Addressing and Routing

      o IANA allocates ASNs to RIRs from the global ASN space.

      o A RIR assigns an ASN to a requestor, typically an ISP, on a 
        temporary basis.


Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


      o A CE can request an ASN. The CE that has an ASN must announce
        it globally and allow traffic from other ASes to traverse its
        network.

      o An ISP creates a network of routers that serve as access points.
        Each access point is a subnet with a unique 32 bit identifier, 
        where 16 most significant bits represent an ASN of the ISP. The
        maximum number of access points for an ISP is 65,536. The
        theoretical maximum number of all access points is 4,294,967,296
        or 8.42 access points per each square kilometer of Earth’s
        surface.

      o An ISP connects CDs of a CE to an access point via a wired or a
        wireless data link.

      o When an access point discovers a new CD it provides this CD
        with the access point’s 32 bit identifier. The CD creates its 
        IP address by combining 32 bit identifier of the access point
        with CD's UIN. When a CD disconnects, the access point
        deprecates an IP address of that CD.

      o To send the first packet a CD must already know the destination
        IP address.

4.  Cost Considerations of the Internet Communication

4.1.  Cost Drivers

      o The Internet serves as a facility for CEs to move data from
        point A to B. The amount of transferred data is measured in
        bits. Consequently a bit can serve as a common denominator for
        all of the Internet communication costs, which can be expressed
        as an X amount of dollars per bit.
     
4.2.  Cost Vectors

      o A CE willing to send a message may incur content production
        costs as well as delivery costs.

      o A CE willing to receive a message may incur delivery costs.

      o ISPs and CEs with ASNs may incur costs of building and / or
        operating their networks.

      o IANA may incur admin costs while serving RIRs.

      o RIRs may incur admin costs while serving CEs and ISPs.





Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   Under the above principles a CE is expected to protect an UIN
   assigned to it as private information. Introduction of UINs is not
   expected to have a negative impact on security issues known to date.

6.  IANA Considerations

   The above principles suggest that IANA manages allocation of both
   UINs and ASNs to RIRs.

7.  Acknowledgments

   To all who ever contributed to the Internet, IETF, RFC process and
   tools.





































Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


8. Informative References

   [ARIN]    ARIN Number Resource Policy Manual, Version 2007.1,
             http://www.arin.net/policy/nrpm.html, 28 March 2007.

   [RFC826]  Plummer, D., "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol or
             Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
             Address for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", RFC 826,
             November 1982.

   [RFC1930]  Hawkinson, J. and T. Bates, "Guidelines for creation,
              selection, and registration of an Autonomous System
              (AS)", BCP 6, RFC 1930, March 1996.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC2608]  Guttman, E., Perkins, C., Veizades, J., and M. Day, 
             "Service Location Protocol, Version 2", RFC 2608, 
             June 1999.

   [RFC3146]  Fujisawa, K., and A. Onoe, "Transmission of IPv6 Packets
              over IEEE 1394 Networks", RFC 3146, October 2001.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R., and S. Deeing, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC3531]  Blanchet, M., "A Flexible Method for Managing the
              Assignment of Bits of an IPv6 Address Block ", RFC 3513,
              April 2003.

   [RFC4632]  Fuller, V. and T. Li, "Classless Inter-domain Routing
              (CIDR): The Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation
              Plan", BCP 122, RFC 4632, August 2006.


















Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


Author's Address

   Peter Sherbin
   RCI

   Email: peter.sherbin@rci.rogers.com














































Sherbin                  Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Elements of the Internet Architecture      August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).






Sherbin               Expires February 11, 2008                 [Page 8]
