



Network Working Group                                       Paul Francis
                                                (formerly Paul Tsuchiya)
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  Bellcore
                                                               June 1993


                           Pip Host Operation


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts).

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be Updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
   Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.


Abstract

   Pip is an internet protocol intended as the replacement for IP
   version 4.  Pip is a general purpose internet protocol, designed to
   handle all forseeable internet protocol requirements.  This
   specification is one of a number of documents that specify the
   operation of Pip.  This specification describes the operation of Pip
   hosts.  In particular, it describes how a Pip host picks among
   multiple Pip Addresses, and how a Pip host responds to various PCMP
   Packet Not Delivered (PDN) messages.


Conventions

   All functions in the main body of this specification are mandatory.
   The functions in the appendix are optional, but if they are not
   implemented, some function that provides the information expected by
   addressListCreate must be implemented..



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 1]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


1.  Overview

   This specification defines two host functions associated with the
   task of choosing the appropriate source and destination addresses for
   a given communications.  The first function, called
   addressListCreate, creates an ordered list of source/destination Pip
   address pairs given certain locally configured information and infor-
   mation learned about the destination host from DNS or the destination
   host's mobile host server.

   The second function, called addressListUse, chooses among the ordered
   list based on information given to it by routers in response to
   packet transmissions.

   The partitioning of address choosing into these two functions allows
   for nice modularity in implementation.  For instance, addressListUse
   could exist inside the kernel while addressListCreate could be out-
   side the kernel, or in another machine altogether, for instance the
   Pip Header Server.  It also allows evolution of the addressListCreate
   function (for instance, in the Pip Header Server) while still allow-
   ing hosts to respond to PCMP messages.

   This document specifies the addressListUse function in the main body,
   but places the addressListCreate function in an appendix.  The reason
   for this is because the addressListCreate function specified here is
   fairly naive, and is considered to be experimental.  It is expected
   that significant evolution of the addressListCreate function will
   occur as the internet gains experience with commercialization and
   real-time services.



2.  addressListUse: Host Selection of Source and Destination Pip Address
Pairs Among an Ordered List

   Assume that the following information has been obtained from the
   function addressListCreate:

   1.   An ordered list of source and destination Pip address pairs to
        potentially use for the communications.  Associated with each
        Pip address pair is a marking of strong or weak preference.  All
        of the strong preference addresses are preferred over the weak
        preference addresses.  The same source or destination Pip
        address may appear multiple times in the ordered list, but a
        given source address/destination address pair may appear only



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 2]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


        once.

   2.   Information about the destination from DNS, including the fol-
        lowing:

   2a.  The Pip ID of the destination host.

   2b.  The names of any mobile host servers associated with the desti-
        nation host.

   2c.  The exit PDN addresses, if any, associated with each of the des-
        tination Pip addresses.

   2d.  The Time-to-Live of the DNS information.

   Given this list, the Pip layer chooses among the ordered list of
   source Pip addresses (and destination Pip addresses) to use in the
   transmitted Pip packets.  There are a number of criteria that are
   considered when choosing.  The basic rule is that, in general, Pip
   address pairs higher in the list are preferred over Pip address pairs
   lower in the list.  Pip address pairs lower in the list can be used,
   however, when Pip address pairs higher in the list cannot be
   delivered or are overridden for one of several reasons.

   The following list of rules are used to choose the appropriate Pip
   address pair.

   1.   If a Pip address pair has strong preference, a lower-preference
        Pip address pair may be used only when the higher-preference Pip
        address pair is unreachable.  Unreachability is indicated by
        PCMP Packet Not Delivered messages.  All address pairs tagged as
        unreachable are retagged as reachable after a period of time.

   2.   Host-driven exit routing is always used with a strong-preference
        Pip address pair.

   3.   Transit-driven exit routing is always used with a weak-
        preference Pip address pair.

   4.   Consider a Pip address pair received from the destination host
        with an exit routing subfield bit set to 0 (host-driven).  If
        the received Pip address pair matches a strong-preference entry
        from the list, then this entry is used in preference to a higher
        list entry.  If the received Pip address pair matches a weak-
        preference entry from the list, then this entry is used in



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 3]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


        preference to a higher weak-preference list entry, but is not
        used in preference to a strong-preference list entry.

   5.   All weak-preference address pairs are tagged as either good-
        route or bad-route.  A weak-preference address pair is tagged as
        bad-route if a Border Redirect is received in response to a
        packet sent with the address pair.  Otherwise, the address pair
        is tagged as good-route.  All bad-route tags are changed to
        good-route after some period of time.  An address pair tagged
        good-route is always preferred over one tagged bad-route.



2.1.  Formatting a Pip Header for Exit Routing

   If the source and destination share a metalevel=0 cluster, then the
   format of the Active FTIF and RC depend on the type of exit routing
   [2].  There are two types of exit routing, that is, routing inter-
   domain Pip packets from a source host to a network service provider
   of a private domain.  In the first method, called transit-driven exit
   routing, the source host leaves the choice of provider to the
   routers.  In the second method, called host-driven exit routing, the
   source host explicitly chooses the provider.

   If host-driven exit routing is chosen, then the Active FTIF is set to
   point at the top (last FTIF) of the source Pip Address.  The exit
   routing type subfield of the RC is set to 0, to indicate host-driven
   exit routing (and thus potentially "override" the routers' best path
   to the destination).  The level and metalevel subfields of the RC are
   set to 0.

   When using transit-driven exit routing, there are two modes of opera-
   tion.  The first, called destination-oriented, is used when the
   routers internal to a domain have external routing information.  The
   second, called provider-oriented, is used when the routers internal
   to a domain do not have any external routing information.  Hosts
   learn whether intra-domain routing is destination-oriented or
   provider-oriented as part of Pip Address auto-configuration.

   With provider-oriented (transit-driven) exit routing, the fields are
   set the same as with host-driven exit routing, except that the exit
   routing type subfield of the RC is set to 1.

   With destination-oriented (transit-driven) exit routing, if there are
   multiple source providers, then the fields are set the same as with



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 4]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   provider-oriented exit routing.  If there is only one provider (and
   therefore only one address prefix above the metalevel=0 boundary),
   the Active FTIF is set to point at the first FTIF of the destination
   Pip Address, the exit routing type subfield of the RF is set to 1,
   and the level and metalevel subfields of the RC are set to 0.



2.2.  Responding to PCMP Packet Not Delivered (PND) Messages

   In the course of transmitting packets to a destination, PCMP PND mes-
   sages may be received [1].  The reception of PCMP PND messages may
   result in 1) new source/destination address pairs being used, 2) the
   packet being reformatted but with the same source/destination address
   pair, 3) a new list of source/destination address pairs being gen-
   erated, or 4) no more attempts at packet delivery.  This section
   describes which actions are taken for the various types of PCMP PND
   messages.

   The PCMP PND message types are shown in Table I.  The actions taken
   as a result of a PCMP PND message fall into four broad categories:

   1.   Those where reformatting the packet, but keeping the same
        source/destination address pair, may result in successful
        delivery.  In these cases, none of the source/destination
        address pairs need be marked as unreachable.  Instead, the
        packet should be reformatted as appropriate according to the
        PCMP PND message received.  PCMP PND types that may fall into
        this category are codes 1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 19.

   2.   Those where nothing, including modifying the source/destination
        address pair, can result in successful delivery of the packet.
        This is often the case where the destination host can be reached
        using the given source/destination address pair, but refuses the
        packet for some reason.  In this case, the application is simply
        informed of the inability to communicate.  PCMP PND types that
        may fall into this category are codes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 12,
        13, 14, and 15.

   3.   Those where none of the source/destination address pairs is ade-
        quate for successful packet delivery, but where new
        source/destination address pairs may be obtained, either from
        the mobile host server or from DNS.  PCMP PND types that may
        fall into this category are codes 7, 8, 10, 16, 18, and 20.




Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 5]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993



           Code   Meaning
           ----   -------
            1     Options Contents Unknown
            2     Individual Option Unknown
            3     Protocol (doesn't exist)
            4     Protocol (administratively prohibited)
            5     Port (doesn't exist)
            6     Port (administratively prohibited)
            7     Dest ID (known not to exist)
            8     Dest ID (known to have moved)
            9     Dest ID (administratively prohibited)
            10    Dest ID (otherwise)
            11    Hop Count Expired
            12    HD Contents Unknown
            13    Individual HD Parameter Unknown
            14    RC Contents Unknown
            15    Individual RC Parameter Unknown
            16    FTIF (known not to exist)
            17    FTIF (administratively prohibited)
            18    FTIF (otherwise)
            19    MTU Exceeded
            20    Exit PDN Address Unreachable

             Table I: PCMP Packet Not Delivered Message Types


   4.   Those where changing the source/destination address pair to
        another one in the given list is adequate for successful
        delivery of the packet.  PCMP PND types that may fall into this
        category are codes 7, 10, 16, 17, 18, and 20.

   It is categories 3 and 4 that are of interest here because it is by
   changing the source/destination pair to be used that packet delivery
   might be achieved.

   When a PCMP PND message of type 10, 18, or 20 (particularly 18) is
   received, a host may continue to use the same address pair for a
   while, in the hope that the reason for non-delivery may be short-
   lived.  In what follows, we assume that the reason for non-delivery
   is not short-lived, and that the host takes action with regards to
   the received PCMP PND message.

   The following list indicates how to respond to the above PCMP PND
   types.



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 6]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   1.   Codes 7 and 16, Dest ID or FTIF known not to exist.  When either
        of these messages are received, the source host re-queries DNS.
        This happens regardless of the stated of the DNS Time-to-Live
        information.  (That is, even if the Time-to-Live indicates that
        the DNS information is still valid, DNS should be re-queried.)

        If the Time-to-Live indicates that the original DNS information
        has expired, then a non-authoritative query is made.  If the
        Time-to-Live indicates that the original DNS information has not
        expired, then an authoritative query is made.  If the DNS infor-
        mation returned from the non-authoritative query matches the
        original DNS information, then an authoritative query is made.

        If the DNS information returned from the authoritative query
        matches the original DNS information, and the PCMP message is
        Code 7, then the destination host cannot be reached and the
        application is informed as such.  If the PCMP message is Code
        16, then all entries with the bad destination address are marked
        unreachable, and other source/destination pairs are tried.

        It should be apparent that the purpose of Codes 7 and 16 are to
        give an on-demand indication of when DNS information for a host
        or a group of hosts has changed.  In the case of Code 7, an
        individual host has obtained a new (permanent) set of Pip
        addresses, resulting in new DNS entries for that host.  Code 7
        is typically returned by the router attached to the subnet that
        the destination host was formerly attached to, or by a host that
        has the Pip address previously owned by the desired destination
        host.  In the case of Code 16, the address prefix of a group of
        hosts has been de-assigned.  This would be the case where a sub-
        scriber network disconnected from a particular provider, thus
        making the subscriber's prefix from that provider invalid.  The
        provider may keep the prefix unassigned for a period of time
        long enough to allow DNS entries to time out.  During this time,
        the provider's routers can be configured to return PCMP PND mes-
        sages with Code 16 for that particular prefix.

   2.   Code 8, Dest ID known to have moved.  This PCMP PND message is
        delivered by a router attached to the subnet of the permanent
        location of the destination when the destination has 1) moved to
        a new location, and has 2) informed the router that it has
        moved.  Note that it may inform the router before it moves.

        Upon reception of this PCMP PND message, the host queries the
        mobile host server learned from DNS.  If there is no mobile host



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 7]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


        server for the destination host, all source/destination pair
        entries whose low-order metalevel part matches that of the
        attempted destination address are marked as unreachable.  (The
        low-order metalevel part is the sequence of FTIFs starting with
        the low-order FTIF and including all FTIFs below the lowest
        metalevel boundary.  Normally, all of a host's addresses will
        have the same low-order metalevel part.  The exception to this
        rule is when the host is attached to more than one subnet.)

        If all of the source/destination address pairs are marked
        unreachable, then the destination host cannot be reached and the
        application is informed as such.

   3.   Code 10, Dest ID, all circumstances other than Codes 7, 8, and
        9.  This PCMP PND message is sent when the router attached to
        the subnet indicated by the Pip address cannot reach the host,
        and the reason is unknown.  In this case, the source host does
        not know if the destination host has moved temporarily, has a
        new permanent address, or has simply crashed, been powered down,
        or has a bad interface.  (If the router has a bad interface,
        then it will return a Code 18, indicating the lowest level FTIF,
        that is, the subnet, as unreachable.)

        When this PCMP PND message is received, all source/destination
        pair entries whose low-order metalevel part matches that of the
        attempted destination address are marked as unreachable (same as
        with item 2 above).

        If this results in all source/destination pair entries being
        marked as unreachable, and the destination host has a mobile
        host server, then the mobile host server is queried to determine
        if the destination host has a new temporary address.  If the
        destination host does not have a new temporary address, and the
        DNS Time-to-Live for that host has expired, then DNS is
        requeried (first with a non-authoritative query, followed by an
        authoritative query if new information is not obtained).

        If none of the above actions results in new destination
        addresses to try, then the destination host cannot be reached
        and the application is informed as such.

   4.   Codes 17 and 18, FTIF, either administratively prohibited or
        undeliverable for unknown reason.

        When one of these PCMP PND messages is received, any



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 8]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


        source/destination address pair that contains the bad FTIF is
        marked as unreachable.  In order to "contain" the bad FTIF, the
        chain of FTIFs from the FTIF indicated by the PCMP PND message
        up to the FTIF immediately below the next higher metalevel boun-
        dary must match.

        If all source/destination address pairs are marked unreachable,
        then the actions in item 3 above for the same circumstances are
        taken.

   5.   Code 20, Exit PDN Address Unreachable.  This PCMP PND message is
        sent when the entry router to a Public Data network cannot com-
        municate with the exit router specified by the Exit PDN Address
        option.  When this PCMP PND message is received, the Exit PDN
        Address information associated with the provider is marked as
        unreachable.  If all of the Exit PDN Addresses for a given pro-
        vider are marked as unreachable, then then all
        source/destination address pairs with a destination address
        associated with the provider are marked as unreachable.

        If all source/destination address pairs are marked unreachable,
        then the actions in item 3 above for the same circumstances are
        taken.

        After a period of time, the Exit PDN Address information is
        marked as reachable.  This may cause a previously unreachable
        source/destination address pair to become reachable.



3.  Forming Exit PDN Address Options

   To be filled in.


   References
   [1]  Francis, Govindan, "PCMP: Pip Control Message Protocol",
        Internet-Draft
   [2]  Francis, "Pip Address Conventions", Internet-Draft









Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                  [Page 9]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


4.  Appendix A: addressListCreate--Forming an Ordered List of Source and
Destination Pip Address Pairs

   This appendix gives an experimental version of the addressListCreate
   function.  It is expected that this function will evolve considerably
   as experience with commercialization and real-time service is gained.

   The following information is used by function addressListCreate:

   1.   The Pip addresses of the source host (obtained from local confi-
        guration).

   2.   The Pip addresses of the destination host (obtained from DNS and
        the destination host's mobile host server).

   3.   The user classes that the traffic falls under (such as research,
        corporate private).

   4.   The desired price/performance tradeoff--that is, one of 1) best
        price, 2) best performance, and 3) best price/performance.

   5    The application type (for instance, telnet, ftp, vat, and so
        on).

   6.   Information about the destination from DNS, including the fol-
        lowing:

   6a.  The Pip ID of the destination host.

   6b.  The names of any mobile host servers associated with the desti-
        nation host.

   6c.  The exit PDN addresses, if any, associated with each of the des-
        tination Pip addresses.

   6d.  The Time-to-Live of the DNS information.

   7.   A provider preference given by the application (or user behind
        the application).

   8.   Other optional information, such as topology information or
        local policy and tariff information.  Such information is not
        specified in this document.

   The following information is associated with the provider indicated



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 10]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   by the first FTIF of any Pip address (note that this is not neces-
   sarily the top-level of the Pip address, as there may be a route
   fragment associated with the Pip address [2]):

   1.   The provider name.

   2.   The service provider switching technology type (such as Pip,
        X.25, Frame Relay, and so on).

   3.   The user communities that the provider services.

   Given the above information, function addressListCreate executes the
   following steps (described in detail below).  First, it determines if
   the source and destination are within the same cluster below
   metalevel boundary 0.  If they are, then no provider decision need be
   made, and the creation of the source/destination address pair list is
   trivial.

   If the source and destination are not in the same metalevel cluster,
   then a provider decision must be made.  This involves considering the
   actual providers, the service they provide versus the service
   required by the application, and any access restrictions on the part
   of either user or provider.  This decision is entirely a local
   matter, and it is expected that this process will become more
   involved as experience is gained.  This document proposes a simple
   but perhaps limited approach.

   First, the addresses associated with unacceptable providers (either
   source or destination) are eliminated.  Note that a given provider
   can have multiple addresses--representing different services pro-
   vided.  The remaining addresses, are then paired into all possible
   combinations.  The address pairs are then ordered according to such
   criteria as commonality between source and destination, price, and
   other provider preference criteria.

4.1.  First Step: Determine if Destination is in a Metalevel>0 Cluster

   The purpose of this step is to determine if the destination is within
   the private network (or possibly a portion of the private network,
   for lower metalevel clusters), or on the same LAN.  If the destina-
   tion is within a metalevel>0 cluster, then no decisions have to be
   made about choice of address prefix--the higher order part of the
   address is pruned, and the packet is transmitted without regard to
   exit routing.




Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 11]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   To determine if the destination is on the same LAN, the host compares
   each of its Pip Addresses with each of the destination's.  If any of
   the Pip Addresses for the source completely match one of those for
   the destination, then the destination is assumed to be on the same
   LAN.

   If the destination is determined to be on the same LAN, then no FTIF
   Chain is necessary.  The level and metalevel fields of the RC are set
   to be that of the LAN.  The Active FTIF field is set to be 0.  The
   Exit Routing Type bit of the RC is set to be 1.  The packet is
   transmitted directly to the destination host (possibly after ARPing
   first).

   If, based on this comparison, the destination is determined not to be
   on the same LAN, the source's and destination's Pip addresses are
   compared to see if they are in the same metalevel cluster.

   Two hosts are in the same metalevel cluster if any of the
   destination's prefixes (the FTIFs from the top level to the FTIF
   above the metalevel boundary) match any of the source's prefixes.
   Two hosts are in the same metalevel=n cluster if this test holds true
   for metalevel=n and not metalevel=n+1.  If the test holds true for
   metalevel=n, then it must also hold true for all metalevels less than
   n (where, again, n=0 is the highest metalevel).

   If the destination host is in the same metalevel>0 cluster, then it
   does not need any of the address prefix above the metalevel boundary
   in the Pip header.  There is no exit provider selection in this case,
   so the exit routing type subfield of the RC is set to 1.  The Active
   FTIF field is set to point at the highest FTIF of the destination
   address, which must be at level=0 and metalevel=n, where n is the
   metalevel cluster the source and destination have in common.

   The destination or source host may have multiple different low-order
   metalevel parts.  If both source and destination have only one multi-
   ple low-order metalevel part, then only one source/destination
   address pair is generated.  If either destination or source have mul-
   tiple low-order metalevel parts, then there will be multiple
   source/destination address pairs in the list generated.  All entries
   in the list should have the same preference type (weak or strong).
   Since no exit routing takes place for internal traffic, the prefer-
   ence type does not matter.

   The list should contain all possible combinations of
   source/destination address pairs.  However, source/destination



Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 12]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   address pairs with more common high order FTIFs should have prefer-
   ence over those with fewer common high order FTIFs.  Among different
   source/destination address pairs with the same number of common high
   order FTIFs, the order of preference in the list is a local decision.
   In general, a random selection will result in load balancing.

   The remaining steps are not necessary if the source and destination
   share a metalevel>0 cluster.



4.2.  Second Step: Eliminate Unusable Addresses by Access Restriction

   The next step is to eliminate any individual source or destination
   addresses that do not meet requirements.  This can be either because
   1) the user (or this particular application) is restricted from using
   the provider, or 2) the user wishes not to use a certain provider.
   In the future, the service provided by the provider will increasing
   be used as an elimination criteria.



4.3.  Third Step: Label Desirability of Source Address by Performance

   In this step, each source address is labeled according to its ability
   to satisfy the service requirements of the application.  The avail-
   able performance levels are satisfactory (S), adequate (A), and
   inadequate (I).  The information used to determine the labeling is 1)
   application type, 2) provider switching technology type, and 3) pro-
   vider name.  It is a local matter how this labeling is determined.



4.4.  Fourth Step: Label Desirability of Source Address by Price

   In this step, each source address is labeled according to its cost.
   The available cost categories are expensive (E), cheap (C), and free
   (F).  It may be possible to rank order the individual addresses
   within each of these categories.  It is expected that the source
   address will be the primary determining factor with respect to cost.








Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 13]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


4.5.  Fifth Step: Rank Order Source Addresses

   In this step, the source addresses are rank ordered according to
   desired price/performance.  If price is preferred over performance,
   then the ranking is FS, FA, FU, CS, CA, ES, CU, EA, and EU, where the
   first letter indicates price, and the second letter indicates perfor-
   mance.  If performance is preferred over price, then the ranking is
   FS, CS, ES, FA, CA, FU, EA, CU, and EU.  If price and performance
   should be balanced, then the ranking is FS, CS, FA, CA, ES, EA, FU,
   CU, and EU.



4.6.  Sixth Step: Match Destination Addresses with Source Addresses

   In this step, the source addresses ranked in the previous step are
   associated with destination addresses, thus producing a set of
   source/destination address pairs.  Each pair is labeled according to
   the quality of match.

   A pair of addresses is considered a best match if the source and des-
   tination share the same provider (according to the provider name).
   Two addresses share the same provider is any of the providers in one
   address match any of the providers in another address.  (An address
   has multiple providers if there is a route fragment in the address
   [2].)

   A pair of addresses is considered a good match if 1) it is not a best
   match, and 2) all of the source and destination providers are of the
   same switching technology type, or any of the source providers are of
   type IP (any version).

   A pair of addresses is considered a bad match otherwise.



4.7.  Seventh Step: Rank Order and Label Address Pairs

   Finally, the source/destination address pairs are rank ordered and
   labeled according to strong and weak preference.  The ordering fol-
   lows the following rules:

   1.   Pairs with best or good matching are ordered before pairs with
        bad matching.




Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 14]






INTERNET-DRAFT             Pip Host Operation                   May 1993


   2.   Otherwise, pairs with higher ranked source addresses are ordered
        before pairs with lower ranked source addresses.

   3.   Otherwise, pairs with best matching are ordered before pairs
        with good matching.

   Address pairs are given a strong preference marking if it is desired
   that 1) the choice of source provider over-ride an alternative choice
   found by the routers, or 2) the address pair be used even if the des-
   tination host uses a different address pair in its packets.  Address
   pairs are given a weak preference marking otherwise.





































Pip WG, Expires December, 1993                                 [Page 15]


