



     ROAMOPS Working Group                                    Bernard Aboba
     INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Microsoft Corporation
     <draft-ietf-roamops-actng-00.txt >
     27 February 1997


                       The Accounting Problem in Roaming


     1.  Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working docu-
     ments of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),  its  areas,  and
     its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute work-
     ing documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  months
     and  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  reference  mate-
     rial or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     To  learn  the  current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts  Shadow
     Directories   on   ds.internic.net   (US  East  Coast),  nic.nordu.net
     (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

     The  distribution  of  this memo is unlimited.  It is filed as <draft-
     ietf-roamops-actng-00.txt>, and  expires September  1,  1997.   Please
     send comments to the authors.


     2.  Abstract

     This document describes the accounting problems that arise in the pro-
     vision of inter-provider services, such as provision of dialup roaming
     capabilities.  These  include  issues  relating  to standardization of
     accounting record formats, and inter-provider transfers of  accounting
     record  bundles.   Work relevant to the solution of these problems are
     reviewed, and recommendations are made  on  the  direction  of  future
     standardization work.


     3.  Introduction


     3.1.  Terminology

     This document frequently uses the following terms:

     Network Access Server
               The  Network  Access Server (NAS) is the device that clients
               dial in order to get access to the network.





     Aboba                                                         [Page 1]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     Accounting
               The goal of network accounting is to accurately measure  and
               record  metrics  relevant  to  the analysis of usage and the
               billing of users and organizations.

     Accounting Protocol
               A protocol used for the communication of accounting  events.

     Full Service Accounting Protocol
               An  accounting  protocol  that  in addition to communicating
               accounting events provides for  encryption  and  signing  of
               accounting  data,  as  well as signed receipts. Full service
               accounting protocols are desirable for use in  inter-organi-
               zational accounting .

     Intra-organizational accounting event
               An  intra-organizational  accounting  event  is one which is
               generated by the local ISP's users. Session  records  gener-
               ated  by  the  users of the local ISP are transferred within
               the local ISP's organization, usually to an internal billing
               server, where they are rated and processed for bill present-
               ment.

     Inter-organizational accounting event
               An inter-organizational accounting event  is  one  which  is
               generated  by  users from outside the local ISP's domain. In
               order to be compensated for these events, the local ISP must
               securely transfer them to an appropriate settlement agent.

     Billing   The  goal  of  billing  is to correctly compute and promptly
               convey charges based on accounting data.

     Settlement
               The goal of settlement is to correctly compute and  promptly
               convey  charges  based  on  inter-organizational  accounting
               events.

     Accounting Gateway
               The Accounting Gateway is a server which receives accounting
               data  from  network  devices  such  as  a NASes and routers,
               translates this data into session records,  and  routes  the
               session  records  to  intra and inter-organizational billing
               servers.


     3.2.  Roaming accounting requirements

     In the architecture described above, it is likely that the  accounting
     gateway,  internal  billing servers, and settlement agent will need to
     handle a large flow of events. For example, if a  roaming  association
     has  10 members, each of whom have 100,000 users, and 5 percent of all
     transactions involve roaming, then if the users  log  in  20  times  a
     month, each billing server will need to handle approximately 2 million
     records/month and the settlement agent will need to handle  1  million



     Aboba                                                         [Page 2]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     records/month.   For  this  reason,  it  is  very  important  that the
     accounting record formats be compact and  the  transfer  processes  be
     efficient.

     Given that large sums of money may change hands as a result of roaming
     accounting transfers, it  is  highly  desirable  that  the  accounting
     records  be  transferred  securely  and  robustly. In order to address
     security  concerns,  it  is  desirable  for  an   inter-organizational
     accounting  transfer protocol to support "full service" functions such
     as mutual  authentication;   signing  of  accounting  record  bundles;
     signed  receipts  for  accounting  record transfers; and encryption of
     accounting record bundles. Accounting gateways will also  need  to  be
     able  to  reliably  route accounting record bundles to the appropriate
     destinations.

     Since intra-organizational accounting events do  not  cross  organiza-
     tional boundaries, "full service" accounting transfer features such as
     digital signing of accounting bundles and non-repudiation  of  receipt
     typically  are not required, although it is highly desirable that both
     inter and intra-organizational accounting transfers exhibit the  char-
     acteristics  of  high reliability transaction processing systems, such
     as  atomicity,  consistency,  isolation  and  durability  (ACID),   as
     described in [5].

     Durability  implies  that  an inter or intra-organizational accounting
     transfer protocol must be able to recover from a  variety  of  faults,
     including partially completed transfers and non-supported metrics.

     It  is desirable that accounting record formats be flexible. While the
     standard accounting record format must be able to encode metrics  com-
     monly  used  by  ISPs  in  determining  a user's bill, it must also be
     extensible so that other metrics can be added in  the  future.   These
     metrics  may  either  be IETF-standard metrics, or they may be vendor-
     specific metrics.  Since it is possible  that  the  accounting  record
     format  will itself evolve over time, or that multiple formats will be
     in common use, it is necessary  that  the  type  and  version  of  the
     accounting  record  be  communicated  as part of the accounting record
     transfer.


     4.  Overview of the roaming accounting architecture

     The goal of the roaming accounting architecture is to enable  ISPs  to
     be  compensated for use of the their network infrastructure by roaming
     users. The accounting architecture, which  is  shown  below,  involves
     interactions  between  network  devices  such  as  NASes  and routers,
     accounting  gateways,  billing  and  audit  servers,  and   settlement
     servers.

     In  this  architecture,  local  ISPs  operating accounting gateways in
     order to translate  between  the  accounting  protocols  used  by  NAS
     devices  and routers and the roaming standard accounting record format
     and transfer method. Local ISP accounting gateways are also  responsi-
     ble for summarizing checkpoint events into session records, as well as



     Aboba                                                         [Page 3]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     routing accounting events.

     Accounting events originating on a local ISP fall into two categories:
     intra-organizational  accounting events, which are events generated by
     local customers; and inter-organizational accounting events, which are
     events generated by customers from other domains. One of the functions
     of the accounting gateway is to distinguish between the two  types  of
     events and route them appropriately. For accounting events originating
     on a local ISP, Intra-organizational accounting events are  routed  to
     the local billing server, while inter-organizational accounting events
     will be routed to the settlement agent.

     While it is not required that the accounting record  formats  used  in
     inter  and intra-organizational accounting transfers be the same, this
     is highly desirable, since this elminates translations that would oth-
     erwise be required.

     In the roaming accounting architecture, the function of the settlement
     agent is to compute charges owed  by  member  organizations.  While  a
     roaming  consortium may act as the settlement agent, it is also possi-
     ble for ISPs to settle among themselves.  When the settlement  agent's
     accounting  gateway  receives inter-organizational events from a local
     ISP's accounting gateway, it  routes  the  events  to  the  settlement
     server, in addition to sending copies to the home ISP. Copies are pro-
     vided in order to enable  the  home  ISP  to  audit  settlement  agent
     charges, as well to bill back to the originating domain.

     Once  received  by the home ISP, the copied accounting records will be
     processed by the home ISP's billing and audit server,  and  will  also
     typically be copied to the originating organization.



























     Aboba                                                         [Page 4]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


          +------------+      +------------+          +------------+
          |            |      |            |          |            |
          |    ISPB    |      |  ISPA      |          |    ISPA    |
          |   Router   |      |  Billing & |<---------|   Acctg.   |
          |            |      |  Audit     |          |   Gateway  |
          |            |      |  Server    |          |            |
          +------------+      +------------+          +------------+
                |                                            ^
                |                                            |
     Accounting |                                            |
     Protocol   |                     Inter-organizational   |
     (RADIUS,   |                       Accounting Events    |
     SNMP,      |                                            |
     Syslog,    |                                            |
     TACACS+,   |                                            |
     etc.)      |                                            |
                |                                            |
                V                                            V
          +------------+                               +------------+
          |            |                               |            |
          |    ISPB    |      Inter-organizational     |  ISPGROUP  |
          |   Acctg.   |<----------------------------->|   Acctg.   |
          |   Gateway  |\       Accounting Events      |  Gateway   |
          |            | \                             |            |
          |            |  \                            |            |
          +------------+   \                           +------------+
                ^           \                                |
                |            \ Intra-organizational          |
     Accounting |             \   Accounting Events          |
     Protocol   |              \                             |
     (RADIUS,   |               \                            |
     SNMP,      |                \                           |
     Syslog,    |                 \                          |
     TACACS+,   |                  \                         |
     etc.)      |                   \                        |
                |                    \                       V
          +------------+      +------------+           +------------+
          |            |      |            |           |            |
          |     ISPB   |      |    ISPB    |           |  ISPGROUP  |
          |     NAS    |      |  Billing & |           | Settlement |
          |            |      |    Audit   |           |   Server   |
          |            |      |   Server   |           |            |
          +------------+      +------------+           +------------+


     5.  Accounting transfer protocol recommendation

     The  requirements  for  roaming  accounting  record  transfers closely
     resemble the requirements for interoperable Internet Electronic  Docu-
     ment  Interchange (EDI), as described in [12], since both applications
     may transmit encrypted and signed entities, and  request  and  receive
     signed  receipts.  Since these features are also of interest in a wide
     variety of EDI and Electronic Commerce (EC) applications,  the  EDIINT
     working  group  has  been  chartered to standardize their use over the



     Aboba                                                         [Page 5]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     Internet. For further  information  on  the  mechanisms  proposed  for
     secure EDI over the Internet, please consult references [6] - [12].

     Given  the close correspondence between the work of the EDIINT working
     group and the requirements for roaming accounting record transfer,  it
     is  proposed that the ROAMOPS working group consider adoption of MIME-
     based Secure EDI, as described in [11], for "full service"  accounting
     record transfers.

     Since  Secure  MIME-enabled mail servers are expected to become widely
     available in the next year, use of this technology will enable a "full
     service" accounting transfer method to be made available in relatively
     short order. Since it is  likely  that  this  technology  will  become
     available  sooner  than  it would be possible for the ROAMOPS group to
     develop a secure accounting transfer method based on alternative secu-
     rity  techniques  (such as shared secrets), it is recommended that the
     group focus on use of Secure MIME as  an  accounting  record  transfer
     mechanism.

     It  should  be  noted that in order to make use of the techniques pro-
     posed in [11], it is not required that accounting record formats  con-
     form  to  EDI  standards such as UN/EDIFACT or EDI X.12, although this
     may be desirable in some circumstances.  What is required  is  that  a
     MIME type be defined for the accounting record format.

     When  MIME-based secure EDI is used to transfer accounting record bun-
     dles between organizations, it is  recommended  that  the  bundles  be
     encrypted  as  well as signed, and that a signed receipt be requested.
     Either S/MIME or PGP/MIME may be used to accomplish this.

     Since MIME-based secure EDI requires public key  authentication  tech-
     nology,  a  mechanism must be provided for acquiring the public key of
     the participants in an exchange. While DNS Security can  be  used  for
     this  purpose,  this  is  not required, since in roaming messages need
     only be sent between entities with a pre-existing  business  relation-
     ship.  As  a result, it is possible to statically configure accounting
     gateways with the required public keys.

     With MIME-based secure EDI, the  accounting  records  are  transferred
     using  S/MIME  or  PGP/MIME over SMTP. Since SMTP server technology is
     mature, it is believed that this method can satisfy durability as well
     as security requirements.


     5.1.  Case study

     Let  us  assume  that we have a roaming user Fred, who works at BIGCO.
     BIGCO has established a relationship with ISPA,  who  has  joined  the
     roaming  consortia  ISPGROUP.  Fred now travels to another part of the
     world and wishes to dial in to the network provided by ISPB.

     ISPB will account for Fred's resource usage, and will submit a session
     record  to ISPGROUP for compensation. ISPGROUP will in turn bill ISPA,
     who will bill BIGCO. Eventually BIGCO will pay  ISPA,  ISPA  will  pay



     Aboba                                                         [Page 6]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     ISPGROUP,  and  ISPGROUP  will  pay ISPB.  In order for all parties to
     verify that they have been properly charged or compensated for  Fred's
     session, the following events must occur:

          ISPB:      Network devices generate accounting data for Fred
          ISPB:      Accounting gateway generates a session record for Fred
          ISPB:      Accounting gateway routes the session record to
                     ISPGROUP and to the local billing server
          ISPB:      Billing server processes the session record,
                     credits ISPGROUP account
          ISPGROUP:  Accounting gateway routes the session record to the
                     settlement server and to ISPA
          ISPGROUP:  Settlement server processes the session record,
                     debits ISPA account, credits ISPB account
          ISPA:      Accounting gateway routes the session record to the
                     local billing server and to BIGCO
          ISPA:      Billing server processes the session record,
                     debits BIGCO account, debits ISPGROUP account
          BIGCO:     Accounting gateway routes the session record to the
                     local billing server
          BIGCO:     Billing server processes the session record,
                     debits Fred's account, debits ISPA account.

     Each of these events is discussed below.


     5.2.  ISPB network devices generate accounting data for Fred

     In  order  to keep track of network resources consumed by Fred, ISPB's
     accounting gateway will collect accounting data  produced  by  network
     devices  such  as routers and NASes. This data may be produced in many
     forms, and may be communicated via a variety of  protocols,  including
     RADIUS,  TACACS+,  SNMP, and SYSLOG. The accounting data may be trans-
     mitted from network devices to the accounting gateway (as  in  RADIUS,
     TACACS+,  SYSLOG,  or  SNMP traps), or the accounting gateway may poll
     for the data (via SNMP GETs).

     Accounting data may refer to resources consumed over  the  life  of  a
     session,  or  it may be a checkpoint event. Checkpoint events refer to
     resource consumption at a specific point in time, rather  than  repre-
     senting  a  summary  of  resources  consumed  over a session. Prior to
     transfer to a billing server or settlement  agent,  checkpoint  events
     are typically summarized into a session record.


     5.3.  ISPB accounting gateway generates a session record for Fred

     Since  there is currently no standards-track network accounting proto-
     col, ISP accounting practices vary  more  widely  than  authentication
     practices,  where  RADIUS authentication is very widely deployed. As a
     result, it appears difficult to standardize on an accounting  protocol
     that  can  be  used  for  communication  between ISPs and a settlement
     agent. Therefore, the roaming accounting architecture anticipates that
     while  ISPs  will  use  an  accounting  protocol  of  their  choice to



     Aboba                                                         [Page 7]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     communicate accounting information between  network  devices  and  the
     accounting gateway, a standardized accounting record format and trans-
     fer method will be used for communication between accounting gateways.

     In  order  to  allow for transmission of accounting information to the
     settlement agent,  ISPB  will  summarize  the  accounting  information
     relating to Fred's session in a standard session record format.


     5.4.   ISPB  accounting  gateway routes the session record to ISPGROUP
     and to the local billing server

     ISPB's accounting gateway examines Fred's session record,  and  routes
     it  to the appropriate destinations. It does this based on whether the
     accounting records refer to transactions occurring  within  the  ISP's
     organization,  or whether they refer to transactions occurring between
     organizations. In this case, since Fred is a roaming user, this is  an
     inter-organizational accounting event, and the accounting gateway will
     send session record to the settlement agent, as well as to  the  local
     biling  server.  In  this example, the settlement agent is run by ISP-
     GROUP, but it could just as easily be run by ISPA, in which  case  the
     two ISPs would settle directly.

     When  routing  accounting  record  bundles,  ISPB's accounting gateway
     machine will operate as an S/MIME or PGP/MIME-enabled SMTP server.  In
     order to improve efficiency, the accounting gateway will sort account-
     ing records into bundles prior to mailing them to  their  destination.
     When a suitable bundle of accounting records has been accumulated, the
     accounting gateway will initiate the transfer. In  this  case,  Fred's
     accounting record will be sent to multiple destinations.

     While  intra-organizational  accounting  transfers  typically will not
     require signed accounting bundles or signed  receipts,  it  still  may
     prove  useful  to  request  that a receipt be generated in order to be
     able to confirm the success of the  transfer.  Use  of  receipts  will
     allow an accounting gateway to keep track of discrepancies between the
     number of accounting record bundles it believes were successfully sent
     to  the  local  billing  server, and the number of receipts collected.
     These discrepancies can be used to detect partially completed account-
     ing record transfers and to retransmit them.

     When  used  to  transfer an accounting record bundle to the settlement
     agent, ISPB will encrypt the bundle, as well as signing it,  and  will
     request a signed receipt.



     5.5.   ISPB  billing server processes the session record, credits ISP-
     GROUP account

     In order to allow itself to  audit  the  charges  and/or  compensation
     offered by ISPGROUP, ISPB's billing server will process Fred's session
     record and credit the ISPGROUP account.  If SMTP is used  to  transmit
     the  session record between the accounting gateway and billing server,



     Aboba                                                         [Page 8]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     then the billing server will need to retrieve  the  accounting  record
     bundle  from its mailbox and process it, sending a receipt in response
     to the accounting gateway's request.


     5.6.  ISPGROUP accounting gateway routes the  session  record  to  the
     settlement server and to ISPA

     Once ISPGROUP receives the signed and encrypted accounting record bun-
     dle from ISPB, it will send back a signed receipt as requested, and in
     addition  will verify the signature, decrypt the bundle, and then send
     copies to the settlement server as well as to ISPA. This  is  done  in
     order to enable ISPA to audit the bill received from ISPGROUP, as well
     as to bill back BIGCO for the charges. In transferring the  accounting
     record bundle to ISPA, ISPGROUP will encrypt it, and sign it, in addi-
     tion to requesting a receipt.


     5.7.  ISPGROUP settlement server processes the session record,  debits
     ISPA account, credits ISPB account

     ISPGROUP's  settlement  server  processes the session record, and as a
     result, ISPA's account is debited, and ISPB's account is credited.  If
     SMTP  is  used  to  transmit  the  session  record  between ISPGROUP's
     accounting gateway and the  settlement  server,  then  the  settlement
     server  will  need  to  retrieve the accounting record bundle from its
     mailbox and process it, sending a receipt in response to the  account-
     ing gateway's request.


     5.8.   ISPA  accounting gateway routes the session record to the local
     billing server and to BIGCO

     Once ISPA has received the signed accounting record bundle  from  ISP-
     GROUP,  it  will send back a signed receipt as requested, and in addi-
     tion will verify the signature, decrypt  the  bundle,  and  then  send
     copies  to  the local billing server as well as to BIGCO. This is done
     in order to enable BIGCO to audit the bill for Fred's usage.In  trans-
     ferring  the  accounting record bundle to BIGCO, ISPA will encrypt it,
     and sign it, in addition to requesting a receipt.


     5.9.  ISPA billing server processes the session record,  debits  BIGCO
     account, debits ISPGROUP account

     ISPA's  billing  server processes the session record, and as a result,
     BIGCO's account is debited, and ISPGROUP's account  is  also  debited.
     If  SMTP  is used to send the session record between ISPA's accounting
     gateway and the billing server, then the billing server will  need  to
     retrieve the accounting record bundle from its mailbox and process it,
     sending a receipt in response to the accounting gateway's request.






     Aboba                                                         [Page 9]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     5.10.  BIGCO accounting gateway routes the session record to the local
     billing server

     Once BIGCO has received the signed accounting record bundle from ISPA,
     it will send back a signed receipt as requested, and in addition  will
     verify the signature, decrypt the bundle, and then forward the message
     to the local billing server.


     5.11.  BIGCO billing  server  processes  the  session  record,  debits
     Fred's account, debits ISPA account

     BIGCO's  billing server processes the session record, and as a result,
     Fred's account is debited, as is ISPA's account.  If SMTP is  used  to
     transit  the session record between BIGCO's accounting gateway and the
     billing server, then the billing server  will  need  to  retrieve  the
     accounting  record  bundle  from its mailbox and process it, sending a
     receipt in response to the accounting gateway's request.


     6.  Accounting record formats

     In order to allow for accounting record bundles between organizations,
     it is necessary to provide for a standard accounting record format.


     6.1.  NVT ASCII formats

     Today  most  accounting  records  are in NVT ASCII, often with a fixed
     record format. This has the advantage of being easy to read and debug,
     as  well as being easy to parse. However, the use of a fixed format is
     a substantial liability, since new accounting metrics are  continually
     emerging.

     In  order  to  provide  for extensibility, it is possible to specify a
     fixed format for the initial portion of the accounting  record,  while
     allowing  additional  metrics to be added via use of appropriate tags.
     In order to allow a record to extend over multiple lines, it is possi-
     ble  to specify that lines beginning with one or more spaces should be
     considered a continuation of the previous line.

     Most NVT ASCII accounting formats now in use consume  between  60  and
     140 octets per record. However, these records are highly compressible,
     often exhibiting compression ratios of 3:1 or greater,  so  that  when
     compressed accounting bundles are transmitted, space consumption of 50
     octets/record is frequently achievable.


     6.2.  Binary formats

     Via use of Attribute Value Pairs (AVPs), binary accounting record for-
     mats  are  easily  engineered for extensibility, and as a result, they
     are popular for  use  in  accounting  protocols  such  as  RADIUS  and
     TACACS+.  Via  use  of  a  vendor field, it is possible to ensure that



     Aboba                                                        [Page 10]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     vendor-specific metrics will not conflict with IETF-defined accounting
     metrics,  and  assuming  that  suitable  space  is left for length and
     attribute fields, it is possible to  allow  for  representation  of  a
     large number and variety of accounting metrics.

     Since  NAS  devices  and  routers typically provide accounting data in
     binary format, binary accounting records can  typically  be  generated
     more  easily  than  NVT  ASCII records. Similarly, billing servers can
     process these records more efficiently, since less parsing and conver-
     sion is required.

     Binary  accounting  records  are  also typically more compact than NVT
     ASCII formats, although this advantage is reduced when compression  is
     employed.   Although binary accounting records are typically compress-
     ible, they are typically much less compressible  than  equivalent  NVT
     ASCII formats.


     6.3.  Example accounting metrics

     Examples of accounting metrics include:

          User Name (String; the user's ID, including prefix or suffix)
          NAS IP address (Integer; the IP address of the user's NAS)
          NAS Port (Integer; identifies the physical port on the NAS)
          Service Type (Integer; identifies the service provided to the user)
          NAS Identifier (Integer; unique identifier for the NAS)
          Delay Time (Integer; time client has been trying to send)
          Input Octets (Integer; in stop record, octets received from port)
          Output Octets (Integer; in stop record, octets sent to port)
          Session ID (Integer; unique ID identifying the session)
          Authentication (Integer; indicates how user was authenticated)
          Session Time (Integer; in stop record, seconds of received service)
          Input Packets (Integer; in stop record, packets received from port)
          Output Packets (Integer; in stop record, packets sent to port)
          Termination Cause (Integer; in stop record, indicates termination cause)
          Multi-Session ID (String; for linking of multiple related sessions)
          Link Count (Integer; number of links up when record was generated)
          NAS Port Type (Integer; indicates async vs. sync ISDN, V.120, etc.)



     7.  Acknowledgements

     Thanks  to Glen Zorn of Microsoft for useful discussions of this prob-
     lem space.


     8.  References

     [1]  B. Aboba, J. Lu, J. Alsop, J. Ding.  "Review of Roaming Implemen-
     tations."  draft-ietf-roamops-imprev-01.txt, Microsoft, Aimnet, i-Pass
     Alliance, Asiainfo, January, 1997.




     Aboba                                                        [Page 11]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     [2]  B. Aboba, G. Zorn.  "Dialing Roaming  Requirements."  draft-ietf-
     roamops-roamreq-02.txt, Microsoft, January, 1997.

     [3]   C. Rigney, A. Rubens, W. Simpson, S. Willens.  "Remote Authenti-
     cation Dial In User Service (RADIUS)." RFC  2058,  Livingston,  Merit,
     Daydreamer, January, 1997.

     [4]   C.  Rigney.  "RADIUS Accounting." RFC 2059, Livingston, January,
     1997.

     [5]  J. Gray, A. Reuter. Transaction Processing:  Concepts  and  Tech-
     niques, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, California, 1993.

     [6]   R. Fajman. "An Extensible Message Format for Message Disposition
     Notifications."  draft-ietf-receipt-mdn-02.txt, National Institute  of
     Health, November, 1996.

     [7]  M.  Elkins.  "MIME  Security with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)." RFC
     2015, The Aerospace Corporation, October, 1996.

     [8] G. Vaudreuil. "The Multipart/Report Content Type for the Reporting
     of  Mail System Administrative Messages." RFC 1892, Octel Network Ser-
     vices, January, 1996.

     [9] J. Galvin., et al. "Security Multiparts for MIME: Multipart/Signed
     and Multipart/Encrypted." RFC 1847, Trusted Information Systems, Octo-
     ber, 1995.

     [10] D. Crocker. "MIME Encapsulation of EDI Objects." RFC 1767,  Bran-
     denburg Consulting, March, 1995.

     [11]  M.  Jansson,  C. Shih, N. Turaj, R. Drummond. "MIME-based Secure
     EDI." draft-ietf-ediint-as1-02.txt, LiNK, Actra, Mitre Corp,  Drummond
     Group, November, 1996.

     [12] C. Shih, M. Jansson, R. Drummond, L. Yarbrough. "Requirements for
     Inter-operable  Internet  EDI."  draft-ietf-ediint-req-01.txt,  Actra,
     LiNK, Drummond Group, May, 1995.

      [13]  R.  Fielding, et al.  "Hypertext Transfer Protocol - HTTP/1.1."
     draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-07, UC Irvine, August, 1996.

     [14] A. Gulbrandsen, P. Vixie.  "A DNS RR for specifying the  location
     of  services  (DNS  SRV)."  RFC 2052, Troll Technologies, Vixie Enter-
     prises, October 1996.

     [15] D. Eastlake, 3rd, C. W. Kaufman.  "Domain  Name  System  Security
     Extensions." Draft-ietf-dnnsec-secext-10.txt, CyberCash, Iris, August,
     1996.

     [16] B. Aboba. "The Roaming Relationships  (RR) Record in the  DNS.  "
     draft-ietf-roamops-dnsrr-00.txt, Microsoft, February, 1997.

     [17]  C.  Rigney, W. Willats.  "RADIUS Extensions." draft-ietf-radius-



     Aboba                                                        [Page 12]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        27 February 1997


     ext-00.txt, Livingston, January, 1997.

     [18] R. Rivest, S. Dusse.  "The  MD5  Message-Digest  Algorithm",  RFC
     1321,  MIT  Laboratory  for  Computer Science, RSA Data Security Inc.,
     April 1992.

     [19] S. Bradner.  "Key words for use in RFCs to  Indicate  Requirement
     Levels."  draft-bradner-key-words-02.txt,  Harvard University, August,
     1996.


     9.  Authors' Addresses

     Bernard Aboba
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 206-936-6605
     EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com





































     Aboba                                                        [Page 13]


