


Inter-Domain Routing                                           G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                           October 4, 2008
Intended status: Informational
Expires: April 7, 2009


              AS Number Reservation for Documentation Use
             draft-ietf-idr-as-documentation-reservation-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 7, 2009.

Abstract

   To reduce the likelihood of conflict and confusion when relating
   documented examples to deployed systems, two blocks of Autonomous
   System numbers (ASNs) are reserved for use in examples in RFCs,
   books, documentation, and the like.  This document describes the
   reservation of two blocks of ASNs as reserved numbers for use in
   documentation.


1.  Introduction

   To reduce the likelihood of conflict and confusion when relating
   documented examples to deployed systems, two blocks of Autonomous



Huston                    Expires April 7, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        ASN Documentation Reservation         October 2008


   System numbers (ASNs) are reserved for use in examples in RFCs,
   books, documentation, and the like.  This document describes the
   reservation of two blocks of ASNs as reserved numbers for use in
   documentation.

   The problems such conflicts may cause have already been encountered
   with IPv4 addresses where literal use of documented examples in a
   production environment causes address and routing conflicts with
   existing services.  Since private use ASNs already have a context of
   use in deployed networks, these ASNs cannot be used in many example
   situations.  In making an explicit allocation of a set of AS numbers
   reserved for documentation use, it is intended that any such
   operational problems may be avoided in the future.

   Similar considerations have been applied to IPv4 addresses
   [IANA.IPv4], IPv6 addresses [RFC3849], and domain names names
   [RFC2606], and reservations have been made for similar purposes.


2.  ASNs for Documentation Use

   To allow documentation to accurately describe deployment examples,
   the use of public or private-use AS numbers is inappropriate, and a
   reserved block of AS numbers is required.  This ensures that
   documentation does not clash with public or private use AS numbers in
   deployed networks, and mitigates the risks to operational integrity
   of the network through inappropriate use of documentation to perform
   literal configuration of routing elements on production systems.

   To allow for examples relating to the transition to use of 32-bit AS
   numbers to be correctly described a reservation of two blocks of AS
   numbers is proposed in this document.  One reserved block of 16
   contiguous AS numbers is to lie in the range of numbers that can be
   expressed as a 16-bit AS number value (i.e. values less than 65536),
   and a second reserved block of 16 contiguous AS numbers is to lie in
   the range of numbers that can only be expressed as 32-bit AS numbers
   (values greater than 65535).


3.  Operational Implications

   This assignment implies that BGP operational configurations should
   not peer with neighboring ASes that are numbered from this reserved
   AS number set.







Huston                    Expires April 7, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        ASN Documentation Reservation         October 2008


4.  IANA Considerations

   [Note to IANA, not for publication: The IANA may wish to consider
   reserving the AS numbers 64496 - 64511 and 65536-65551 (1.0 - 1.15
   using "asdot" notation) for this purpose.]

   IANA is requested to reserve a contiguous block of 16 Autonomous
   System numbers from the unallocated number range within the "16-bit"
   number set, 1 - 64512, and to reserve a contiguous block of 16
   Autonomous System numbers from the "32-bit" number set, 65536 -
   4294967294, and documentation this reservation in the IANA AS Number
   Registry [IANA.AS].


5.  Security Considerations

   AS number reservations do not have any direct impact on Internet
   infrastructure security.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The author acknowledges the work of Tomoya Yoshida, Gaurab Upadhaya
   and Philip Smith in authoring a policy proposal that was submitted to
   the APNIC Policy Process in 2008 relating to the reservation of AS
   numbers for documentation purposes.


7.  Informative References

   [IANA.AS]  IANA, "Autonomous System (AS) Numbers", Sep 2008,
              <http://www.iana.org/assignments/as-numbers/>.

   [IANA.IPv4]
              IANA, "IPv4 Global Unicast Address Assignments", Sep 2008,
              <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv4-address-space/>.

   [RFC2606]  Eastlake, D. and A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS
              Names", BCP 32, RFC 2606, June 1999.

   [RFC3849]  Huston, G., Lord, A., and P. Smith, "IPv6 Address Prefix
              Reserved for Documentation", RFC 3849, July 2004.









Huston                    Expires April 7, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        ASN Documentation Reservation         October 2008


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston

   Email: gih@apnic.net














































Huston                    Expires April 7, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        ASN Documentation Reservation         October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Huston                    Expires April 7, 2009                 [Page 5]

