
L3VPN Working Group                                        Y. El Mghazli
Internet-Draft                                                   Alcatel
Expires: April 2005                                            T. Nadeau
                                                                   Cisco
                                                            M. Boucadair
                                                          France Telecom
                                                                 K. Chan
                                                                  Nortel
                                                              A. Gonguet
                                                                 Alcatel
                                                          September 2004


             Framework for L3VPN Operations and Management
                      draft-ietf-l3vpn-mgt-fwk-03

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract




El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   This document provides a framework for operation and management of
   Layer 3 Virtual Private Networks (L3VPNs).  This framework intends to
   produce a coherent description of the significant technical issues
   that are important in the design of L3VPN management solutions.
   Selection of specific approaches, making choices among information
   models and protocols are outside of the scope of this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1   Specification of Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3   Management functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.4   Reference Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Service Operations and Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.1   Customer Service Management Information Model  . . . . . .  9
     2.2   Customer Management Functions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.2.1   Fault Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.2.2   Configuration Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.2.3   Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.4   Performance Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.5   Security Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.6   Management Access Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.7   Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.3   Customer Management Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.1   L3VPN Service Offering Management  . . . . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.2   L3VPN Service Order Management . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       2.3.3   L3VPN Service Assurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   3.  Provider Network Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     3.1   Provider Network Management Definition . . . . . . . . . . 15
     3.2   Network Management Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       3.2.1   Fault Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.2.2   Configuration Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.2.3   Provisioning Routing-based Configuration
               Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       3.2.4   Provisioning Access-based Configuration Information  . 17
       3.2.5   Provisioning Security Services-based Configuration
               Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       3.2.6   Provisioning VPN Resource Parameters . . . . . . . . . 18
       3.2.7   Provisioning Value-Added Service Access  . . . . . . . 18
       3.2.8   Provisioning Hybrid VPN Services . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     3.3   Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     3.4   Performance Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     3.5   Security Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   4.  L3VPN Devices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     4.1   Information model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     4.2   Communication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 26















































El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


1.  Introduction

1.1  Specification of Requirements

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.2  Terminology

   In this document, the following terms are used and defined as
   follows:

   VPN:
      Virtual Private Network.  A set of transmission and switching
      resources, which will be used over a shared infrastructure to
      process the (IP) traffic that characterizes communication services
      between the sites or premises interconnected via this VPN.  See
      [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-ppvpn-terminology].

   PPVPN:
      Provider Provisioned VPN denotes VPNs for which a service provider
      participates in provisioning and management.  See
      [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-ppvpn-terminology] and [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-framework].

   L3VPN:
      A L3VPN is a VPN that interconnects several sets of hosts and
      routers and allow them to communicate based on their L3 addresses.
      See [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-ppvpn-terminology] and
      [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-framework].

   VPN Instance:
      From a management standpoint, a VPN instance is the collection of
      configuration information associated with a specific VPN, residing
      on a PE router.

   VPN Site:
      A VPN customer's location connected to the Service Provider
      network via a CE-PE link, which can access at least one VPN.

   VPN Service Provider (SP):
      A Service Provider that offers VPN-related services.







El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   VPN Customer:
      Refers to a customer that bought VPNs from a VPN service provider.

   Customer Agent:
      Denotes the entity that is responsible for requesting VPN customer
      specific information.

   Service Level Agreement(SLA):
      Contractual agreement between Service Provider and Customer, which
      includes qualitative and quantative metrics defining service
      quality garantuees and retribution procedures when service levels
      are not being met.

   Service Level Specifications (SLS):
      Internally-focused service performance specifications used by the
      Service Provider to manage customer service quality levels.

1.3  Management functions

   For any type of Layer-3 VPN (PE or CE-based VPNs) it is recommended
   to have a management platform where the VPN-related information could
   be collected and managed.  The Service and Network Management System
   may centralize information related to instances of a VPN and allow
   users to configure and provisions each instance from a central
   location.

   A SP must be able to manage the capabilities and characteristics of
   their VPN services.  Customers should have means to ensure
   fulfillment of the VPN service they subscribed to.  To the extent
   possible, automated operations and interoperability with standard
   management protocols should be supported.

   Two main management functions are identified:

   A customer service management function:

      This function provides the means for a customer to query,
      configure, and receive (events/alarms) customer-specific VPN
      service information.  Customer specific information includes data
      related to contact, billing, site, access network, IP address,
      routing protocol parameters, etc.  It may also include
      confidential data, such as encryption keys.  Several solutions
      could be used:

      *  Proprietary network management system
      *  SNMP manager
      *  PDP function




El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


      *  Directory service, etc.


   A provider network management function:

      This function is responsible for planning, building, provisioning,
      and maintaining network resources in order to meet the VPN
      service-level agreements outlined in the SLA offered to the
      customer.  This mainly consists of (1) setup and configuration of
      physical links, (2) provisioning of logical VPN service
      configurations, and (3) life-cycle management of VPN service
      including adding, modifying, and deleting VPN configurations.

      There may be relationships between the customer service management
      function and the provider network management function, as the
      provider network is managed to support/realize/provide the
      customer service.  One example use of this relationship is to
      provide the VPN-SLS assurance for verifying the fulfillment of the
      subscribed VPN agreement.

1.4  Reference Models

   The ITU-T Telecommunications Management Network has the following
   generic requirements structure:

   o  Engineer, deploy and manage the switching, routing and
      transmission resources supporting the service, from a network
      perspective (network element management);
   o  Manage the VPNs deployed over these resources (network
      management);
   o  Manage the VPN service (service management);




















El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Service      +-------------+                   :      +----------+
      Management   |   Service   |<------------------:----->| Customer |
      Layer        |   Manager   |                   :      | Agent    |
                   +-------------+                   :      +----------+
      - - - - - - - - - - ^ - - - - - - - - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Network             |       +------------+     :
      Management          |       |  Provider  |     :
      Layer               |       |  Network   |  Customer
                          +------>|  Manager   |  Interface
                                  +------------+     :
      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ^ - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Network Element                   |            :
      Management                        |  +------+  :  +------+
      Layer                             |  |      |  :  |  CE  |
                                        +->|  PE  |  :  |device|
                                           |device|  :  |  of  |
                                           |      |--:--|VPN  A|
                                           +------+  :  +------+
      ---------------------------------------------->:<----------------
                     SP network                      :  Customer Network

        Figure 1: Reference Model for PE-based L3VPN Management




























El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Service      +-------------+                   :      +----------+
      Management   |   Service   |<------------------:----->| Customer |
      Layer        |   Manager   |                   :      | Agent    |
                   +-------------+                   :      +----------+
      - - - - - - - - - - ^ - - - - - - - - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Network             |       +------------+     :
      Management          |       |  Provider  |     :
      Layer               |       |  Network   |  Customer
                          +------>|  Manager   |  Interface
                                  +------------+     :
      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -^- - - -^- - - -:- - - - - - - - -
      Network Element                |       +-------:---------------+
      Management                     |     +------+  :  +------+     |
      Layer                          |     |      |  :  |  CE  |     |
                                     +---->|  PE  |  :  |device|<----+
                                           |device|  :  |  of  |
                                           |      |--:--|VPN  A|
                                           +------+  :  +------+
      ---------------------------------------------->:<----------------
                     SP network                      :  Customer Network

        Figure 2: Reference Model for CE-based L3VPN Management

   Figure 1 and Figure 2 above present the reference models for both PE
   and CE-based L3VPN management, according to the aforementioned
   generic structure.

   In both models, the service manager administrates customer specific
   attributes, such as customer Identifier (ID), personal information
   (e.g., name, address, phone number, credit card number, etc.),
   subscription services and parameters, access control policy
   information, billing and statistical information, etc.

   In the PE-based reference model, the provider network manager
   administrates device attributes and their relationship, covering PE
   devices and other devices constructing the corresponding PE-based
   VPN.

   In the CE-based reference model, the provider network manager
   administrates device attributes and their relationship, covering PE
   and CE devices constructing the corresponding CE-based VPN.

   Network and customer service management systems that are responsible
   for managing VPN networks have several challenges depending on the
   type of VPN network(s) they are required to manage.





El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


2.  Service Operations and Management

   The Customer Management function's goal is managing the	service-based
   operations like service ordering, service subscription, activation,
   etc.

   The Customer Management function resides in the L3VPN service manager
   at the Service Management Layer (SML).  It mainly consists of
   defining the L3VPN services offered by the SP, collecting and
   consolidating the customer L3VPN services requirements, as well as
   performing some reporting for the customer.  This function is
   correlated with the Network Management function at the Network
   Management Layer (NML) for initiating the L3VPN services
   provisioning, and getting some service reporting.

2.1  Customer Service Management Information Model

   This section presents the information model that is used for L3VPN
   service management at the SML.  The information models represent the
   data that need to be managed, and the way they are represented.  At
   the SML, the information model that is foreseen is composed of
   Service Level Agreements (SLA) and Service Level Specifications
   (SLS).

   Services are described through Service Level Agreements (SLA) that
   are contractual documents between customers and service providers.
   The technical part of the service description is called the Service
   Level Specification (SLS).  The SLS groups different kinds of
   parameters.  Some are more related to the description of the
   transport of the packets, and some to the specification of the
   service itself.

   A Service Level Specification (SLS) may be defined per access network
   connection, per VPN, per VPN site, and/or per VPN route.  The service
   provider may define objectives and the measurement intervals for at
   least the SLS using the following Service Level Objective (SLO)
   parameters:

   o  QoS and traffic parameters
   o  Availability for the site, VPN, or access connection
   o  Duration of outage intervals per site, route or VPN
   o  Service activation interval (e.g., time to turn up a new site)
   o  Trouble report response time interval
   o  Time to repair interval
   o  Total incoming/outgoing traffic from a site, a (VPN) route or that
      has transited through the whole VPN
   o  Measurement of non-conforming incoming/outgoing traffic
      (compliance of traffic should deserve some elaboration, because of



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                    [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


      many perspectives - security, QoS, routing, etc.) from a site, a
      (VPN) route, or which has transited through the whole VPN

   The service provider and the customer may negotiate contractual
   penalties in the case(s) where the provider does not meet a (set of)
   SLS performance objective(s).

   Traffic parameters and actions should be defined for incoming and
   outgoing packets that go through the demarcation between the service
   provider premises and the customer's premises.  For example, traffic
   policing functions may be activated at the ingress of the service
   provider's network, while traffic shaping capabilities could be
   activated at the egress of the service provider's network.

2.2  Customer Management Functions

   This section presents detailed customer management functions in the
   traditional fault, configuration, accounting, performance, and
   security (FCAPS) management categories.

2.2.1  Fault Management

   The fault management function of the Customer Service Manager relies
   upon the manipulation of network layer failure information, and it
   reports incidents to the impacted customers.  Such reports should be
   based upon and relate to the VPN service offering subscribed by the
   customer.  The Customer Management function support for fault
   management includes:

   o  Indication of customer's services impacted by failure,
   o  Incident recording or logs.
   o  Frequency of tests
   o  Ability to invoke probes from customer and provider
   o  Ability to uncover faults before the customer notices them

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-oam-requirements] specifies OAM requirements for MPLS,
   as well as for applications of MPLS such as pseudowire voice and VPN
   services.

2.2.2  Configuration Management

   The configuration management function of the Customer Manager must be
   able to configure PPVPN service parameters with the level of detail
   that the customer is able to specify, according to service templates
   defined by the provider.

   A service template contains fields which, when instantiated, yield a
   definite service requirement or policy.  For example, a template for



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   an IPSec tunnel [RFC2401] would contain fields such as tunnel end
   points, authentication modes, encryption and authentication
   algorithms, shared keys (if any), and traffic filters.

   Other examples: a BGP/MPLS-based VPN service template would contain
   fields such as the customer premises that need to be interconnected
   via the VPN.  And a QoS agreement template would contain fields such
   as one-way transit delay, inter-packet delay variation, throughput,
   and packet loss thresholds.

2.2.3  Accounting

   The accounting management function of the Customer Manager is
   provided with network layer measurements information and manages this
   information.  The Customer Manager is responsible for the following
   accounting functions:

   o  Retrieval of accounting information from the Provider Network
      Manager,
   o  Analysis, storage and administration of measurements.

   Some providers may require near-real time reporting of measurement
   information, and may offer this as part of a customer network
   management service.

   If a SP supports "Dynamic Bandwidth Management" service, then the
   schedule and the amount of the bandwidth required to perform
   requested bandwidth allocation change(s) must be traceable for
   monitoring and accounting purposes.

   Solutions should state compliance with accounting requirements, as
   described in section 1.7 of [RFC2975].

2.2.4  Performance Management

   From the Customer Manager's perspective, performance management
   includes functions involved in the determination of the conformance
   level with the Service Level Specifications, such as QoS and
   availability measurements.  The objective is to correlate accounting
   information with performance and fault management information to
   produce billing that takes into account SLA provisions for periods of
   time where the service level objectives are not met.

   The performance information should reflect the quality of the
   subscribed VPN service as perceived by the customer.  This
   information could be measured by the provider or controlled by a
   third party.  The parameters that will be used to reflect the
   performance level could be negotiated and agreed between the service



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   provider and the customer during the VPN service negotiation phase.

   Performance management should also support analysis of important
   aspects of a PPVPN, such as bandwidth utilization, response time,
   availability, QoS statistics, and trends based on collected data.

2.2.5  Security Management

   From the Customer Manager's perspective, the security management
   function includes management features to guarantee the security of
   the VPN.  This includes security of devices, configuration data and
   access connections.

2.2.6  Management Access Control

   Management access control determines the privileges that a user has
   for particular applications and parts of the network.  Without such
   control, only the security of the data and control traffic is
   protected, leaving the devices providing the PPVPN network
   unprotected, among other equipment or resources.  Access control
   capabilities protect these devices to ensure that users have access
   to the sole resources and applications they are granted to use.

2.2.7  Authentication

   Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a VPN
   user.  The Service Manager must support standard methods for
   authenticating users attempting to access VPN services.

   Scalability is critical as the number of nomadic/mobile clients is
   increasing rapidly.  The authentication scheme implemented for such
   deployments must be manageable for large numbers of users and VPN
   access points.

   Support for strong authentication schemes needs to be supported to
   ensure the security of both VPN access point-to-VPN access point (PE
   to PE) and client-to-VPN Access point (CE-to-PE) communications.
   This is particularly important to prevent VPN access point (VPN AP)
   spoofing.  VPN Access Point Spoofing is the situation where an
   attacker tries to convince a PE or a CE that the attacker is the VPN
   Access Point.  If an attacker succeeds, then the device will send VPN
   traffic to the attacker (who could forward it on to the actual (and
   granted) access point after compromising confidentiality and/or
   integrity).

   In other words, a non-authenticated VPN AP can be spoofed with a
   man-in-the-middle attack, because the endpoints rarely verify each
   other.  A weakly authenticated VPN AP may be subject to such an



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   attack.  However, strongly authenticated VPN APs are not subject to
   such attacks, because the man-in-the-middle cannot authenticate as
   the real AP, due to the strong authentication algorithms.

2.3  Customer Management Architecture

   This section provides a high level example of an architecture for the
   L3VPN management framework as far as the SML layer is concerned.  The
   goal is to map the customer management functions described in Section
   2.2 to architectural yet functional blocks, and to describe the
   communication with the other L3VPN management functions.

       + - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  +
       | Service    +----------------+   +----------------+ |
       | Management |   VPN  Offering|   | VPN Order      | |
       |            |   Management   |   |    Management  | |
       |            +----------------+   +----------------+ |
       |            +----------------+   +----------------+ |
       |            |   VPN          |   | VPN-based      | |
       |            |   Assurance    |   | SLS Management | |
       |            +----------------+   +----------------+ |
       + - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  +

              Figure 3: Overview of the Service Management

   A customer must have a means to view the topology, operational state,
   order status, and other parameters associated with the VPN service
   offering that has been subscribed.

   All aspects of management information about CE devices and customer
   attributes of a PPVPN manageable by a SP should be capable of being
   configured and maintained by an authenticated, authorized Service
   manager.

   A customer agent should be able to make dynamic requests for changing
   parameters describing a service.  A customer should be able to
   receive response from the SP network in response to these requests
   (modulo the existence of necessary agreements).  Communication
   between customer Agents and (VPN) service providers will rely upon a
   query/response mechanism.

   A customer who may not be able to afford the resources to manage its
   CPEs should be able to outsource the management of the VPN to the
   service provider(s) supporting the network.

2.3.1  L3VPN Service Offering Management

   The deployment of a VPN hopefully addresses customers' requirements.



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   Thus, the provider must have the means to advertise the VPN-based
   services it offers.  Then, the potential customers could select the
   service they want to subscribe to.  Additional features could be
   associated to this subscription phase, like the selection of a level
   of quality associated to the delivery of the VPN service, the level
   of management of the VPN service performed by the SP, security
   options, etc.

2.3.2  L3VPN Service Order Management

   This operation aims at managing the requests initiated by the
   customers and tracks the status of the achievement of the related
   operations.  The activation of the orders is conditioned by the
   availability of the resources that meet the customer's requirements
   with the agreed guarantees (note that could be a result of a
   negotiation phase between the customer and the provider).

2.3.3  L3VPN Service Assurance

   The customer may require to have the means to evaluate the
   fulfillment of the contracted SLA with the provider.  Thus, the
   provider should monitor, measure and provide statistical information
   to the customer assuming an agreement between both parties on the
   measurement methodology as well as the specification of the
   corresponding (set of) quality of service indicators.


























El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


3.  Provider Network Manager

3.1  Provider Network Management Definition

   When implementing a VPN architecture within a domain (or a set of
   domains managed by a single SP), the SP must have a means to view the
   physical and logical topology of the VPN premises, the VPN
   operational status, the VPN service ordering status, the VPN service
   handling, the VPN service activation status, and other aspects
   associated with each customer's VPN in terms of set of relevant
   parameters and attributes.

   The management of a VPN service from a provider's perspective
   consists mainly of:

   o  Managing the customers (the term "customer" denotes a role rather
      than the end user, thus a SP could be a customer) and end-users in
      terms of SLA
   o  Managing the VPN premises (especially creating, modifying and
      deleting operations, editing the related information to a specific
      link or supervising the AAA [RFC2903][RFC2906] operations)
   o  Managing the CE-PE links (particularly creating, modifying and
      deleting links, editing the related information to a specific VPN)
   o  Managing the service ordering like Quality of Service in terms of
      supported classes of service, traffic isolation, etc.

   Currently, proprietary methods are often used to manage VPNs.  The
   additional expense associated with operators having to use multiple
   proprietary configuration- related management methods (e.g., Command
   Line Interface (CLI) languages) to access such systems is not
   recommended, because it affects the overall cost of the service
   (including the exploitation costs), especially when multiple vendor
   technologies (hence multiple expertise) are used to support the VPN
   service offering.  Therefore, devices should provide standards-based
   interfaces.  From this perspective, additional requirements on
   possible interoperability issues and availability of such
   standardized management interfaces need to be investigated.

3.2  Network Management Functions

   In addition, there can be internal service provided by the SP for
   satisfying the customer service requirements.  Some of these may
   include the notion of dynamic deployment of resources for supporting
   the customer visible services, high availability service for the
   customer may be supported by automatic failure detection and
   automatic switchover to back-up VPNs.  These are accomplished with
   inter-working with the FCAPS capabilities of Provider Network
   Manager.



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


3.2.1  Fault Management

   The Provider Network Manager support for fault management includes:

   o  Fault detection (incidents reports, alarms, failure
      visualization),
   o  Fault localization (analysis of alarms reports, diagnostics),
   o  Corrective actions (data path, routing, resource allocation).

   Since L3VPNs rely upon a common network infrastructure, the Provider
   Network Manager provides a means to inform the Service Manager about
   the VPN customers impacted by a failure in the infrastructure.  The
   Provider Network Manager should provide pointers to the related
   customer configuration information to contribute to the procedures of
   fault isolation and the determination of corrective actions.

   It is desirable to detect faults caused by configuration errors,
   because these may cause VPN service to fail, or not meet other
   requirements (e.g., traffic and routing isolation).  One approach
   could be a protocol that systematically checks all constraints have
   been taken into account, and consistency checks have been enforced
   during the tunnel configuration process.

   A capability that aims at checking IP reachability within a VPN must
   be provided for diagnostic purposes.

   A capability that aims at checking the configuration of a VPN device
   must be provided for diagnostic purposes.

3.2.2  Configuration Management

   The Provider Network Manager must support configuration management
   capabilities to deploy VPNs.  To do so, a Provider Network Manager
   must provide configuration management to provision at least the
   following L3VPN components: PE, CE, hierarchical tunnels, access
   connections, routing, and QoS, as detailed in this section.  If
   access to the Internet is provided, then this option must also be
   configurable.

   Provisioning for adding or removing VPN customer premises should be
   as automated as possible.

   Finally, the Provider Network Manager must ensure that these devices
   and protocols are provisioned consistently and correctly.  The
   solution should provide a means for checking if a service order is
   correctly provisioned.  This would represent one method of diagnosing
   configuration errors.  Configuration errors can arise due to a
   variety of reasons: manual configuration, intruder attacks, and



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   conflicting service requirements.

   Requirements for L3VPN configuration management are:

   o  The Provider Network Manager must support configuration of VPN
      membership
   o  The Provider Network Manager should use identifiers for SPs,
      L3VPNs, PEs, CEs, hierarchical tunnels and access connections as
      described in [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-framework].
   o  Tunnels must be configured between PE/CE devices.  This requires
      coordination of tunnel identifiers, paths, VPNs, and any
      associated service information, for example, a QoS service.
   o  Routing protocols running between PE routers and CE devices must
      be configured.  For multicast services, multicast routing
      protocols must also be configurable.
   o  Routing protocols running between PE routers, and between PE and P
      routers must also be configured.

   PE-based only:

   o  Routing protocols running between PE routers and CE devices must
      be configured on a per VPN basis.  The Provider Network Manager
      must support configuration of CE routing protocol for each access
      connection.
   o  The configuration of a PE-based L3VPN must be coordinated with the
      configuration of the underlying infrastructure, including Layer 1
      and 2 networks interconnecting components of a L3VPN.

3.2.3  Provisioning Routing-based Configuration Information

   The Provider Network Manager must provision parameters for the IGP
   for a L3VPN.  This includes metrics, capacity, QoS capability, and
   restoration parameters.

3.2.4  Provisioning Access-based Configuration Information

   The Provider Network Manager must provision network access between
   SP-managed PE and CE equipment.

3.2.5  Provisioning Security Services-based Configuration Information

   When a security service is requested, the Provider Network Manager
   must provision the entities and associated parameters involved in the
   provisioning of the service.  For example, for IPSec services,
   tunnels, options, keys, and other parameters must be provisioned at
   either the CE and/or the PE routers.  In the case of an intrusion
   detection service, the filtering and detection rules must be
   provisioned on a VPN basis.



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


3.2.6  Provisioning VPN Resource Parameters

   A service provider must have a means to dynamically provision
   resources associated with VPN services.  For example, in a PE-based
   service, the number and size of virtual switching and forwarding
   table instances must be provisioned.

   If a SP supports a "Dynamic Bandwidth Management" service, then the
   dates, times, amounts and intervals required to perform requested
   bandwidth allocation change(s) must be traceable for accounting
   purposes.

   If a SP supports a "Dynamic Bandwidth Management" service, then the
   provisioning system must be able to make requested changes within the
   ranges and bounds specified in the Service Level Specifications.
   Examples of QoS parameters are the response time and the probability
   of being able to service such a request.

   Dynamic VPN resource allocation is crucial to cope with the frequent
   requests for changes that are expressed by customers (e.g., sites
   joining or leaving a VPN), as well as to achieve scalability.  The PE
   routers should be able to dynamically assign the VPN resources.  This
   capability is especially important for dial-up and wireless VPN
   services.

3.2.7  Provisioning Value-Added Service Access

   A L3VPN service provides controlled access between a set of sites
   over a common backbone.  However, many service providers also offer a
   range of value-added services, for example: Internet access, firewall
   services, intrusion detection, IP telephony and IP Centrex,
   application hosting, backup, etc.  It is outside of the scope of this
   document to define if and how these different services interact with
   the VPN service offering.  However, the VPN service must be able to
   provide access to these various types of value-added services.

   A VPN service should allow the SP to supply the customer with
   different kinds of well-known IP services (e.g.  DNS, NTP, RADIUS,
   etc.) needed for ordinary network operation and management.  The
   provider should be able to provide IP services to multiple customers
   from one or many servers.

   A firewall function may be required to restrict access to the L3VPN
   from the Internet [Y.1311].

   Managed firewalls must be supported on a per-VPN basis, although
   multiple VPNs will be supported by the same physical device.  Managed
   firewalls should be provided at the access point(s) of the L3VPN.



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   Such services may be embedded in the CE or PE devices, or implemented
   in standalone devices.

   The Provider Network Manager should allow a customer to outsource the
   management of an IP service to the SP providing the VPN or a third
   party.

   The management system should support collection of information
   necessary for optimal allocation of IP services in response to
   customers' orders, in correlation with provider- provisioned
   resources supporting the service.

   Reachability to and from the Internet from/to sites within a VPN must
   be configurable by an SP.  Configuring routing policy to control
   distribution of VPN routes advertised to the Internet could realize
   this.

3.2.8  Provisioning Hybrid VPN Services

   Configuration of inter-working L3VPN solutions should also be
   supported.  Ensuring that security and end-to-end QoS issues are
   addressed.

3.3  Accounting

   The Provider Network Manager is responsible for the measurements of
   resource utilization.

3.4  Performance Management

   From the Provider Network Manager's perspective, performance
   management includes functions involved in monitoring and collecting
   performance data regarding devices, facilities, and services.

   The Provider Network Manager must monitor the devices' behavior to
   evaluate performance metrics associated with a SLS.  Different
   measurement techniques may be necessary depending on the service for
   which an SLA is provided.  Example services are QoS, security,
   multicast, and temporary access.  These techniques may be either
   intrusive or non-intrusive, depending on the parameters being
   monitored.

   The Provider Network Manager must also monitor aspects of the VPN not
   directly associated with a SLS, such as resource utilization, status
   of devices and transmission facilities, as well as control of
   monitoring resources such as probes and remote agents at network
   access points used by customers and mobile users.




El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   Devices supporting L3VPN whose level of quality is defined by SLSs
   should have real-time performance measurements that have indicators
   and threshold crossing alerts.  Such thresholds should be
   configurable.

3.5  Security Management

   From the Provider Network Manager's perspective, the security
   management function of the Provider Network Manager must include
   management features to guarantee the preservation of the
   confidentiality of customers' traffic and control data as described
   in section 5.9 of [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-requirements].







































El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


4.  L3VPN Devices

4.1  Information model

   Each L3VPN solution must specify the information bases (MIBs, PIBs,
   XML schemas, etc.) for network elements involved in L3VPN services.
   This is an essential requirement in network provisioning.  The
   approach should identify any L3VPN specific information not contained
   in a standard MIB.

4.2  Communication

   The deployment of a VPN may span a wide range of network equipment,
   potentially including equipment from multiple vendors.  Therefore,
   the provisioning of a unified network management view of the VPN
   shall be simplified by means of standard management interfaces and
   models.  This will also facilitate customer self-managed (monitored)
   network devices or systems.

   In case where significant configuration is required whenever a new
   service is to be provisioned, it is important for scalability reasons
   that the NMS provides a largely automated mechanism for the relevant
   configuration operations.  Manual configuration of VPN services
   (i.e., new sites, or re- provisioning existing ones), could lead to
   scalability issues, and should be avoided.  It is thus important for
   network operators to maintain visibility of the complete picture of
   the VPN through the NMS system.  This should be achieved by using
   standard protocols such as SNMP, COPS, NetConf.  Use of proprietary
   command-line interfaces is not recommended.






















El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


5.  Security Considerations

   This draft describes a framework for L3PVN Operations and Management.
   The document addresses some security concerns that have been depicted
   above.














































El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


6.  Acknowledgements

   Special Thanks to Nathalie Charton, Alban Couturier, Christian
   Jacquenet and Harmen Van Der Linde for their review of the document
   and their valuable suggestions.

7  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2975]  Aboba, B., Arkko, J. and D. Harrington, "Introduction to
              Accounting Management", RFC 2975, October 2000.

   [RFC2401]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2903]  de Laat, C., Gross, G., Gommans, L., Vollbrecht, J. and D.
              Spence, "Generic AAA Architecture", RFC 2903, August 2000.

   [RFC2906]  Farrell, S., Vollbrecht, J., Calhoun, P., Gommans, L.,
              Gross, G., de Bruijn, B., de Laat, C., Holdrege, M. and D.
              Spence, "AAA Authorization Requirements", RFC 2906, August
              2000.

   [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-framework]
              Callon, R. and M. Suzuki, "A Framework for Layer 3
              Provider Provisioned Virtual Private Networks",
              draft-ietf-l3vpn-framework-00 (work in progress), July
              2003.

   [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-requirements]
              Carugi, M. and D. McDysan, "Service requirements for Layer
              3 Virtual Private Networks",
              draft-ietf-l3vpn-requirements-02 (work in progress), July
              2004.

   [I-D.ietf-l3vpn-ppvpn-terminology]
              Andersson, L., "Provider Provissioned VPN terminology",
              draft-ietf-l3vpn-ppvpn-terminology-04 (work in progress),
              September 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-oam-requirements]
              Nadeau, T., "OAM Requirements for MPLS Networks",
              draft-ietf-mpls-oam-requirements-04 (work in progress),



El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


              September 2004.

   [Y.1311]   ITU, "Network-based IP VPN over MPLS architecture", ITU-T
              Y.1311.1, 2001.


Authors' Addresses

   Yacine El Mghazli (Editor)
   Alcatel
   Route de Nozay
   Marcoussis  91460
   France

   EMail: yacine.el_mghazli@alcatel.fr


   Thomas D. Nadeau
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   300 Apollo Drive
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   USA

   EMail: tnadeau@cisco.com


   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   42, rue des Coutures
   Caen  14066
   France

   EMail: mohamed.boucadair@francetelecom.com


   Kwok Ho Chan
   Nortel Networks
   600 Technology Park Drive
   Billerica, MA  01821
   USA

   EMail: khchan@nortelnetworks.com









El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


   Arnaud Gonguet
   Alcatel
   Route de Nozay
   Marcoussis  91460
   France

   EMail: arnaud.gonguet@alcatel.fr












































El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       L3VPN Operations and Mgmt Frwk            July 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




El Mghazli, et al.        Expires April 2005                   [Page 26]


