



GAIA RG                                                          R. Mahy
Internet-Draft                                          (no affiliation)
Intended status: Informational                          December 1, 2014
Expires: June 4, 2015


Tools to accomplish the goals of GAIA (Global Access to the Internet for
                                  All)
                      draft-mahy-gaia-tools-00.txt

Abstract

   This document explores the central problem of the GAIA (Global Access
   to the Internet for All) IRTF research group.  It discusses several
   possible approaches or tools that can be used to increase the number
   of people with access to the Internet.  Specifically we discuss how
   these tools can improve reach, reduce cost, and improve the quality
   of the Internet, especially in underserved areas.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 4, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.




Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Recommended tools to improve Internet availability  . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Encourage competition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Make services available with few barriers to entry  . . .   4
     2.3.  Using existing copper or fiber more efficiently . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Adding more fiber (or sometimes copper) . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.5.  Using existing wireless spectrum more efficiently . . . .   5
     2.6.  Adding wireless connectivity where there is no service at
           all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.6.1.  Terrestrial wireless  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.6.2.  Near-earth wireless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.6.3.  Geosynchronous satellites . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.7.  Replacing (geosynchronous) satellite with lower latency
           services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.8.  Increasing access to electricity  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.9.  Data mule services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.10. Replacing above ground wired services with underground
           wired services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.11. Peering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Which actors can use which tools  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  To Do . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Informational References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   GAIA aims to increase availability of access to the Internet.  The
   author will discuss a number of tools available to different actors
   to accomplish this goal.  For each tool, the author will consider
   three related attributes of availability: reach, cost, and quality.
   Reach is which members of a population could access the Internet via
   various approaches.  Reach is not just a technical characteristic.
   Services which have various administrative requirements (ex: long-
   term contracts, legal residency, requirements for certain forms of
   identity) also restrict reach.  Cost is the overall cost to the end-
   user for the services they would like to use.  It includes upfront
   and recurring subscription or usage costs.  Quality is related to the
   useful throughput for the services the end-user would like to use.
   Factors affecting quality include bandwidth capacity, latency,
   jitter, congestion, loss, and the reliability (downtime) of the
   service.  The author will also consider which actors has the ability
   to implement which of these tools.





Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


2.  Recommended tools to improve Internet availability

2.1.  Encourage competition

   History has shown that Internet markets with lots of providers are
   robust, healthy, and provide a full range of services and prices,
   including very affordable basic service.  By contrast, markets with
   monopolies or duopolies tend to experience high prices and often poor
   quality.  This is not uniquely a problem in developing countries.
   For example, at the time of this writing most residences in the
   United States only have access to a single cable TV provider and a
   single telephone provider for Internet access.  Relative to other
   countries at a similar level of development, residential Internet
   access is among the most expensive and slowest among other rich
   countries.  One area where competition has dramatically lowered cost
   quite suddenly is in access to ocean-going fiber.  Where some markets
   (much of West and Southern Africa, Haiti) went from a single fiber
   landing with access to the Internet to more than one, the costs
   dropped by at least an order of magnitude in a few years.

   Encouraging competition is about removing unnatural or unnecessary
   barriers to new entrants.  This is not to say that telecommunications
   should be completely unregulated.  Every form of wired or wireless
   Internet access needs to use some kind public resource (e.g. travel
   over public land or a public right of way, or transmit
   electromagnetic waves).  In a competitive market this use is
   regulated to encourage fair access to established providers and new
   entrants alike, including non-commercial providers.  The various
   approaches described as "Alternative Network Deployments" in
   [I-D.manyfolks-gaia-community-networks] all effectively offer an
   alternative to one or more "traditional" service providers and
   therefore are an additional form of competition.

   A regulator can further implement policies that encourage providers
   to extend access into new or underserved areas rather than providing
   service in a location that already has several competitive providers.
   Two ways are to increase the cost of the spectrum or right-of-way in
   well-served areas, or to allow no new permits if there is capacity
   available from a neutral service or provider or from a certain number
   of providers (ex: four or more).  For wireless services, allowing
   providers (private or community) in underserved areas to use
   frequencies without having to buy a country-wide license is
   especially effective at encouraging expansion of range.  The use of
   dynamic spectrum (ex: TV white spaces, dynamic allocation of GSM
   frequencies) is a logical extension of this approach and looks
   particularly promising.





Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


   In many developing countries, there is a lack of good information
   about the size of the market in underserved areas.  For example, in a
   regional capital you may have 3 or 4 mobile network operators
   offering service, but in a nearby small city you may find no service
   at all.  Rather than use available capital to extend service into a
   new area, operators often add capacity in an existing area, because
   they can perform a break-even analysis with relatively low risk.  One
   of the advantages of community-based approaches in serving a new area
   is that their goal is usually to serve a specific community at a
   reasonable cost rather than to select the most profitable or least
   risky project among many possible choices.  The community is also in
   a better position to estimate the eventual usage than typical
   outsiders.

   In summary, once a market becomes competitive, cost drops and quality
   improves.  Reach usually improves somewhat slowly in the worst case,
   but this can be helped along considerably with appropriate policy
   choices, by allowing flexible or dynamic allocation of frequencies,
   and by encouraging communities to deploy their own networks.

2.2.  Make services available with few barriers to entry

   In many developing countries, anyone can buy an inexpensive mobile
   phone with basic Internet access and pre-pay for a "bucket" of
   bandwidth or unlimited Internet by the day, week, or month at very
   affordable rates.  (Sadly this is not usually true in some rich
   countries.)  By contrast, purchasing broadband Internet access may
   have several barriers.

   For example Internet service may require filling out and signing a
   contract, possibly in a language that is not widely spoken by certain
   groups or economic classes.  It may require having an official
   address or some form of official identification which is difficult or
   impossible for some segments of the population to obtain.  For
   example, contracts in Haiti are typically in French even though the
   vast majority of the population are not able to read a complex
   document in French.  Some large neighborhoods in India were built
   without permits and are therefore ineligible for addresses.  In some
   countries, identity cards are routinely denied to certain ethnic
   groups.  Services with these requirements are effectively out of
   reach of a large segment of the population.

   Finally, if a service requires a large deposit, the purchase of
   expensive equipment, or a recurring financial commitment, this will
   affect the overall cost of the service and could exclude a large
   number of potential subscribers who could otherwise afford the normal
   usage or subscription costs most of the time.




Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


2.3.  Using existing copper or fiber more efficiently

   This approach can reduce the cost and/or increase the quality
   (specifically bandwidth) of Internet links over existing copper pairs
   or fiber strands.  For fiber, migrating TDM, SRP, FDDI or even SONET
   to Ethernet often increases the available capacity considerably.  For
   copper, migrating POTS, ISDN, TDM, or DSL links to Ethernet or faster
   forms of DSL can also increase available capacity, but usually with
   slightly more effort.  Ordinary POTS lines are typically not well
   conditioned, so copper may need to be touched at several points
   before it is ready to use.

2.4.  Adding more fiber (or sometimes copper)

   Fiber is a good long-term solution to improve the capacity and
   reliability of Internet services along a path.  It can also be very
   cost effective if there is a competitive market for using the fiber.
   New fiber or copper can be deployed along a route or to a destination
   with no (non-satellite) Internet connectivity at all, it can replace
   an existing wireless link, or it can be an upgrade or replacement of
   an existing copper or fiber link.  Replacing an existing congested
   terrestrial wireless link is often an especially good investment, as
   the wireless equipment can be redeployed to a location that has no
   connectivity at all.

2.5.  Using existing wireless spectrum more efficiently

   Unlicensed spectrum (typically the 2.4Ghz and 5Ghz Industrial
   Scientific and Medical bands) in populated areas can become quite
   crowded.  Best practices include using directional antennas for
   point-to-point links and reducing the transmit power when possible.

   Cellular telephones use a limited number of licensed frequencies
   which are typically allocated to mobile network operators on a per-
   country basis.  Upgrading cellular data protocols from GPRS or EDGE
   to 3G improves the bandwidth efficiency.  In areas with high usage,
   reducing the size of each cell improves density and bandwidth
   efficiency.  These both improve the quality of available Internet.
   In areas with no cellular service, providing a new allocation to a
   community or provider without a nationwide license, or allowing them
   to reuse the frequencies of one or more nationwide cellular providers
   in the unserved area would allow for a tremendous improvement in
   reach.

   In many developing countries there are relatively few broadcast
   television stations (often between 2 and 4), but a large amount of
   bandwidth is reserved for their potential use.  TV White Spaces
   offers the opportunity to use the bandwidth on unoccupied channels



Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


   for networking purposes.  As frequencies for WiFi, WiMax, and similar
   wireless services are extremely limited, TV White Spaces can
   potentially offer lots of additional bandwidth for data services in a
   part of the wireless spectrum with excellent propagation
   characteristics.  In general, dynamic frequency allocation could make
   a number of frequencies available to offer services in underserved
   regions.

2.6.  Adding wireless connectivity where there is no service at all

2.6.1.  Terrestrial wireless

   Some form of Internet access is currently available in the following
   radio bands: High Frequency (HF, 3Mhz to 30Mhz), Very High Frequency
   (VHF, 30Mhz to 300Mhz), Ultra High Frequency (UHF, 300Mhz to 3Ghz),
   and Super High Frequency (SHF, 3Ghz to 30 Ghz).  Each of these bands
   has different propagation characteristics.

   Many HF frequencies are reflected by the ionosphere and can easily
   travel hundreds or thousands of kilometers.  The amount of reflection
   varies depending on the time of day and season and can be subject to
   substantial interference.  Unfortunately this band offers very low
   bandwidth and generally requires quite large antennas.  It is the
   only terrestrial option for a user without line of sight who is
   hundreds or several tens of kilometers away from the nearest Internet
   access.  Fortunately these regions are relatively few, primarily in
   open ocean, deserts, steppe, polar regions, and parts of central
   Africa.

   VHF frequencies and the lower UHF frequencies generally travel
   slightly further than line of sight.  They are frequently diffracted
   by hills and buildings.  SHF and the higher UHF frequencies generally
   require near line of sight for reliable transmission.  In general,
   the higher the frequency, the more bandwidth is available and the
   shorter the effective range.

   Terrestrial wireless solutions include cellular data, WiFi, WiMax, TV
   White spaces, and packet radio (the last typically used for marine
   communication and by hobbyists).

2.6.2.  Near-earth wireless

   Several solutions have been proposed and deployed as trials where
   stations on the ground communicate with balloons, drones, or low-
   earth orbit satellites.  These non-terrestrial signals still have a
   negligible latency relative to geosynchronous satellites (e.g.
   approximately 4ms round trip to the Iridium constellation of low-
   earth orbit satellites).



Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


   Balloons and Low-earth orbit satellites are launched once for the
   duration of their service life.  Most uses of drones assumes that
   they will periodically return to earth for servicing.  While this
   offers the possibility to easily upgrade telecommunications gear
   there is a long-term logistical element required for their use.  One
   disadvantage of drones in some regions is their association with
   surveillance or military activities (including lethal action).  The
   author observed that in South Sudan, the sound of particular aircraft
   will cause everyone to drop whatever they are doing and run for the
   bush.

   Each of these solutions requires a rather large upfront investment,
   but depending on the size of the target service area, population
   density and difficulty of the terrain may still be more cost
   effective than terrestrial solutions.  For example, low-earth
   satellites likely offer the best price-performance in ocean and polar
   regions.  Balloons could offer a good balance of price-performance in
   sparsely population desert regions.  Drones (if culturally
   appropriate) or tethered balloons could supplement capacity in
   disaster areas or dense refugee settings.

2.6.3.  Geosynchronous satellites

   Traditional geosynchronous bidirectional Internet (typically via VSAT
   or BGAN) is still the option of last resort for businesses or
   organizations in locations with no terrestrial broadband service and
   slow, unreliable or non-existent cellular data.  BGANs are mobile and
   offer connectivity from practically anywhere outside with a view of
   the sky.  (Geosynchronous satellites are not accessible from the
   polar regions.)

   Unfortunately these service are relatively hard to setup, expensive
   to setup, and in places where they are most needed are often
   expensive to use.  In addition, for some of their plans many
   providers place a cap (called a "Fair Access Policy" or FAP) on the
   maximum amount of bandwidth that can be consumed over some period of
   time (typically one month or one week).  When this cap is reached the
   effective bandwidth drops well below 8kbps.

   Unidirectional satellite access can provide bulk data or broadcasting
   to a large number of ground stations simultaneously.  This could
   include for example educational content, entertainment, news, and
   software updates.  In some cases, the subscriber can propose or
   subscribe to specific content using an out-of-band Internet
   connection.






Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


2.7.  Replacing (geosynchronous) satellite with lower latency services

   Traditional bidirectional satellite Internet services (ex: VSAT or
   BGAN) use geosynchronous satellites which add a round-trip delay of
   at least 480 to 558ms to every packet.  For interactive usage (ex:
   web browsing) or real-time communication the delay is especially
   bothersome.  Likewise, cellular towers in remote areas often use a
   geosynchronous satellite for backhaul.  (A call from between such
   towers will have a minimum delay of at least 1 second.)  This
   attribute affects the quality of the connection.

   As of this writing there were a handful of reasonably affordable (ex:
   around $100) satellite bidirectional Internet access options
   available in the United States.  By comparison a similar speed
   satellite service in the Democratic Republic of Congo might cost ten
   times as much.  Why is there such a discrepancy?  Providers of
   satellite Internet service know that their service is often a choice
   of last resort.  In countries with poor or expensive Internet access
   the Internet provider can raise the price of their service
   substantially.  Because there is no or very little competition they
   know that the market will bear a much higher price for the same
   service.

   Also, the regulator in each country usually collects fees for the use
   of satellites.  If the service provider charges a lot for their
   service, chances are the regulator will charge a lot too, and that
   will be passed along to the end-user.

2.8.  Increasing access to electricity

   In many developing countries, power from an electrical grid is not
   widely available outside of large cities.  Where a cellular network
   exists but the typical individual user does not have electricity,
   mobile phone users may leave their telephones with the guard of a the
   cellular tower or with a local entrepreneur for charging.

   When setting up new wireless links in remote locations, the cost of
   providing power (either via a generator or solar system) usually
   exceeds the cost of the networking or cellular equipment.  The author
   also lived in a town where the local cellular service was turned off
   at night to conserve fuel for the generator.

   A reliable source of electricity for cellular towers, community WiFi,
   etc. decreases the cost of providing those services and often
   increases the quality (reliability) of services that would otherwise
   run on generators.  Power availability for users allows end users to
   keep mobile devices with them more often and makes it practical to
   use more powerful and larger devices which consume more power.



Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


   In the absence of grid power, the extent to which both networking and
   end-user equipment (ex: computers, tablet, or phones) consume less
   power has a huge effect on their possible reach.

2.9.  Data mule services

   When there is no permanent Internet connectivity in a community, but
   regular transportation between a connected town and the community, a
   specially configured computer or even tablet can shuttle data back
   and forth between the two locations.  Currently this is a very low
   cost solution but requires a lot of very technical setup and
   installation.

   While data mule services alone provide perhaps the worst user
   experience and fail to provide the interactivity of the Internet,
   they can help prove a demand for Internet which can help with a
   business case for community-based or traditional provider, or justify
   a subsidy or grant.  Users can also supplement very slow interactive
   Internet connectivity with data mule services for bulk data.

2.10.  Replacing above ground wired services with underground wired
       services

   Moving services running on copper or fiber from poles to buried coper
   or fiber (typically in conduit) generally improves the reliability of
   those services.  Cables on poles are generally more susceptible to
   storm and earthquake damage, damage from vehicles, vandalism and
   theft.

2.11.  Peering

   (Border Gateway Protocol [BGP]) Peering among service providers
   (typically in a country or region) decreases the cost of Internet
   access by reducing the amount of money spent by each provider on
   transit outside the area, and improves the quality by reducing
   latency.

3.  Which actors can use which tools













Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


   +----------------------------+----------+------+-----------+-------+
   | Tool                       | Regulat. | ISPs | Community | Users |
   +----------------------------+----------+------+-----------+-------+
   | Encourage competition      | x        | n/a  | n/a       | n/a   |
   | Fewer barriers             | x        | x    | x         | n/a   |
   | Make wired more efficient  | n/a      | x    | x         | n/a   |
   | Add new fiber/copper       | n/a      | x    | n/a       | n/a   |
   | More efficient wireless    | n/a      | x    | x         | x     |
   | Add terrestrial wireless   | n/a      | x    | x         | n/a   |
   | Deploy Near-earth wireless | n/a      | x    | unlikely  | n/a   |
   | Use Geosync satellite      | n/a      | x    | x         | x     |
   | Replace (geo) satellite    | n/a      | x    | x         | x     |
   | Improve Electricity        | x        | x    | x         | x     |
   | Data mule services         | n/a      | n/a  | x         | x     |
   | Move wires underground     | n/a      | x    | n/a       | n/a   |
   | Peering                    | n/a      | x    | n/a       | n/a   |
   +----------------------------+----------+------+-----------+-------+

4.  Security Considerations

   As this document is concerned primarily with policy or layer 1 and 2,
   many of the traditional topics discussed in a Security Considerations
   section are not relevant.  However, in a future version of this
   document we can explore how difference choices affect pervasive
   monitoring, privacy, and denial of service.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action by IANA.

6.  To Do

   Add a lot of references.

   Add discussion of security.

7.  Informational References

   [I-D.manyfolks-gaia-community-networks]
              Saldana, J., Arcia-Moret, A., Braem, B., Navarro, L.,
              Pietrosemoli, E., Rey-Moreno, C., Sathiaseelan, A., and M.
              Zennaro, "Alternative Network Deployments. Taxonomy and
              characterization", draft-manyfolks-gaia-community-
              networks-01 (work in progress), October 2014.







Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 GAIA Tools                  December 2014


Author's Address

   Rohan Mahy
   (no affiliation)
   PO Box 441
   Santa Cruz, CA
   USA

   Email: rohan.ietf@gmail.com










































Mahy                      Expires June 4, 2015                 [Page 11]
