



Network Working Group                                      M. Kuehlewind
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Best Current Practice                       S. Krishnan
Expires: 13 January 2022                                          Kaloom
                                                            12 July 2021


           Definition of new tags for relations between RFCs
                     draft-kuehlewind-update-tag-04

Abstract

   An RFC can include a tag called "Updates" which can be used to link a
   new RFC to an existing RFC.  On publication of such an RFC, the
   existing RFC will include an additional metadata tag called "Updated
   by" which provides a link to the new RFC.  However, this tag pair is
   not well-defined and therefore it is currently used for multiple
   different purposes, which leads to confusion about the actual meaning
   of this tag and inconsistency in its use.

   This document recommends the discontinuation of the use of the
   updates/updated by tag pair, and instead proposes three new tag pairs
   that have well-defined meanings and use cases.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 January 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.






Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  New Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Cross-stream use and maturity levels  . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Additional Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Discontinuation of the Use of Updates/Updated by  . . . .   5
     4.2.  Formatting Style of Amendments  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Indication of Linkage in the Abstract and Introduction  .   6
   5.  Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Alternative Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   An RFC can include a tag called "Updates" which can be used to link a
   new RFC to an existing RFC.  On publication of such an RFC, the
   existing RFC will include an additional metadata tag called "Updated
   by" which provides a link to the new RFC.  However, this tag pair is
   not well-defined and therefore it is currently used for multiple
   different purposes, which leads to confusion about the actual meaning
   of this tag and inconsistency in its use.














Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   The "Updates/Updates by" tag pair is currently used consistently as
   different working groups or areas tend to apply different meanings to
   it.  Opinions also differ greatly about the obligations on
   implementors for the updated RFC.  While updating an RFC never makes
   the updated RFC invalid, updates can contain bug fixes or critical
   changes.  Some groups apply the update tag only to these kind of
   changes with the expectation that new implementations are also
   obliged to implement the new updating RFC.  Some other groups use the
   update tag to define optional extensions or new uses of extension
   points in the current protocol.  This disconnect leads to a situation
   where it is desirable to add a "mandatory-to-implement" indication to
   an existing RFC.

   Groups or individuals that apply such restrictive conditions to the
   Updates tag, consequently usually do not use the update tag for any
   extensions or addition to a protocol.  However, as there is no other
   way in the current metadata scheme to link a new RFC to an existing
   RFC, not using the Updates tag makes it harder to find these new
   RFCs.  While implementors might well benefit from some extensions or
   additions, they might not be aware of them and either not use them
   or, in the worst case, implement an alternate mechanism instead.

   Currently the Updates/Updated by tag pair mainly provides a way to
   link two documents.  The cases mentioned above clearly benefit from
   such a linkage which the expectation that readers of updated RFC as
   least look or also read the updating RFC.  Additionally, there are
   more cases where such a linkage could be useful to improve awareness
   of some newer related technology without providing any indication on
   the importance of the linked document.  As the conditions for the use
   of the Updates tag are not clear, often it is not used in such cases.

   This document recommends the discontinuation of the use of the
   Updates/Updated by tag pair, and instead proposes three new tag pairs
   that have well-defined meanings and use cases.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  New Definitions

   Based on the problems identified above this document defines three
   new tag pairs with the following meanings:




Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   Amends/Amended by: This tag pair is used with an amending RFC that
   changes the amended RFC.  This could include bug fixes, behavior
   changes etc.  This is intended to specify mandatory changes to the
   protocol.  The goal of this tag pair is to signal to anyone looking
   to implement the amended RFC that they MUST also implement the
   amending RFC.

   Extends/Extended by: This tag pair is used with an extending RFC that
   defines an optional addition to the extended RFC.  This can be used
   by documents that use existing extension points or clarifications
   that do not change existing protocol behavior.  This signals to
   implementers and protocol designers that there are changes to the
   extended RFC that they need to consider but not necessarily
   implement.

   See Also/See Also: This is intended as a catch-all tag where two
   documents are related loosely but do not fit either of the above
   categories.  The main intention of this tag is to provide a forward
   reference from the existing RFC to the RFCs that may be of interest
   to read.  However, it is not recommenced to use this tag extensively.

   These three tags MUST only be used for the defined meanings, mostly
   with respect to the implication on implementation requirements.  This
   document does not mandate the use of these tags if one of the
   described use cases apply.  Tags are optional metadata that are
   useful to understand the context of RFCs and navigate the RFC series.
   All three tags can only be used to reference other RFCs (and not as
   reference to external sources).

   If a new RFC amends an old RFC while also defining an extension,
   usually it is sufficient to use the "Amends" tag.  However, both tags
   could be used as well.  In any case, it is more important to explain
   clearly in the abstract what is amended/extended by the new RFC (see
   section Section 4.3).

   As today with "updates", none of the new tags makes the extended/
   amended RFC invalid.  An implementation that conforms to the amended
   RFC still conforms to that RFC, even when an amendment is published.
   However, an implementation can, and hopefully should, of course be
   updated to also conform to the new RFC with the amendment.  If only
   conformance to the new RFC is desired, obsoleting the respective RFC
   with a new full (bis) specification may be more appropriate and
   should be consider instead.








Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


3.1.  Cross-stream use and maturity levels

   This document does not impose any restrictions on the status or
   maturity level of the RFC that uses these new tags in relation the
   RFC that gets amended/extended.  Further, no restrictions are made on
   the use of these tags across RFC streams.

   However, it is expected that some cases are less likely, e.g. an
   IETF-stream RFC gets amended by an RFC from another stream.  For
   amendments that effectively change the originally RFC is is expected
   that the same consensus process is applied.  This document does not
   specify any detailed process requirements on how this is achieved.

   Examples exist where non IETF-stream documents update IETF-stream
   documents.  However, these updates usually utilise an existing
   extension point and therefore the use of "Extends" would be expected
   in future, e.g.  RFC 3579 (RADIUS Support For EAP) which is a
   document in the Independent Submission Stream updates RFC 2869
   (RADIUS Extensions), an IETF stream document.  In fact, this new,
   more clear definition of tags could even lead to an increase in cross
   stream usage of the "Extends" tag (if adopted by other streams, which
   is still open for discussion and may be reflected in future versions
   of this document).

4.  Additional Recommendations

4.1.  Discontinuation of the Use of Updates/Updated by

   [NOTE: This is open for discussion and we would like opinions on
   whether the use of Updates needs to be discontinued for all future
   documents or not.  This requires further discussion with the RFC
   Editor and the other stream managers to see if we can have a unified
   policy for all streams]

   This document makes the updates tag obsolete for future use: it MUST
   NOT be used in new IETF stream documents.  The new tags are to be
   used instead, beginning with the publication of this document as an
   RFC.













Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   However, the Updates/Updated by tag pair will remain in existing
   documents and there is no plans to change these metadata in order to
   apply the new tags instead.  While it would be possible to change the
   "Updated by" tag in the metadata without republishing the updating
   RFC, the mapping to either "Amended by", "Extended by", or "See also"
   is not always straight forward and as such would require building
   consensus for each RFC separately.  Further, simply replacing the tag
   would in any way not be sufficient, as also RFCs that currently do
   not have an updates tag would probably qualify to have one of the new
   tags defined in this document.

4.2.  Formatting Style of Amendments

   This document does not impose any requirements on the form of the
   amendment made.  Some RFCs use and OLD/NEW style to highlight actual
   text changes others simply describe the changes in text.  Both can
   make sense in certain situation.  However, this document does
   recommend to use the OLD/NEW rather for smaller and a limited number
   of changes, while if larger or many changes are needed, a new
   document revision that obsoletes the old RFC should be considered.

4.3.  Indication of Linkage in the Abstract and Introduction

   The RFC style guide [RFC7322] recommends to indicate updates in the
   abstract and introduction.  Note that both is needed as the abstract
   is meant to function in a stand-alone fashion.  This document will
   keep this practice for the new Amends/Amended by and Extends/Extended
   by tag pairs as well.  It is further recommended to provide
   additional information about the extension in the abstract or
   introduction for the Extends/Extended by tag pair in order to provide
   the reader some assistance whether he or she also needs to read the
   rest of extending RFC.

   For the See Also/See Also tag pair, additional information of the
   linked RFC may be added in the introduction but there is no
   expectation to name these RFC in the abstract.

5.  Future work

   There will be a need to update the RFC Style Guide [RFC7322] (and
   specifically Section 4.1.4.) in order to discuss the new tags if and
   when this document is published.

   Further, the "updates" attribute is part of the "xml2rfc" Version 3
   Vocabulary [RFC7991].  Therefore an extension to [RFC7991] is need as
   well.  This may be done by a future version of this draft or in a
   separate draft, e.g. with other extension or amendments to [RFC7991].




Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


6.  Alternative Approaches

   This document proposes three new meta data tag pairs to address the
   problem that the use of the "Updates" tag is currently undefined
   which causes confusion due to various different practices applied in
   different group and after all a waste of time in recurring discussion
   about using or not using the tag.

   Alternatively, in order to solely solve the problem of avoiding
   unnecessary discussion time, it would also be possible to document
   that the "Updates" tag is undefined and as such there are no strict
   rules about applying it or any implications of using it.  This was
   proposed by the IESG providing an IESG statement for community
   discussion and lead to community feedback indicating that this
   solution is not preferred.

   However, rather than defining three new tags, one could also just
   clearly define the meaning of the existing update tag.  Still, this
   could also be confusing as it would not apply to RFCs that are
   already published.  So re-naming and defining one tags, instead of
   three, would be an alternative.  This one tag could either cover all
   three usages that are described in this draft or only one (probably
   the one as defined by the proposed "Amends" tag, as this is usually
   seen as the most important one).

   This draft proposes three tags as those tags are considered to cover
   most of the usages that we see today for the "Updates" tag, assuming
   that these cases are benefiting from a forward reference of an
   already published RFC to a new RFC.  Especially separating changes to
   an existing RFC, as often done by use of the OLD/NEW notation, from
   extension/additions to an RFC is one of the main confusion and
   discussion points and therefore this draft proposes different tags
   for it.  However, if it is observed that not all proposed tags are
   actively used in future, or their usage is still not sufficiently
   clear, it should be considered to deprecate the unused tags and
   therefore restrict forward references to only some of the identified
   usages.

7.  Security Considerations

   The changes in this document do not have directly impact the security
   of any protocol or mechanism specified in the RFC series.  However,
   amendments or extensions can help to improve security or discuss
   security-related issues.  Therefore, the use of the proposed tags and
   their clear definition can also support such RFCs in their intended
   goals regarding security.





Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   If a document is amended, it is expected that the same consensus
   process is used as for the original document as an amended can be see
   as an actual change of the original document.  For extension points
   usually the originally specification also defines requirement for an
   extension mechanism to be used, e.g. in form of policy for IANA
   registries.  Of course, the requirement must be considered when
   extending a protocol.

   There is a risk that this experiment fails by either not seeing
   adoption from the community or not addressing the discussed problems
   sufficiently (ambiguity of use, implications for implementations).
   However, it is not expected that the proposed tags will make these
   problem worse.  In the worst case, if the experiment is decided to be
   reverted in future and the Updates tag should be used instead again,
   this will likely not make the situation worse or more confusing than
   it already is either.  Maybe this effort is than seen as a waste of
   time but the same recurring discussions about using or not using the
   Updates tag (especially during IESG review but also before that in
   the working group discussion) are a waste of time as well.

8.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Alexey Melnikov, Alvaro Retana, Barry
   Leiba, Eric Vyncke, Heather Flanagan, Martin Vigoureux, Brian
   Carpenter and Sandy Ginoza for their reviews and comments that
   improved this document.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7322]  Flanagan, H. and S. Ginoza, "RFC Style Guide", RFC 7322,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7322, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7322>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References






Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             New Tag Definitions                 July 2021


   [RFC7991]  Hoffman, P., "The "xml2rfc" Version 3 Vocabulary",
              RFC 7991, DOI 10.17487/RFC7991, December 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7991>.

Authors' Addresses

   Mirja Kuehlewind
   Ericsson

   Email: mirja.kuehlewind@ericsson.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Kaloom

   Email: Suresh@kaloom.com



































Kuehlewind & Krishnan    Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 9]
