
HTTP Working Group                                     Koen Holtman, TUE
Internet-Draft                              Andrew Mutz, Hewlett-Packard
Expires: January 28, 1998                               Ted Hardie, NASA      
                                                            Nov 28, 1997

                    Content Feature Tag Registration Procedure

                     draft-ietf-http-feature-reg-03.txt


STATUS OF THIS MEMO

        This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are
        working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
        (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
        groups may also distribute working documents as
        Internet-Drafts.

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
        six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
        other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use
        Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other
        than as "work in progress".

        To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please
        check the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the
        Internet-Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za
        (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
        Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US
        West Coast).

        Distribution of this document is unlimited.  Please send
        comments to the HTTP working group at
        <http-wg@cuckoo.hpl.hp.com>.  Discussions of the working
        group are archived at
        <URL:http://www.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/http/>.  General
        discussions about HTTP and the applications which use HTTP
        should take place on the <www-talk@w3.org> mailing list.



ABSTRACT

   Recent Internet applications, such as the World Wide Web, tie
   together a great diversity in data formats, client and server
   platforms, and communities.  This has created a need for negotiation
   mechanisms in order to tailor the information form to the 
   capabilities and preferences of the parties involved.  

   Extensible negotiation mechanisms need a vocabulary to identify
   various things which can be negotiated on.  To promote
   interoperability, a registration process is needed to facilitate
   sharing this vocabulary between the negotiating parties.

   This document defines a registration procedure which uses the
   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) as a central registry
   for this content feature vocabulary.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

   1 Introduction

   2 Feature tag syntax
 
   3 Feature tag registration
    3.1 Registration trees
    3.1.1 IETF tree
    3.1.2 Global tree
    3.1.3 Local or specialized tree
    3.1.4 Special `x.' tree
    3.1.5 Additional registration trees
    3.2 Location of registered feature tag list
    3.3 IANA procedures for registering feature tags
    3.4 Registration template

   4 Security considerations

   5 Acknowledgments

   6 References

   7 Authors' addresses

   Appendix A: IANA and RFC editor to-do list



1 Introduction

   Recent Internet applications, such as the World Wide Web, tie
   together a great diversity in data formats, client and server
   platforms, and communities.  This has created a need for various
   kinds of negotiation mechanisms, which tailor the data which is
   exchanged, or the exchange process itself, to the capabilities and
   preferences of the parties involved.

   Extensible negotiation mechanisms need a vocabulary to identify
   various things which can be negotiated on.  To promote
   interoperability, a registration process is needed to ensure that
   that this vocabulary, which can be shared between negotiation
   mechanisms, is developed in an orderly, well-specified, and public
   manner.

   This document defines registration procedures which use the
   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) as a central registry
   for this content feature vocabulary.


2 Feature tag syntax

   A feature tag is a string consisting of one or more of the
   following US-ASCII characters: uppercase letters, lowercase
   letters, digits, colon (":"), slash ("/"), the dot (".") and the 
   dash ("-").  Feature tags are case-insensitive.  Dots are 
   understood to potentially imply heirarchy; a feature can be 
   subtyped by describing it as tree.feature.subfeature and by
   indicating this in the feature registration.


3 Feature tag registration

   Registration of a new feature tag starts with the submission of a
   registration proposal.  Registration may occur in several different
   registration trees, which have different requirements as discussed
   below.  In general, the new registration proposal is circulated and
   reviewed in a fashion appropriate to the tree involved.  The
   feature tag is then registered if the proposal is acceptable.  The
   following sections describe the requirements and procedures used
   for each of the different registration trees.


3.1 Registration trees

   The following subsections define registration "trees",
   distinguished by the use of faceted names (e.g., names of the form
   "tree.feature_name").


3.1.1 IETF tree

   The IETF tree is intended for feature tags of general interest to
   the Internet Community.  Registration in the IETF tree requires
   approval by the IESG and publication of the feature tag
   specification as some form of RFC.

   Feature tags in the IETF tree normally have names that are not
   explicitly faceted, i.e., do not contain period (".", full stop)
   characters.

   The "owner" of a feature tag in the IETF tree is assumed to be the
   IETF itself.  Modification or alteration of the specification
   requires the same level of processing (e.g. standards track)
   required for the initial registration.

3.1.2 Global tree

   The global tree is intended for feature tags of general interest to
   the Internet Community.  Unlike registration in the IETF tree,
   registration in the global tree does not require approval by the
   IESG.  A registration may be placed in the global tree by anyone
   who has the need to allow for feature negotiation on a particular
   capability or preference.

   Typically, if the creator of an Internet service or product
   introduces something new to the Internet Community, and if it is
   meaningful to do negotiation on it, the vendor can register a
   feature tag in the global tree.

   The owner of "global" tags and associated specifications is the
   person or entity making the registration, or one to whom
   responsibility has been transferred as described below.

   Tags in the global tree will be distinguished by the leading facet
   "g.". That may be followed, at the discretion of the registration,
   by either a designation of an area of negotiation, (e.g.,
   "g.blinktags") or by an IANA-approved designation of the producer's
   name which is then followed by a designation of an area of
   negotiation (e.g., g.bigcompany.obscurefeature).

   While public exposure and review of feature tags to be registered
   in the global tree is not required, using the ietf-feature-tags
   list for review is strongly encouraged to improve the quality of
   those specifications.  Registrations in the global tree may be
   submitted directly to the IANA.

3.1.3 Local or specialized tree

   The local tree is intended for feature tags identifying areas
   of negotiation which are relevant in a localized, specialized,
   restricted, or experimental context.

   The owner of "local" tags and associated specifications is the
   person or entity making the registration, or one to whom
   responsibility has been transferred as described below.

   Tags in the local tree will be distinguished by the leading facet
   "l.".  While public exposure and review of feature tags to be
   registered in the local tree is not required, using the
   ietf-feature-tags list for review is strongly encouraged to improve
   the quality of those specifications.  Registrations in the local
   tree may be submitted directly to the IANA.

3.1.4 URL trees

   A feature tag may be defined as a complete URL. The "owner" of the 
   domain is assumed to be registration authority regarding features
   defined and described by URLs within the domain.  These tags are
   considered unregistered for the purpose of this document.  

3.1.5 Additional registration trees

   From time to time and as required by the community, the IANA may,
   with the advice and consent of the IESG, create new top-level
   registration trees.  It is explicitly assumed that these trees may
   be created for external registration and management by well-known
   permanent bodies, such as scientific societies for media types
   specific to the sciences they cover.  In general, the quality of
   review of specifications for one of these additional registration
   trees is expected to be equivalent to that which IETF would give to
   registrations in its own tree.  Establishment of these new trees
   will be announced through RFC publication approved by the IESG.

3.2 Location of registered feature tag list

   Feature tag registrations will be posted in the anonymous FTP
   directory "ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/feature-
   tags/" and all registered feature tags will be listed in the
   periodically issued "Assigned Numbers" RFC [currently STD 2,
   RFC-1700].  The feature tag description and other supporting
   material may also be published as an Informational RFC by sending
   it to "rfc-editor@isi.edu" (please follow the instructions to RFC
   authors [RFC-1543]).


3.3 IANA procedures for registering feature tags

   The IANA will only register feature tags in the IETF tree in
   response to a communication from the IESG stating that a given
   registration has been approved.

   Global and local tags will be registered by the IANA automatically
   and without any formal review as long as the following minimal
   conditions are met:

    (1)   A feature tag must function as an actual identifier of an area
          of negotiation.

    (2)   All feature tag names must be unique, and must conform to the 
          syntax in section 2.

    (3)   An openly available description of the area of negotiation is
          minimally required.  The specification of a feature tag must
          state whether the choice in the indicated area is a simple
          yes/no choice, or if it is a choice among multiple values.
          If the choice is among multiple values, and a canonical
          format for these values is defined, it must be possible to
          map this format onto octet strings.

    (4)   Any security considerations given must not be obviously
          bogus. (It is neither possible nor necessary for the
          IANA to conduct a comprehensive security review of
          feature tag registrations.  Nevertheless, the IANA has
          the authority to identify obviously incompetent material
          and exclude it.)


3.4 Registration template

   To: ietf-feature-tags@iana.org (Feature tags mailing list)
        (or directly to iana@iana.org)
   Subject: Registration of feature tag XXXX


    | Instructions are preceded by `|'.  Some fields are optional.

   Feature tag name:

   Summary of the area of negotiation indicated by this feature tag:

    | Include a short (no longer than 4 lines) description or summary
    | Examples:
    |   `Negotiation on whether to use the xyzzy feature of ...'
    |   `Negotiation on the MIME media type of the data which
    |    is transmitted for ...'
    |   `Negotiation on whether to use colors in displaying ...'
    |   `Negotiation on the number of colors to use in displaying ...'

   Number of alternative results in this area of negotiation:

     [ ] 1. Two alternatives, which can be labeled with `yes' and `no'
     [ ] 2. More than two alternatives, or two alternatives with no
            natural `yes/no' labeling

   For case 1: nature of the `yes' and `no' alternatives:

     [ ] 1a. A particular feature is used/invoked/enabled, or not
     [ ] 1b. Other

   For case 2: How is a single alternative result naturally identified?

     [ ] 2a. With a name, keyword, label, or tag (e.g. a language tag)
     [ ] 2b. With an integer value
     [ ] 2c. With a numeric value of a non-integer type (e.g. float)
     [ ] 2d. Other
     [ ] 2e. There is no simple way to identify a single result

   (Only for case 1a) Description of the feature which is used,
   invoked, or enabled if the result is `yes':

    | Descriptions may also reference outside material.

   (Only for case 1b) Description of the effect of the 'yes' result:

   (Only for case 1b) Description of the effect of the 'no' result:

   (Only for case 2) Detailed description of the area of negotiation,
   and (in cases 2a-2d) of the format and meaning of the identifiers
   for the alternative results:
   
     | If the number of alternative results is small, the description
     | could simply enumerate the identifiers of the different results
     | and describe their meaning.  
     | 
     | The identifiers of the alternative results could also be
     | described by referring to another IANA registry, for example
     | the MIME media type registry.

   Default negotiation result (if applicable to the intended
   application domain):

   The feature tag is intended for use in the applications, protocols,
   services, or negotiation mechanisms:                   [optional]

    | For applications, also specify the number of the first version
    | which will use the tag, if applicable.

   Examples of typical use:                               [optional]

   Related standards or documents:                        [optional]

   Considerations particular to use in individual applications,
   protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:        [optional]

   Interoperability considerations:                       [optional]

   Security considerations:

   Additional information:                                [optional]

     Keywords:                                            [optional]

     Related feature tags:                                [optional]

     Related media types or data formats:                 [optional]

     Related HTML markup tags:                            [optional]

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

   Intended usage:

    | one of COMMON, LIMITED USE or OBSOLETE

   Author/Change controller:

   Requested IANA publication delay:                      [optional]

    | A delay may only be requested for registration in global or
    | local trees, with a maximum of two months.

   Other information:                                     [optional]

    |  Any other information that the author deems interesting may be
    |  added here.


4 Security considerations

   When used, negotiation mechanisms usually reveal some information
   about one party to other parties.  This may raise privacy concerns,
   and may allow a malicious party to make more educated guesses about
   the presence of security holes in the other party.


5 Acknowledgments

   The details of the registration procedure in this document were
   directly adapted from [1].  Much of the text in section 3 was
   directly copied from this source.  

   The idea of creating a vocabulary of areas of negotiation, which is
   maintained in a central open registry, is due to discussions on
   extensible negotiation mechanisms in the IETF HTTP working group.
   The authors wish to thank Ted Hardie, Larry Masinter and Graham 
   Klyne for contributing to discussions about feature tag 
   registration.


6 References

   [1] N. Freed, J. Klensin, J. Postel, Multipurpose Internet Mail
       Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures.  RFC
       2048, BCP 13, Network Working Group, November 1996


7 Authors' addresses

   Koen Holtman
   Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
   Postbus 513
   Kamer HG 6.57
   5600 MB Eindhoven (The Netherlands)
   Email: koen@win.tue.nl

   Andrew H. Mutz
   Hewlett-Packard Company
   11000 Wolfe Rd. 42UO
   Cupertino CA 95014 USA
   Fax +1 408 447 4439
   Email: andy_mutz@hp.com

   Ted Hardie
   NASA
   hardie@thornhill.arc.nasa.gov
  


Appendix A: IANA and RFC editor to-do list

   VERY IMPORTANT NOTE:  This appendix is intended to communicate
   various editorial and procedural tasks the IANA and the RFC
   Editor should undertake prior to publication of this document
   as an RFC.  This appendix should NOT appear in the actual RFC
   version of this document!

   This document refers to the feature tags mailing list
   ietf-feature-tags@iana.org.  This list does not exist at the
   present time and needs to be created.

   The ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/feature-tags/" area
   does not exist at the present time and needs to be created.


Expires: June 1, 1998
