
SIMPLE WG                                                        R. Mahy
Internet-Draft                                               C. Jennings
Expires: August 9, 2004                              Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                                O. Levin
                                                   Microsoft Corporation
                                                                A. Houri
                                                                     IBM
                                                               M. Barnes
                                                         Nortel Networks
                                                        February 9, 2004


           SIMPLE Session and Relay IM Protocol Requirements
               draft-mahy-simple-im-protocol-reqs-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 9, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines requirements for sessions of messages in
   SIMPLE. These requirements apply to the Message Session Relay
   Protocol (MSRP).






Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 1]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


1. Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].

2. Introduction and Requirements

   The IETF SIMPLE working group has identified a number of scenarios
   where using a separate protocol for bulk messaging is desirable. In
   particular, the SIMPLE WG will use this facility to handle a sequence
   of messages as a session of media setup using SIP just like any other
   media. The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [2] defines a
   protocol for delivering such messages point-to-point, but does not
   define any relay functionality. This document takes into
   consideration the "Guidelines for Instant Message Sessions" [3] and
   brings into the focus essential requirements on the MSRP core
   protocol and additional requirements for extensions to MSRP that
   define relay functionality.

2.1 MSRP Core Requirements
   o  Transport level security: It MUST be possible to negotiate the
      desired security modes such as TLS only.  For systems that support
      TLS, TLS is used, but for systems that only do TCP, possible to
      gracefully fall back to TCP from client.
   o  Inter-domain link authentication: It MUST be possible to
      authenticate the link using mutual TLS.
   o  Additional security schemes: IM protocol MUST allow for additional
      security schemes to be introduced later.
   o  Features negotiation: It MUST be possible to announce or negotiate
      different basic and advanced IM protocol features with fine
      granularity.  Protocol needs to support "forward compatibility"
      where one client can tell the other client what features it
      supports.
   o  Message type negotiation: It MUST be possible to negotiate the
      desired message formats.
   o  Transactional message delivery: IM protocol MUST support
      request-response transaction per message.
   o  Transaction overlapping: IM protocol MUST allow for overlapping
      transactions.
   o  Non-transactional message delivery: IM protocol MUST support "send
      and forget" mode per message.  Future message delivery modes: IM
      protocol MUST allow for additional modes to be introduced later
      per message.
   o  Order of messages: IM protocol MUST ensure the order of messages
      in a session.
   o  Original sender's identification: IM protocol MUST include
      sender's identification per message for each of the possible



Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 2]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


      message formats. This is in order to facilitate conferencing
      scenarios. Even though the IM is coming from the conference
      system, it needs to say which person sent it to the conference
      system.
   o  Session's identification: It MUST be possible to include session's
      identification per message (for each of the possible message
      formats). That is in order to facilitate multiplexing extensions.
   o  MIME: IM protocol MUST be able convey arbitrary binary MIME data.
   o  Peer-2-Peer: IM protocol MUST support client to client operation
      (no relays required).

2.2 MSRP Relay Requirements
   o  Multiple relays: IM protocol MUST support operating through an
      arbitrary number of relays for policy enforcement.
   o  Path by client: IM protocol MUST allow each client to specify
      which relays are traversed on its behalf.
   o  Path by administrator: IM protocol MUST allow enterprise network
      administrators to insist on a policy of using relays.
   o  Relay-to-relay features negotiation: It MUST be possible to
      announce or negotiate different basic and advanced IM protocol
      features with fine granularity.  Protocol needs to support
      "forward compatibility" where one relay can tell the other relay
      what features it supports.
   o  Relay-to-client features negotiation: It MUST be possible to
      announce or negotiate different basic and advanced IM protocol
      features with fine granularity.  Protocol needs to support
      "forward compatibility" where a relay and a client can tell each
      other what features it supports.
   o  Congestion control: The protocol MUST have adequate congestion
      control properties. This means traffic between relays or clients
      that are sending many messages must compete fairly with other TCP
      flows and display adequate back off during congestion.
   o  DOS prevention: IM protocol MUST prevent SMTP style "open relays",
      and denial of service amplification.
   o  Multiplexing: IM protocol MUST allow relays to use one or a small
      number of TCP or TLS connections to carry messages for multiple
      sessions, recipients, and senders.
   o  Large messages: IM protocol MUST allow large messages to be sent
      over a slow connection without causing head-of-line blocking
      problems.
   o  Restart: IM protocol MUST allow transmission of a large message to
      be interrupted and resumed in place when network connectivity is
      lost and later reestablished.
   o  End-2-end notification: IM protocol MUST offer end-to-end
      notification of message receipt.
   o  Storage notification: IM Protocol MUST offer notification of
      message storage (desirable).




Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 3]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


   o  Transient state: IM Protocol MUST allow relays to delete state
      after a short amount of time (order 30 seconds).

3. Acknowledgments

   The authors thank the following members of the SIMPLE WG for spirited
   discussions on session mode: Ben Campbell, Jonathan Rosenberg, Robert
   Sparks, Paul Kyzivat, Allison Mankin, Jon Peterson, Brian Rosen, Dean
   Willis, Adam Roach, Aki Niemi, Hisham Khartabil, Pekka Pessi, and
   Chris Boulton.

   The authors also thank the MSN IM Group of Microsoft for sharing
   their experience and for providing important inputs to this document.

Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Informative References

   [2]  Campbell, B., "Instant Message Sessions in SIMPLE",
        draft-ietf-simple-message-sessions-03 (work in progress),
        January 2004.

   [3]  Mankin, A., Peterson, J., "Guidelines for Instant Message 
        Sessions", draft-mankin-im-session-guide-00 (work in progress), 
        November 2001.


Authors' Addresses

   Rohan Mahy
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   5617 Scotts Valley Drive, Suite 200
   Scotts Valley, CA  95066
   USA

   EMail: rohan@cisco.com











Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 4]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   MS: SJC-21/3
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 527-9132
   EMail: fluffy@cisco.com


   Orit Levin
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   MS 30/3085
   Redmond, WA  98052-6399
   USA

   Phone: +1 425 722-2225
   EMail: oritl@microsoft.com


   Avshalom Houri
   IBM
   Science Park
   Building 18/D
   Rehovot
   Israel

   Phone: +972 8 940-9761 Ext. 123
   EMail: avshalom@il.ibm.com


   Mary Barnes
   Nortel Networks
   2380 Performance Drive
   Richardson, TX
   USA

   Phone: +1 972 684-5432
   EMail: mary.barnes@nortelnetworks.com










Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 5]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 6]


Internet-Draft      SIMPLE IM Protocol Requirements        February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Mahy, et al.             Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 7]

