 
   SIPPING                                                 T. Melanchuk 
   Internet Draft                                           G. Sharratt 
   Expires: Aug. 15, 2004                                      Convedia 
                                                          Feb. 15, 2004 
    

                   Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML) 
                      draft-melanchuk-sipping-msml-02 

 

Status of this Memo 

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

Abstract 

   The Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML) is used to control and 
   invoke many different types of services on IP media servers. Clients 
   can use it define how media sessions interact on a media server and 
   to apply services to individual or groups of users. MSML can be used, 
   for example, to control media server advanced conferencing features, 
   create sidebar conferences, and insert media processing objects into 
   media streams. As well, clients can use MSML with other languages 
   such as the Media Objects Markup Language (MOML) or VoiceXML to 
   interact with individual users or with groups of conference 
   participants.  

    

    

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 1] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Glossary.......................................................4 
   3. Media Server Architecture Model................................5 
      3.1 Objects....................................................5 
      3.2 Identifiers................................................7 
      3.3 Media Streams.............................................10 
   4. MSML SIP Usage................................................11 
   5. Execution Flow................................................13 
   6. Elements Received by a Media Server...........................14 
      6.1 <msml>....................................................14 
      6.2 <alias>...................................................15 
      6.3 <join>....................................................15 
      6.4 <unjoin>..................................................17 
      6.5 <createconference>........................................17 
         6.5.1 <reserve>............................................19 
      6.6 <destroyconference>.......................................21 
      6.7 <dialogstart>.............................................21 
      6.8 <dialogend>...............................................23 
      6.9 <insert>..................................................24 
      6.10 <remove>.................................................26 
      6.11 <send>...................................................26 
   7. Elements Sent by a Media Server...............................27 
      7.1 <msml>....................................................27 
      7.2 <result>..................................................27 
      7.3 <event>...................................................27 
   8. Specialized Join Operations...................................28 
      8.1 <cjoin>...................................................28 
      8.2 <monitor>.................................................29 
   9. Response Codes................................................29 
   10. Examples.....................................................30 
      10.1 MSML transaction.........................................30 
      10.2 Call Flow................................................31 
   11. Change Summary...............................................33 
   12. Future Work..................................................34 
   13. XML Schemas..................................................34 
   Security Considerations..........................................41 
   References.......................................................41 
   Acknowledgments..................................................42 
   Authors' Addresses...............................................43 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................43 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................43 
   Acknowledgement..................................................44 
    
    



 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 2] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
1. Introduction 

   Media servers contain dynamic pools of media resources. Application 
   servers and other users of media servers (called media server 
   clients) can define and create many different services based on how 
   they configure and use those resources. Often, that configuration and 
   the ways in which those resources interact will be changed 
   dynamically over the course of a call, to reflect changes in the way 
   that an application interacts with a user.  

   For example, a call may undergo an initial IVR dialog before being 
   placed into a conference. Calls may be moved from a main conference 
   to a sidebar conference and then back again. Individual calls may be 
   directly bridged to create small n-way calls or simple sidebars. None 
   of these change the SIP dialog or RTP session. Yet these do affect 
   the media flow internal to the media server. 

   The Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML) is an XML language used to 
   change the flow of and services on media streams within a media 
   server. It is used to invoke many different types of services on 
   individual sessions, groups of sessions, and conferences. MSML allows 
   the creation of conferences, bridging different sessions together, 
   and bridging sessions into conferences.  

   MSML can be used to apply IVR operations and dialogs to sessions or 
   conferences, and to modify the media flowing on a session. Dialogs 
   may be specified in any suitable language from VoiceXML [7], which 
   allows complete application interfaces to be executed by a media 
   server, to Media Objects Markup Language (MOML) [9], which can be 
   used to define individual user dialog commands and user input 
   controlled widgets.  

   A network connection is established with the media server using SIP. 
   Media received and transmitted on that connection will flow through 
   different media resources on the media server depending on the 
   requested service. Basic Network Media Services with SIP [6] defines 
   conventions for associating a basic service with a SIP Request-URI. 
   MSML allows services to be dynamically applied and changed by an 
   application server during the lifetime of the SIP dialog. 

   MSML and MOML have been designed to work closely together: MOML 
   addresses the control and manipulation of media processing operations 
   (e.g., announcement, IVR, play and record, ASR/TTS, fax, video), 
   while MSML addresses the relationships of media streams (e.g., simple 
   and advanced conferencing). Together, MSML and MOML create a general-
   purpose media server control architecture. MSML can additionally be 
   used to invoke other IVR languages such as VoiceXML. 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 3] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   MSML is currently defined for audio conferences. Future work will add 
   support for different types of video and multimedia conferences. 

2. Glossary 

   Media Server: a general-purpose platform for executing high-density 
   real-time media processing tasks. It may be a single physical device 
   or a logical function within a physical device. 

   Media Server Client: an application residing on an external server 
   which originates MSML requests to a media server. 

   Object: the generic term for a media server entity that terminates, 
   originates, or processes media. This specification defines four 
   classes of objects and specifies mechanisms to create them, join them 
   together, and destroy them.   

   Participant Object: an object in a media server that sources original 
   media in a call or that receives and terminates media in a call.  

   Intermediary Object: an object in a media server that acts on media 
   within a call for the benefit of the participants.  

   Independent Object: an object that can exist on a media server 
   independent of other objects.  

   Network Connection: a participant object class that represents the 
   termination on a media server of an RTP session and one or more media 
   streams (for example audio and video). Network connections are 
   established and removed using a session establishment protocol such 
   as SIP. An instance of a network connection is an independent object. 

   Operator: an intermediary object class that modifies or transforms a 
   media stream. Examples of operators may be gain controls, voice 
   masking, or tone filters. Specific types of operators are not defined 
   within MSML. Operators may be defined in MOML or other similar 
   languages. 

   Dialog: an automated participant object class. Examples of dialogs 
   may be announcement players, IVR interfaces, or voice recorders. 
   Specific types of dialogs are not defined within MSML. Dialogs may be 
   defined in VoiceXML, MOML, or other similar languages. 

   Conference: an intermediary object class that provides multimedia 
   mixing and other advanced conferencing services. This specification 
   currently considers audio conferences, but is extensible to video and 
   other media applications. An instance of a conference is an 
   independent object. 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 4] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Identifier: a name that is used to refer to a specific instance of an 
   object on the media server. Identifiers are composed of one or more 
   terms where each term identifies an object class and instance.   

   Media Stream: the media flow between two objects. A media stream may 
   be half-duplex or full-duplex. The duplex nature of the media stream 
   is specified when it is established.  

3. Media Server Architecture Model 

   Media servers are  general-purpose platforms for executing real-time 
   media processing tasks. These tasks range in complexity from simple 
   ones such as serving announcements, to complex ones, such as speech 
   interfaces, centralized multimedia conferencing, and sophisticated 
   gaming applications. 

   Sessions are established to a media server using SIP. Clients will 
   often use SIP third party call control (3PCC) [2] to establish media 
   sessions to a media server on behalf of end users. However MSML does 
   not require that 3PCC be used; only that the client and the media 
   server share a common identifier for the session.  

   The primary abstractions used by MSML are objects and streams. 
   Objects represent entities which source, sink, or modify media and 
   streams represent the media flow between objects on a media server. 
   The following subsections define the classes of objects that exist on 
   a media server, the way these are identified in MSML, and the basic 
   properties of media streams. 

3.1 Objects 

   A media object is an endpoint of a media stream. It may be something 
   that terminates an external network connection or a resource which 
   transforms or manipulates the media in some way. MSML defines four 
   classes of media objects. Each class defines the basic properties of 
   how object instances are used within a media server. Some classes 
   require that the function of specific instances be defined by the 
   client, using languages such as VoiceXML or the Media Objects Markup 
   Language (MOML).  

   The following classes of media processing objects are defined. The 
   class names are given in parentheses: 

      o  network connection (conn) 
      o  conference (conf) 
      o  dialog (dialog) 
      o  operator (oper) 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 5] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Network connection is an abstraction for the media processing 
   resources involved in terminating a RTP session from the network. For 
   audio services as described here, they present a single full-duplex 
   media stream interface within a media server. Multimedia services may 
   have multiple media streams associated with a RTP session. Network 
   connections get instantiated when a media session is established to a 
   media server (e.g., through SIP).  

   Conference represents an n-1 audio mixer and the other media 
   resources and state information required for an audio conference. 
   They have multiple inputs and possibly several classes of inputs. 
   Different classes of input allow the conference to offer different 
   treatment to different audio streams. For example, an advanced 
   conference may have some inputs contend to contribute to the mix 
   while others are always able to contribute.  

   A conference has a single logical output consisting of the conference 
   mix, less any contributed audio of an individual participant who 
   receives the output. Conferences are instantiated using the 
   <createconference> element. The <createconference> element, and the 
   other elements identified below, are discussed in depth in section 6. 

   Dialogs are a class of objects that represent automated participants. 
   They are similar to network connections from a media flow perspective 
   and have a single full-duplex media stream as the abstraction for 
   their interface within a media server. Unlike connections however, 
   dialogs are created and destroyed through MSML, and the media server 
   itself implements the dialog participant. 

   The function that an instance of a dialog fulfills is defined by a 
   client using a language such as VoiceXML or MOML. As such, "dialog" 
   is a generic reference to the set of resources, both media and 
   control, that are used to create either a simple action, such as an 
   atomic play or record operation, or more complex application 
   interface components, such as a VoiceXML interpreter. Dialogs are 
   instantiated through the <dialogstart> element.  

   Operators are a class of objects that are used to filter or transform 
   a media stream. The function that an instance of an operator fulfills 
   is defined by a client using a language such as MOML. Operators may 
   be half-duplex or full-duplex. Half-duplex operators reflect simple 
   atomic functions such as automatic gain control or filtering tones 
   from conferences. Half-duplex operators have a single media input, 
   which is connected to the media stream from one object, and a single 
   media output, which is connected to the media stream of a different 
   object. 

   Full-duplex operators have two media inputs and two media outputs. 
   One media input and output is associated with the stream to one 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 6] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   object and the other input and output is associated with a stream to 
   a different object. Full-duplex objects may also treat the media 
   differently in each direction. For example, an operator could be 
   defined which changed the media sent to a connection based upon 
   recognized speech or DTMF received from the connection. Operators get 
   instantiated through the <insert> element.  

   The relationships between the different object classes is shown in 
   the figure below. 

                +--------------------------------------+ 
                |           Media Server               | 
                |                                      | 
                |------+                      ,---.    | 
                |      |      +------+       /     \   | 
     <== RTP ==>| conn |<---->| oper |<---->( conf  )  | 
                |      |      +------+       \     /   | 
                |------+                      `---'    | 
                |   ^                           ^      | 
                |   |                           |      | 
                |   |   +------+    +------+    |      | 
                |   |   |      |    |      |    |      | 
                |   +-->|dialog|    |dialog|<---+      | 
                |       |      |    |      |           | 
                |       +------+    +------+           | 
                +--------------------------------------+ 

   A single, full-duplex instance of each object class is shown together 
   with common relationships between them. An operator is shown between 
   a connection and a conference and dialogs are shown participating 
   both with an individual connection and with a conference. The figure 
   is not meant to imply only one to one relationships. Conferences will 
   often have hundreds of participants, and either connections or 
   conferences may be interacting with more than one dialog. For 
   example, one dialog may be recording a conference while other dialogs 
   announce participants joining or leaving the conference.  

3.2 Identifiers 

   Objects are referenced using identifiers which are composed of one or 
   more terms. Each term specifies an object class and names a specific 
   instance within that class. The object class and instance are 
   separated by a colon ":" in an identifier term.  

   Identifiers are assigned to objects when they are first created. In 
   general, either the MSML client or a media server may specify the 
   instance name for an object. Objects for which a client does not 
   assign an instance name will be assigned one by a media server. Media 
   server assigned instance names are returned to the client as a 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 7] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   complete object identifier in the response to the command which 
   created the object. 

   It is meaningful for some classes of objects to exist independently 
   on a media server. Network connections may be created through SIP at 
   any time. MSML is then used to associate their media with other 
   objects as required to create services requested by clients. 
   Conferences may be created and have specific resources reserved 
   waiting for connections.  

   Objects from these two classes, connections and conferences, are 
   considered independent objects since they can exist on a standalone 
   basis. Identifiers for independent objects consist of single term as 
   defined above. For example, identifiers for a conference and 
   connection could be "conf:abc" or "conn:1234" respectively. Clients 
   which choose to assign instance names to independent objects must use 
   globally unique instance names. One way to create globally unique 
   names is to include the domain name of the client as part of the 
   name. 

   Dialogs and operators are only created to provide some form of 
   service to independent objects. Dialogs may act as a participant in a 
   conference or interact with a connection similar to a two participant 
   call. Operators modify the media flow between other objects, such as 
   between a connection and a conference. As such, dialogs and operators 
   depend upon the existence of independent objects and this is 
   reflected in the composition of their identifiers.  

   Identifiers for dialogs and operators are composed of a structured 
   list of slash ('/') separated terms. The left-most term of the 
   identifier must specify a conference or connection. This serves as 
   the root for the identifier. An example of an identifier for a dialog 
   acting as a conference participant could be: 

       conf:abc/dialog:recorder 

   Because operators may exist relative to two independent objects, 
   different identifiers, with each independent object serving as the 
   root, may be used to refer to the same operator. This is discussed 
   further below.  

   All objects except connections are created using MSML. Connections 
   are created when media sessions get established through SIP. There 
   are several options clients and media servers can use to establish a 
   shared instance name for the media streams of a connection.  

   Connection instance names can be network identifiers or aliases. A 
   network identifier consists of the IP address and the port number of 
   a specific media stream. Because these are not used in the context of 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 8] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   addressing, and are instead intended as opaque media stream 
   identifiers, it is not necessary to distinguish the address family. 
   Either IPv4 or IPv6 addresses may be used.  

   Examples of connection identifiers based upon network identifiers 
   are: 

       conn:192.0.26.2:10000 
       conn:FF1E:03AD::7F2E:172A:1E24:10000 

   Clients may also use the <alias> element to create a named alias for 
   a connection. Media servers may also support automatic creation of 
   aliases. An automatic alias can use an identifier from the SIP 
   message used to establish the session together with a stream 
   identifier from the SDP. Stream identifiers are required in order to 
   support multiple media streams, such as audio and video, from a 
   single connection.  

   Any of the fields that are used to uniquely identify a SIP dialog 
   (Call-ID, from-tag, to-tag) could be used to identify the session. 
   Specific media streams can be identified using either the position of 
   the media line describing the stream in SDP or use the per media 
   description information lines "i-lines" when those are present.  

   An example of a connection identifier based upon an explicitly 
   assigned alias is:  

       conn:aliasedConnection 

   And an exampled based upon an automatically assigned alias using the 
   position of the media line could be: 

       conn:1234567890@example.com:2 

   Note that in all cases, there are no MSML semantics to the contents 
   of the identifier. 

   The preceding discussion on connection identifiers assumes that an 
   MSML client is using 3PCC to establish the media sessions. Thus both 
   the client and the media server have access to the SDP and SIP dialog 
   identifiers. If this is not the case, it would be a simple matter to 
   use an event package to allow a media server to notify new sessions 
   to a client that has subscribed to this information. 

   Identifiers as described above allow every object in a media server 
   to be uniquely addressed. They can also be used to refer to multiple 
   objects. There are two ways in which this can currently be done: 

      o  common instance names 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                 [Page 9] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
      o  wildcards 

   Operators that are inserted between two independent objects, such as 
   between a conference and a connection, can be identified using either 
   independent object as the root for its identifier as described above. 
   All operators can thus be uniquely referenced through connections, 
   even if they have the same instance name. An operator identifier that 
   uses a conference as the root may resolve to multiple objects. This 
   allows common control for operators on multiple media streams. 

   For example, assume that a client has created a conference with an 
   instance name of "abc". Assume also that it has inserted an operator, 
   with an instance name "VolumeGroup1", in a subset of media streams 
   into the conference. In this case, the identifier 
   "conf:abc/oper:VolumeGroup1" identifies multiple objects which, for 
   example, could all have their input volume simultaneously muted. The 
   volume operator for a specific connection would be identified similar 
   to "conn:192.0.26.8:10000/oper:VolumeGroup1". 

   The other way an identifier can reference multiple objects is when a 
   wildcard is used as an instance name. MSML reserves the instance name 
   comprised of a single asterisk ('*') to mean all objects that have 
   the same identifier root and class. Instance names containing an 
   asterisk cannot be created. Wildcards are not allowed to represent 
   the instance of an independent object, either when identifying an 
   independent object itself, or as a root for other object identifiers.  

   The following are examples of valid wildcards: 

       conf:abc/oper:* 

       conn:1234567890@example.com:2/dialog:* 

   Examples of illegal wildcard usage are: 

       conf:*/oper:73849 

       conn:* 

   Although identifiers share a common syntax, MSML elements restrict 
   the class of objects which are valid in a given context. As an 
   example, although it is valid to join two connections together, it is 
   not valid to join two IVR dialogs.   

3.3 Media Streams 

   All objects have at least one input and one output. Each class 
   defines the number of inputs and outputs an object supports. Joining 
   objects consists of connecting the output from one object to the 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 10] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   input of another object and vice versa. When a join is requested to 
   an object that already has a media stream connected to its single 
   input (such as a connection), a media server should automatically 
   bridge the new stream with the existing stream. 

   The maximum number of streams that may be bridged in this manner is 
   implementation-specific, but it is recommended that a media server 
   support bridging at least two streams. Two reflects the ability to 
   easily create simple three-way calls, and to bridge private 
   announcements with a conference mix that can be heard by an 
   individual conference participant.  

   Other applications with specialized topologies may benefit from more 
   than two or three automatically bridged media streams. In the case of 
   general conferences, however, it is simpler to create a conference 
   (with associated mixer) and then to join participants to the 
   conference. 

4. MSML SIP Usage 

   SIP is used to create and modify media sessions with a media server 
   according to the procedures defined in RFC 3261 [1]. Often, SIP third 
   party call control will be used to create sessions to a media server 
   on behalf of end users. MSML is used to define and change the service 
   which a user connected to a media server will receive. As such, MSML 
   clients are expected to be application servers, which must have an 
   authorized security relationship with the media server. MSML itself 
   does not define authorization mechanisms. 

   MSML transactions are originated based upon events that occur in the 
   application domain. These events may be independent from any media or 
   user interaction. For example, an application may wish to play an 
   announcement to a conference warning that its scheduled completion 
   time is approaching. Applications themselves are structured in many 
   different ways. Their structure and requirements contribute to their 
   selection of protocols and languages. To accommodate differing 
   application needs, MSML has been designed to be neutral to other 
   languages and independent of the transport used to carry it. 

   Many alternatives exist for a transport mechanism for MSML. There may 
   be one or many transport channels used to carry MSML based upon the 
   requirements and structure of applications. SIP INVITE and INFO [3] 
   requests and responses have been chosen to carry MSML in this release 
   of the specification. INFO requests allow asynchronous mid-call 
   messages within SIP with few additional semantics. In addition, there 
   are existing widely deployed implementations of that method, it aids 
   in initial developments which are closely coupled with SIP session 
   establishment, and it allows MSML to be directly associated with user 
   dialogs when third party call control is used. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 11] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Although INFO is generally not considered to be a suitable general-
   purpose transport mechanism for messages within SIP, there have been 
   proposals to make it more acceptable [10]. MSML is expected to evolve 
   to include other SIP usage and/or to work with other protocols or as 
   a stand-alone protocol established through SIP, in future releases of 
   this document. 

   MSML supports several models for client interaction. When clients use 
   3PCC to establish media sessions on behalf of end users, clients will 
   have a SIP dialog for each media session. MSML may be sent on these 
   dialogs. However the targets of MSML actions are not inferred from 
   the session associated with the SIP dialog. The targets of MSML 
   actions are always explicitly specified using identifiers as 
   previously defined. 

   An application, after interacting with a user, may want to affect 
   multiple objects within a media server. For example, tones or 
   messages are often played to a conference when connections are added 
   or removed. A separate message may also be played to a participant as 
   they are joined, or to moderators. Explicit identifiers not inferred 
   from a transport mechanism allow these multiple actions to be easily 
   grouped into a single transaction sent on any SIP dialog.  

   MSML also supports a model of dedicated control associations. This 
   supports decoupled application architectures where a client can 
   control media server services without also establishing all of the 
   media sessions itself. Control associations are created using SIP but 
   they do not have any associated media session. Although initially 
   INFO messages will be sent on this SIP dialog, just as with dialogs 
   associated with media sessions, it is expected that in the future, 
   the SIP dialog will be used to establish a separate control session 
   (defined in SDP) that does not use SIP as the transport for MSML 
   messages. 

   A media server using MSML also sends asynchronous events to a client 
   using SIP INFO. Events are sent based on previous MSML requests and 
   are sent within the SIP dialog on which the MSML request that caused 
   the event to be generated was received. If the dialog no longer 
   exists when the event is generated, the event is discarded. 

   Events may be generated during the execution of a dialog created by a 
   <dialogstart> element. For example, dialogs defined in MOML can send 
   events based on user input. VoiceXML dialogs on the other hand, 
   generally interact with other servers outside of MSML using HTTP.  

   An event is also generated when the execution of a dialog terminates, 
   either because of completion or failure. The exact information 
   returned is dependent on the dialog language, the capabilities of the 
   dialog execution environment, and what was specified by the dialog. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 12] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Both MOML and VoiceXML allow information to be returned when they 
   exit. These events may be sent in a SIP INFO or a SIP BYE. BYE is 
   used when the dialog itself specifies that the connection should be 
   disconnected such as through the use of <disconnect>. 

   Conferences may also generate events based upon their configuration. 
   An example of this is the notification of the set of active speakers. 

5. Execution Flow 

   MSML assumes a model where there is a single control context within a 
   media server for MSML processing. That context may have one or many 
   SIP dialogs associated with it. It is assumed that any SIP dialogs 
   associated with the MSML control context have been authorized by 
   mechanisms outside the scope of MSML. 

   A media server control context maintains information about the state 
   of all media objects and media streams within a media server. It 
   receives and processes all MSML requests from authorized SIP dialogs 
   and receives all events generated internally by media objects and 
   sends them on the appropriate SIP dialog. An MSML request is able to 
   create new media objects and streams, and to modify or destroy any 
   existing media objects and streams.  

   An MSML request may simply specify a single action for a media server 
   to undertake. In this case, the document is very similar to a simple 
   command request. Often, though, it may be more natural for a client 
   to request multiple actions at one time, or the client would like 
   several actions to be closely coordinated by the media server. 
   Multiple MSML elements received in a single request are processed 
   sequentially in document order. 

   An example of the first scenario would be to create a conference and 
   join it with an initial participant. An example of the second case 
   would be to unjoin one or more participants from a main conference 
   and join them to a sidebar conference. In the first scenario, network 
   latencies may not be an issue, but it is simpler for the client to 
   combine the requests. In the second case, the added network latency 
   between separate requests could mean perceptible audio loss to the 
   participant. 

   Each MSML request is processed as a single transaction. A media 
   server must ensure that it has the necessary resources available to 
   carry out the complete transaction before executing any elements of 
   the request. If it does not have sufficient resources, it should 
   return a 520 response and not execute the transaction.  

   The MSML request must be checked for well-formedness and validated 
   against the schema prior to executing any elements. This allows XML 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 13] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   errors to reported immediately and minimizes failures within a 
   transaction and the corresponding execution of only part of the 
   transaction.  

   Each element is expected to execute immediately. Elements such as 
   <dialogstart>, which take time, are "forked" and executed in a 
   separate thread. Once successfully forked, execution continues with 
   the element following the dialog. As such, MSML does not provide 
   mechanisms to sequence or coordinate other operations with dialog 
   elements.  

   Processing within a transaction stops if any errors occur. Elements 
   that were executed prior to the error are not rolled back. It is the 
   responsibility of the client to determine appropriate actions based 
   upon the results indicated in the response. Most elements may contain 
   an optional "mark" attribute. The value of that attribute from the 
   last successfully executed element is returned in an error response. 
   Note that errors that occur during the execution of a dialog occur 
   outside the context of an MSML transaction. These errors will be 
   indicated in an asynchronous event.  

   Transaction results are returned as part of the SIP request response. 
   The transaction results indicate the success or failure of the 
   transaction. It will also include identifiers for any objects created 
   by a media server for which the client did not provide an instance 
   name. Additionally, if the transaction fails, the reason for the 
   failure is returned, as well as an indication of how much of the 
   transaction was executed before the failure occurred. 

6. Elements Received by a Media Server 

   This section defines the specific MSML elements that clients use to 
   request services from a media server. Each request element is 
   defined, together with its attributes and any errors specific to the 
   request, in sub-sections below. Errors that are common across 
   requests, such as syntax errors, are summarized in section 9. 

6.1 <msml> 

   <msml> is the root element. When received by a media server, it 
   defines the set of actions that form a single MSML transaction. 
   Actions are defined by the remaining elements of this section, most 
   of which may appear zero or more times as children of <msml>. 

   The results of the transaction are included as a body in the response 
   to the SIP request that contained the transaction. This response will 
   contain any identifiers that the media server assigned to newly 
   created objects. All messages that a media server generates are 
   correlated to those object identifiers.  
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 14] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
      Attributes: 

         version: "1.0" Mandatory  

6.2 <alias> 

   Alias is used to assign a name to a connection. The same connection 
   can be assigned multiple aliases but an alias may refer to only a 
   single connection or an error (433) occurs.  

      attributes:  

         name: the instance name of the aliased connection. Mandatory. 

         id: an existing connection identifier. Mandatory. 

         mark: a token that can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

   For example, the following assigns the alias "moderator" to a 
   connection referenced using a network identifier. 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <alias name="moderator" id="conn:192.0.2.4:6428"/> 
         </msml> 

6.3 <join> 

   Join is used to create a media stream between two media objects. A 
   media object may be a network connection or an internal media 
   resource such as a conference. By default a full-duplex media stream 
   is created. However a half-duplex stream may be created by setting a 
   duplex attribute to "half". Join establishes the specified 
   relationship between the two objects and does not change any pre-
   existing relationships.  

   Some media resources may only be half-duplex. It is illegal to join a 
   full-duplex resource to a half-duplex resource without specifying the 
   join to be half-duplex. Otherwise the media server cannot be sure of 
   the intent and will generate an error (441). At most one media stream 
   may be created between the same two objects. When the two objects 
   specified by a join operation already have a media stream between 
   them, the value of the duplex attribute must be different from the 
   existing stream or an error (443) will be generated. In this way, 
   join can be used to change the duplexity of an existing stream. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 15] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Join is only used to establish media streams between independent 
   objects. Media streams to the media resources for a dialog are 
   established in conjunction with starting the dialog. Operators are 
   only inserted into existing media streams.   

      attributes:  

         id1: an identifier of either a connection or conference. Any 
         other object class results in a 440 error.  

         id2: an identifier of either a connection or conference. Any 
         other object class results in a 440 error. 

         duplex: "half" or "full". When "half" is specified the object 
         identified by id1 receives media from the object identified by 
         id2 but not vice versa. Default is full.  

         class: only allowed when either id1 or id2 identifies an 
         advanced audio conference. These conferences have two types of 
         audio inputs; "standard" participants contend to be one of the 
         N-loudest which contribute to the conference mix; "preferred" 
         always contribute to the conference mix. The duplex attribute 
         governs whether a media stream is actually established. Default 
         is "standard". When both id1 and id2 are conferences, class is 
         ignored and a preferred input is used. 

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

   For example, consider a call center coaching scenario where a 
   supervisor can listen to the conversation between an agent and a 
   customer, and provide hints to the agent, which are not heard by the 
   customer. One join establishes a stream between the agent and the 
   customer and another join establishes a stream between the agent and 
   the supervisor. A third join is used to establish a half-duplex 
   stream from the customer to the supervisor. The media server 
   automatically bridges the media streams from the customer and the 
   supervisor for the agent, and from the customer and the agent for the 
   supervisor.  

   Assuming the following media streams  
      supervisor: 192.0.2.2:4680 
           agent: 192.0.2.4:6428 
        customer: 192.0.2.6:9684 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 16] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   If all connections were already established on a media server the 
   following would create the media flows previously described: 

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
   <msml version="1.0"> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.2:4680" id2="conn:192.0.2.4:6428"/> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.4:6428" id2="conn:192.0.2.6:9684"/> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.2:4680" id2="conn:192.0.2.6:9684"  
            duplex="half"/> 
   </msml> 

6.4 <unjoin> 

   Unjoin removes a media stream between two objects. <unjoin> and 
   <join> may be used together to move a media stream, such as from a 
   main conference to a sidebar conference. 

      attributes:  

         id1: an identifier of either a specific connection or a 
         conference. Mandatory. 

         id2: an identifier of either a specific connection or a 
         conference. Mandatory. 

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

   The following removes a participant from a conference and plays a 
   leave tone for the remaining participants in the conference. 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <unjoin id1="conn:192.0.2.2:8" id2="conf:1"/> 
            <dialogstart target="conf:1" type="application/moml+xml"> 
               <play> 
                  <audio uri="file://leave_tone.wav"/> 
               </play> 
            </dialogstart> 
         </msml> 

6.5 <createconference> 

   Create conference is used to allocate media processing resources for 
   audio conferences. Two types of audio conferences are defined; 
   audio.basic and audio.advanced. A basic conference is simply an N-1 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 17] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   mix of the participants. An advanced conference supports the 
   following features: 

      o  N-loudest 
      o  preferred speakers 
      o  participant and conference resource reservations 
      o  active speaker notifications 

   Characteristics of conferences may be changed dynamically during the 
   conference by sending events to the conference identifier. The event 
   name would identify the attribute to set and the valuelist for the 
   event would specify the new value. The type of conference cannot be 
   changed once the conference has been created. 

      attributes: (all attributes are optional. Only the name attribute 
      is allowed if type="audio.basic") 

         type: audio.basic or audio.advanced. In the future this may be 
         a URL which identifies a description of a conference. MOML may 
         be a candidate language to specify conference descriptions. 
         Default is audio.advanced.  

         name: the instance name of the conference. If the attribute is 
         not present, the media server will assign a globally unique 
         name for the conference. If the attribute is present but the 
         name is already in use, an error (432) will result and MSML 
         document execution will stop. Any events which the conference 
         generates will be correlated with this name. 

         n: the number of participants (excluding preferred speakers) 
         who contend to be included in the conference mix based upon 
         their audio energy. Default is 3. 

         asn: boolean which defines whether active speakers should be 
         reported. Only the participants who are active and eligible to 
         contribute to the mix are reported. Default is false. 

         ri: the minimum reporting interval defines the minimum duration 
         of time which must pass before changes to active speakers will 
         be reported. Default is 5 seconds. 

         deletewhen: defines when a media server should automatically 
         delete the conference. Possible values are "nomedia" 
         corresponding to the last participant leaving, "nocontrol" 
         corresponding to the termination of the SIP dialog that carries 
         the <createconference> element, and "never" which leaves 
         conference deletion under the control of the conference 
         application. Default is nomedia. 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 18] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

   An example of creating a conference is shown below. This conference 
   allows at most two participants to contend to be heard and reports 
   the set of active speakers no more frequently than every ten seconds. 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <createconference name="myconf" n="2" asn="true" ri="10S"/> 
         </msml> 

   If the MSML client later decides that three participants should 
   contend to be mixed, it may do so by: 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <send target="conf:myconf" event="n" valuelist="3"/> 
         </msml> 

   The deletewhen attribute allows a media server to automatically 
   delete a conference when the specified condition occurs. When a 
   conference is deleted because the last participant has left, a 
   msml.conf.nomedia event is notified to the MSML client. When a 
   conference is deleted because the SIP dialog controlling the 
   conference is terminated, a media server must terminate all 
   participants by sending a BYE for their associated SIP dialog. This 
   corresponds to the client having issued a <destroyconference> with a 
   default value for the "term" attribute.  

6.5.1 <reserve> 

   Conference resources may be reserved by including the <reserve> 
   element as a child of <createconference>. <reserve> allows the 
   specification of a set of resources which a media server will reserve 
   for the conference. Any requests for resources beyond those that have 
   been reserved should be honored on a best-effort basis by a media 
   server. 

      attributes:  

         required: boolean that specifies whether <createconference> 
         should fail if the requested resources are not available. When 
         set to false, the conference will be created, with no reserved 
         resources, if the complete reservation cannot be honored. 
         Default true. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 19] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   Two classes of resources are associated with a conference. Individual 
   resources consist of those resources which are reserved for each 
   participant. Shared resources are reserved for the entire conference. 
   Examples of shared resources may be announcement players or voice 
   recorders. Each class of resource is defined using the child elements 
   <individual> and <shared> respectively. Each of these accepts an 
   attribute that indicates the number of resource instances that are to 
   be reserved.  

   The contents of each element describes the resources that are to be 
   reserved for each instance. Descriptions are implementation-
   dependent. Media servers that support MOML may use the elements from 
   that language as the basis for resource descriptions. 

   In the general case, the resources reserved for each participant must 
   accommodate all of the codecs that a media server supports. However 
   in some environments, the types of codecs that are expected may be 
   known. In these cases, a media server may support descriptions that 
   constrain reservations to different media formats.  

   For example, the following creates a conference and reserves 
   individual resources for 20 participants, and reserves 2 instances of 
   the shared resources for use on a conference-wide basis. 

   <createconference> 
      <reserve> 
         <individual n="20"> 
            <!-- description of resources used by each participant --> 
         </individual> 
         <shared n="2"> 
            <!-- description of the shared conference resources --> 
         </shared> 
      </reserve> 
   </createconference>      

   The number of individual and shared reservations may be changed 
   during the life of a conference by sending "reserve-ind" and 
   "reserve-shared" events to the conference identifier. The valuelist 
   indicates the number of instances which are now desired. The success 
   of the request is indicated in the response to the event. Requests 
   for increases that cannot be honored do not change the reservation 
   which was previously established. 

   Individual reservations are consumed when participants are joined to 
   the conference. Applications must either include MSML indicating a 
   <join> to the conference with the initial SIP INVITE, or must use the 
   "conf=" Request-URI conventions defined in [6], to ensure that the 
   conference connection may make use of the reserved resources when the 
   connection is first established. Otherwise, if a dialog is required 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 20] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   to determine the conference or service, the connection contends for 
   available media server resources. 

6.6 <destroyconference> 

   Destroy conference deletes the conference state and all shared 
   resources. Any media streams between the conference and participants 
   are also removed. 

      attributes:  

         id: the identifier for a conference. Mandatory. 

         term: a boolean value: When true, the media server will send a 
         BYE request on all SIP dialogs still associated with the 
         conference. Setting term equal to false allows clients to start 
         dialogs on connections once the conference has completed. 
         Default true.  

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within 
         an MSML document should be unique. 

6.7 <dialogstart> 

   Dialog start is used to instantiate media dialog on connections or 
   conferences. A dialog may consist of a simple atomic command or it 
   may be an entire sequence of interactions. Dialogs may be speech or 
   IVR dialogs with human participants, of fax dialogs with a machine. A 
   media server must support MOML to allow command driven and fax 
   interactions, and should support VoiceXML to allow execution of 
   complex user interfaces. Other dialog languages may also be 
   supported. 

   The control resources associated with dialogs are separate from the 
   MSML thread of execution. When a dialog is started, a media stream is 
   created between the media resources required for the dialog and then 
   MSML allows the dialog control resources to execute. MSML execution 
   continues without waiting for the dialog to complete.  

   The media stream between the dialog media resources and the network 
   connection or conference may be full-duplex or half-duplex. When a 
   dialog is performed on conferences of type audio.advanced, the dialog 
   media stream is connected to the conference mixer as a preferred 
   speaker. 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 21] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   The dialog description may be specified either inline or by a URL. 
   The description must not be inline if the src attribute is specified.  

   The originator of the dialog is notified using a "msml.dialog.exit" 
   event when the dialog completes. Any results returned by the dialog 
   when it exits are sent as a namelist to the event.  

   The "msml.dialog.exit" event is also used when dialogs fail due to 
   errors encountered fetching external documents or errors that occur 
   within the dialog execution thread. In this case, a namelist 
   containing the items "dialog.exit.status" and 
   "dialog.exit.description" is returned with the event to inform the 
   client of the failure and the failure reason. The values of these 
   items are defined in section 9. Information from the failed dialog 
   may be returned as additional namelist items. 

      attributes:  

         target: an identifier of a connection or a conference which 
         will interact with the dialog. Mandatory. 

         src: the URL of the dialog description. Must not be used if the 
         dialog description is inline. Otherwise  an error (422) will 
         result and MSML document execution will stop. 

         type: a MIME type which identifies the type of language used to 
         describe the dialog. application/moml+xml and 
         application/vxml+xml are used to identify MOML and VoiceXML 
         respectively. 

         name: an instance name for the dialog. If the attribute is not 
         present, the media server will assign an identifier to the 
         dialog. If the attribute is present but the name is already 
         associated with the target, an error (431) will result and MSML 
         document execution will stop. Any results that a dialog 
         generates will be correlated to its identifier.  

         duplex: "full" means the media stream is full-duplex, "to" 
         means the media stream is half-duplex to the dialog (it 
         receives audio), and "from" means the media stream is half-
         duplex from the dialog (it sends media). Default "full". 

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within 
         an MSML document should be unique. 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 22] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   The following example starts a VoiceXML dialog on a connection. 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <dialogstart target="conn:192.0.2.6:9684"  
                type="application/vxml+xml" 
                name="sample" 
                src="http://server.example.com/scripts/foo.vxml"/> 
         </msml> 

   If this dialog failed once its execution thread had begun, for 
   example the fetch of the VoiceXML document failed, an example of the 
   event which would be returned would be: 

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <event name="msml.dialog.exit"  
                id="conn:192.0.2.6:9684/dialog:sample"> 
            <name>dialog.exit.status</name> 
            <value>423</value> 
            <name>dialog.exit.description</name> 
            <value>External document fetch error</value> 
         </event> 

6.8 <dialogend> 

   Dialog end is used to terminate a dialog created through 
   <dialogstart> before it completes of its own accord. The operation of 
   <dialogend> depends on the dialog language being used by the 
   executing context. When that context is VoiceXML, a 
   "connection.disconnected" event will be thrown to the VoiceXML 
   application. When that context is MOML, a "terminate" event will be 
   sent to the MOML context. 

   <dialogend> allows the executing dialog the opportunity to gracefully 
   complete before generating a "msml.dialog.exit" event. Dialog results 
   may be returned and will be contained as a namelist to that event. 

      attributes:  

         id: the identifier of a dialog. Mandatory. 

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all "mark" attributes within 
         an MSML document should be unique. 



 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 23] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   For example, if the dialog from the previous example was still 
   executing, the following would terminate the dialog and generate a 
   "msml.dialog.exit" event.  

         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <dialogend id="conn:192.0.2.6:9684/dialog:sample"/> 
         </msml> 

6.9 <insert>  

   Insert allows media streams to be modified by placing a media 
   processing operator between two existing objects. Operators may be 
   full-duplex or half-duplex. The existing media stream is replaced by 
   a new stream which includes the inserted operator. When a half-duplex 
   operator is inserted, only the media stream in one direction is 
   affected. Operators are used to transform, filter, or otherwise 
   modify a media stream. Examples are gain controls, voice masking, or 
   tone filters although specific operators are not defined within MSML.  

   Operators are defined using MOML although media servers may also 
   support other languages. Half-duplex operators may be as simple as 
   individual MOML transform primitives such as <gain> or <clamp> which 
   explicitly adjust gain and filter DTMF tones respectively. More 
   complex half-duplex and full-duplex operators can also be created and 
   used. Media objects may be referenced by a URL or defined inline. 

   Full-duplex operators may not be symmetric in how they process media. 
   Media in one direction may be treated or used differently from media 
   in the other direction. For example, automatic gain control may be 
   applied to media going to a conference mix but a participant may have 
   the ability to explicitly control the volume of the conference mix 
   that they hear. In this case, a media server uses the left side and 
   right side definition of the inserted operator to know how to orient 
   its inputs and outputs with the media stream.  

   Insert differs from using explicit unjoin and join operations because 
   the inserted operator is considered to be part of the media stream 
   between the two original objects. If one of those objects terminates, 
   for example a dialog, then the operator is automatically removed as 
   part of deleting the media stream. Multiple operators may be inserted 
   and all become part of the media stream. 

   It may often be desired to define the same treatment for all of the 
   media streams associated with a conference. When one of the objects 
   identifies a conference, <insert> allows the other object to be 
   specified as "all" to indicate that a copy of the new object should 
   become part of the media stream for all participants of the 
   conference. The keyword "all" affects all current and future streams 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 24] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   joined to the conference. The class of media stream that is affected 
   may be specified for conferences that support multiple kinds of 
   participants.  

      attributes:  

         id1: an identifier or "all" if id2 specifies a conference. If 
         the inserted operator is half-duplex, id1 identifies the 
         recipient of the media from the operator. If the inserted 
         operator is full-duplex, id1 is connected to the left side of 
         the operator. Mandatory. 

         id2: an identifier or "all" if id1 specifies a conference. If 
         the inserted operator is half-duplex, id2 identifies the object 
         that will send media to the operator. If the inserted operator 
         is full-duplex, id2 is connected to the right-side of the 
         operator. Mandatory. 

         src: the URL of a document defining the media operator. Must 
         not be used if the operator is inline or an error (422) will 
         result and MSML document execution will stop. 

         type: a MIME type which identifies the type of language used to 
         describe the operator. The type "application/moml+xml" must be 
         supported and is the default. 

         duplex: "half" or "full". When "half" is specified the inserted 
         object affects the stream in the direction from id2 to id1 but 
         not vice versa. Default is half. 

         name: an instance name for the object.  

         class: defines the class of conference media stream which is 
         affected when a conference supports multiple classes and the 
         "all" keyword is used (see also <join>). If no class is 
         specified, then all media streams are affected. The class 
         attribute must not be used if neither id1 nor id2 specify "all" 
         media streams. 

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

   For example, the following creates a conference, and specifies that a 
   gain control object from MOML should be inserted for each participant 
   that joins the conference that will automatically adjust the gain on 
   their input to the conference mix. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 25] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
         <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
         <msml version="1.0"> 
            <createconference name="myconf""/> 
            <insert id1="conf:myconf" id2="all"  
                    type="application/moml+xml" duplex="half"> 
               <agc/> 
            </insert> 
         </msml> 

6.10 <remove> 

   The remove element is used to remove objects which have been placed 
   in a media stream using <insert>. Remove restores the original media 
   stream. 

      attributes:  

         id: the identifier of the object to remove. If id refers to 
         multiple objects affecting multiple media streams, then all 
         objects are removed from all affected media streams. Mandatory. 

6.11 <send> 

   Events are used to affect the behavior of different objects within a 
   media server. The <send> element is used to send an event to the 
   specified recipient. An example of using <send> is shown in the 
   definition of <createconference>. 

      attributes: 

         event: the name of an event. Mandatory. 

         target: an object identifier. When the identifier is for a 
         dialog or operator, it may optionally be appended with a slash 
         "/" followed by the target to be included in a MOML <send>. 
         Connections and conferences of type "audio.basic" do not 
         support events. Mandatory. 

         valuelist: a list of zero or more parameters that are included 
         with the event. 

         mark: a token that can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 



 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 26] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
7. Elements Sent by a Media Server 

7.1 <msml> 

   The root element for MSML. When sent by a media server, it 
   encompasses the results of a request or the contents of events. 

      Attributes: 

         version: Mandatory "1.0" 

7.2 <result> 

   The <result> element is used to report the results of an MSML 
   transaction. It is included as a body in the final response to the 
   SIP request which initiated the transaction. An optional child 
   element <description> may include text which expands on the meaning 
   of error responses. Response codes are defined in the following 
   section. 

      attributes:  

         response: a numeric code indicating the overall success or 
         failure of the transaction, and in the case of failure, an 
         indication of the reason. Mandatory. 

         mark: in the case of an error, the value of the mark attribute 
         from the last successfully executed element that included the 
         mark attribute. 

   In the case of failure, a description of the reason should be 
   provided using the child element <description>. 

   Three other child elements allow the response to include identifiers 
   for objects created by the request but which did not have instance 
   names specified by the client. Those elements are <confid>, 
   <dialogid>, and <operid>, for objects created though a 
   <createconference>, <dialogstart>, or <insert> respectively. 

7.3 <event> 

   The <event> element is used to convey an event to a media server 
   client. Two types of events are defined by MSML: "msml.dialog.exit", 
   and "msml.conf.asn". These correspond to the termination of an 
   executing dialog, and the notification of the current set of active 
   speakers for a conference, respectively. Events may also be generated 
   by an executing dialog. In this case the event type is specified by 
   the dialog. 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 27] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
      attributes:  

         name: the type of event. Mandatory. 

         id: the identifier of the conference or dialog that generated 
         the event or caused the event to be generated. Mandatory. 

   <event> has two children, <name> and <value>, which contain the name 
   and value respectively of each namelist item associated with the 
   event. 

8. Specialized Join Operations 

   This sections defines two forms of specialized join operations. In 
   both cases, the resulting media stream may be removed using the 
   <unjoin> element described in section 6.4. 

8.1 <cjoin> 

   Compressed join is used to create a media stream between two 
   connections where no transcoding is required. As such, it functions 
   much like an RTP relay. By default a full-duplex compressed media 
   stream is created. However a half-duplex stream may be created by 
   setting a duplex attribute to "half". <cjoin> establishes the 
   specified relationship between the two objects and does not change 
   any pre-existing relationships.  

   Both connections must use the same media format or an error response 
   (450) is generated. At most one media stream, whether compressed or 
   transcoded, may be created between the same two objects. Only objects 
   which operate with the compressed media format may be inserted into a 
   compressed media stream or an error response (451) is generated. 

      attributes:  

         id1: an identifier of a connection. Any other object class 
         results in a 440 error.  

         id2: an identifier of a connection. Any other object class 
         results in a 440 error. 

         duplex: "half" or "full". When "half" is specified the object 
         identified by id1 receives media from the object identified by 
         id2 but not vice versa. Default is full.  

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 28] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

8.2 <monitor> 

   Monitor is a specialized half-duplex join that copies the media that 
   is destined for a connection object. One example of the use for 
   <monitor> may be quality monitoring within a conference.  

      attributes:  

         id1: an identifier of the connection to be monitored. Any other 
         object class results in a 440 error.  

         id2: an identifier of the object which is to receive the copy 
         of the media destined to id1. id2 may be a connection or a 
         conference. Any other object class results in a 440 error. 

         compressed: "true" or "false". Specifies whether the join 
         should occur before or after compression. When "true", id2 must 
         be a connection using the same media format as id1 or an error 
         response (450) is generated. Default is "false.  

         mark: a token which can be used to identify execution progress 
         in the case of errors. The value of the mark attribute from the 
         last successfully executed MSML element is returned in an error 
         response. Therefore the value of all mark attributes within an 
         MSML document should be unique. 

9. Response Codes 

   The response codes defined in this section are returned as the value 
   of the response attribute to the <result> element. Some values may 
   also be returned as part of a namelist to an "msml.dialog.exit" event 
   generated when an executing dialog fails. 

         Informational (1xx) 

   Reserved for future use 

         Success 

   200  Ok 

         Client Error (4xx) 

   400  Bad Request 
   401  Unknown Element 
   402  Unsupported Element 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 29] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   403  Missing mandatory element content 
   404  Forbidden element content 
   405  Invalid element content 
   406  Unknown attribute 
   407  Attribute not supported 
   408  Missing mandatory attribute 
   409  Forbidden attribute is present 
   410  Invalid attribute value 

   420  Unsupported media description language 
   421  Unknown media description language 
   422  Ambiguous request (both URI and inline description) 
   423  External document fetch error 
   424  Syntax error in foreign language 
   425  Semantic error in foreign language 
   426  Unknown error executing foreign language 

   430  Object does not exist 
   431  Object instance name already used 
   432  Conference name already in use 
   433  Alias name already in use 
   434  External document fetch error 

   440  Cannot join objects of specified class 
   441  Objects have wrong duplexity 
   442  Media stream does not exist to insert 
   443  Objects already joined with specified duplexity 
   444  Number of media inputs exceeded 

   450  Objects have incompatible media formats 
   451  Incompatible media stream format 

         Server Error (5xx) 

   500  Internal media server error 
   510  Not in service 
   511  Service Unavailable 
   520  No resource to fulfill request 
   521  Internal limit exceeded 

10. Examples 

10.1 MSML transaction 

   The following example creates a sidebar conference and moves three 
   participants from a main conference to the sidebar using <unjoin> and 
   <join>. It then does a half-duplex join of the main conference to the 
   sidebar, so that those in the sidebar may hear the main conference. 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 30] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   However, a gain is inserted so that the volume of the main conference 
   does not intrude on the sidebar. 

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
   <msml version="1.0"> 
      <createconference type="audio.basic" name="conf:sidebar"/> 
      <unjoin id1="conn:192.0.2.2:4680" id2="conf:main"/> 
      <unjoin id1="conn:192.0.2.4:6428" id2="conf:main"/> 
      <unjoin id1="conn:192.0.2.6:9684" id2="conf:main"/> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.2:4680" id2="conf:sidebar"/> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.4:6428" id2="conf:sidebar"/> 
      <join id1="conn:192.0.2.6:9684" id2="conf:sidebar"/> 
      <join id1="conf:sidebar" id2="conf:main" duplex="half"/> 
      <insert id1="conf:sidebar" id2="conf:main"  
              duplex="half" type="application/moml+xml"> 
         <gain amt="-30"/> 
      </insert> 
   </msml> 

10.2 Call Flow 

   The following call flow shows an application server (AS) using a 
   media server (MS) to create a three-person conference. Three 
   terminals (T1, T2, T3) each dial in to a conferencing access number 
   hosted on the AS. The AS uses 3PCC to connect their media streams to 
   the MS and uses the MS to engage in a welcome dialog with each 
   person.  

   That dialog would consist of playing a greeting and asking them for a 
   conference identifier. Either MOML or VoiceXML could be used for 
   dialogs. The flow presented here assumes that MOML has been used, and 
   that the results are returned to the AS using MSML. Had VoiceXML been 
   used, the results would have been posted to the AS using HTTP. 

   After the first person has requested the conference, the AS instructs 
   the MS to create the conference and joins in that participant. 
   Subsequent participants are simply joined to the existing conference. 
   Each person records their name and the second and third participants 
   have their name announced to the conference as they join. 

    

   T1, T2, T3                    AS                                   MS 
   ----------                    --                                   -- 
    
   T1 -----------INVITE--------> | 
   T1 <------------OK----------- | 
   T1 -----------ACK-----------> | 
                                 | ---INVITE (MSML dialog[welcome])-> | 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 31] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | ---ACK---------------------------> | 
   T1 =====================RTP======================================> | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:conf-id)------ | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML dialog[rec name])--> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:recordexit)--- | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML createconf+join)---> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
       T2 ---------INVITE------> | 
       T2 <----------OK--------- | 
       T2 ---------ACK---------> | 
                                 | ---INVITE (MSML dialog[welcome])-> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | ---ACK---------------------------> | 
       T2 <================RTP======================================> | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:conf-id)------ | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML dialog[rec name])--> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:recordexit)--- | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML join)--------------> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
   T1 <=========RTP (conf mix)======================================> | 
       T2 <=====RTP (conf mix)======================================> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML dialog[play name])-> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
           T3 --------INVITE---> | 
           T3 <---------OK------ | 
           T3 --------ACK------> | 
                                 | ---INVITE (MSML dialog[welcome])-> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | ---ACK---------------------------> | 
           T3 <============RTP======================================> | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:conf-id)------ | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML dialog[rec name])--> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
                                 | <--INFO (MSML event:recordexit)--- | 
                                 | -----OK--------------------------> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML join)--------------> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 
           T3 <=RTP (conf mix)======================================> | 
                                 | ---INFO (MSML dialog[play name])-> | 
                                 | <----OK--------------------------- | 

 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 32] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
11. Change Summary 

   The following are the primary changes between this version of the 
   draft and the -01 version: 

      o  added the specialized join operations <cjoin> and <monitor> 

      o  added "deletewhen" attribute to <createconference> to allow a 
         media server to automatically delete conferences when the 
         specified condition occurs 

      o  clarified that <join> is used to change the duplexity of a 
         media stream 

   The following are the primary changes between this version of the 
   draft and the -00 version.  

      o  added a glossary 

      o  rewrote the description of objects to precisely distinguish 
         between classes and instances. All classes are now defined in 
         MSML. The "oper" class replaces "application defined classes". 

      o  rewrote the description of identifiers. All terms must use 
         "class:instance" where the instance may be assigned by the 
         client or media server. "/" replaces ";" as the term separator 
         for identifiers. 

      o  clarified the definition of connection identifiers and require 
         that "conn" be the class for all forms of the identifier. 

      o  '*' wildcard allowed for an instance name in limited 
         situations. 

      o  alias only names a single connection.  

      o  clarified SIP usage and transport neutrality. All actions use 
         mandatory explicit identifiers rather than inferring targets 
         from a SIP dialog. 

      o  changed the attribute name from "id" to "name" for client 
         assigned instance names. 

      o  fixed <send> so that MOML target is appended to the MSML target 
         rather than the MSML event. 

      o  changed xml+moml to moml+xml and xml+vxml to vxml+xml. 

      o  changed "namelist" to "valuelist" in send. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 33] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
      o  removed explicit "lhs" / "rhs" labeling of full duplex objects. 

      o  added specification of result codes and when they are returned. 

    

12. Future Work 

   Some of the likely functions to be added in future release of MSML 
   include: 

      o  a mechanism for extending the language, similar conceptually to 
         MGCP/MEGACO packages. 

      o  management capabilities such as dedicated management 
         associations between control agent and media server, auditing 
         of state, and support for control agent failover. 

      o  video and multimedia. 

    

13. XML Schemas 

   The MSML schema uses one core schema which includes two other 
   schemas; one defines the MSML datatypes, the other is for MOML which 
   is optionally used for dialogs and is required to define operators.  

   The core schema is: 

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
   <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"    
      elementFormDefault="qualified" attributeFormDefault="unqualified"> 
      <xs:include schemaLocation="moml.xsd"/> 
      <xs:include schemaLocation="msml-datatypes.xsd"/> 
      <xs:element name="msml"> 
         <xs:complexType> 
            <xs:choice> 
               <xs:group ref="msmlRequest"/> 
               <xs:element name="event"> 
                  <xs:complexType> 
                     <xs:choice maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
                        <xs:sequence> 
                           <xs:element name="name" 
                               type="msmlEventNameValue.datatype"/> 
                           <xs:element name="value"> 
                              <xs:simpleType> 
                                 <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
                                    <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.]+"/> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 34] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
                                 </xs:restriction> 
                              </xs:simpleType> 
                           </xs:element> 
                        </xs:sequence> 
                     </xs:choice> 
                     <xs:attribute name="name"  
                         type="msmlEventName.datatype" use="required"/> 
                     <xs:attribute name="id" 
                         type="msmlEventSource.datatype" 
                         use="required"/> 
                  </xs:complexType> 
               </xs:element> 
               <xs:element name="result"> 
                  <xs:complexType> 
                     <xs:sequence> 
                        <xs:element name="description" minOccurs="0"> 
                           <xs:simpleType> 
                              <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
                                 <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.-_]+"/> 
                              </xs:restriction> 
                           </xs:simpleType> 
                        </xs:element> 
                        <xs:choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
                           <xs:element name="confid"  
                               type="confID.datatype"/> 
                           <xs:element name="dialogid" 
                               type="dialogID.datatype"/> 
                           <xs:element name="operid"  
                               type="operatorID.datatype"/> 
                        </xs:choice> 
                     </xs:sequence> 
                     <xs:attribute name="response"> 
                        <xs:simpleType> 
                           <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
                              <xs:pattern value="\d{3}"/> 
                           </xs:restriction> 
                        </xs:simpleType> 
                     </xs:attribute> 
                  </xs:complexType> 
               </xs:element> 
            </xs:choice> 
            <xs:attribute name="version" type="xs:string"  
                use="required" fixed="1.0"/> 
         </xs:complexType> 
      </xs:element> 
      <xs:group name="msmlRequest"> 
         <xs:choice maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
            <xs:element name="alias"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 35] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
                  <xs:attribute name="id" type="connID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="name" use="required"> 
                     <xs:simpleType> 
                        <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
                           <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
                        </xs:restriction> 
                     </xs:simpleType> 
                  </xs:attribute> 
                  <xs:attribute name="mark" type="mark.datatype"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="createconference"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="type"  
                      type="conferenceType.datatype" use="optional"  
                      default="audio.advanced"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="name"  
                      type="msmlInstanceID.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="n" default="3"> 
                     <xs:simpleType> 
                        <xs:restriction base="xs:integer"> 
                           <xs:minInclusive value="1"/> 
                        </xs:restriction> 
                     </xs:simpleType> 
                  </xs:attribute> 
                  <xs:attribute name="asn" type="boolean.datatype" 
                      default="false"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="ri" type="posDuration.datatype" 
                      default="5s"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="deletewhen" default="nomedia"> 
                     <xs:simpleType> 
                        <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
                           <xs:enumeration value="nomedia"/> 
                           <xs:enumeration value="nocontrol"/> 
                           <xs:enumeration value="never"/> 
                        </xs:restriction> 
                     </xs:simpleType> 
                  </xs:attribute> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="destroyconference"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id" type="confID.datatype" 
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="term" type="boolean.datatype"  
                      default="true"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 36] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="dialogstart"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:sequence> 
                     <xs:group ref="momlRequest"/> 
                     <xs:group ref="sendType" minOccurs="0"/> 
                  </xs:sequence> 
                  <xs:attribute name="target"  
                      type="independentID.datatype" use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="type"  
                      type="dialogLanguage.datatype" use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="name"  
                      type="msmlInstanceID.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="duplex" type="duplex.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="src" type="xs:anyURI"  
                      use="optional"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="dialogend"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id" type="dialogID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="join"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id1" type="independentID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id2" type="independentID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="duplex" type="duplex.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="class" type="confclass.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark" type="mark.datatype"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="unjoin"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id1" type="independentID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id2" type="independentID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="insert"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 37] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
                  <xs:group ref="momlRequest"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id1" type="insertID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id2" type="insertID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="type" type="xs:string"  
                      use="required" fixed="application/moml+xml"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="duplex" type="duplex.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="name"  
                      type="msmlInstanceID.datatype" use="optional"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="class" type="confclass.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="remove"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="objid" type="operatorID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="cjoin"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id1" type="connID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id2" type="connID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="duplex" type="duplex.datatype"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark" type="mark.datatype"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="monitor"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id1" type="connID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="id2" type="independentID.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="compressed"  
                      type="boolean.datatype" default="false"/> 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark" type="mark.datatype"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
            <xs:element name="send"> 
               <xs:complexType> 
                  <xs:attribute name="event" type="msmlEvent.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="target" type="msmlTarget.datatype"  
                      use="required"/> 
                  <xs:attribute name="valuelist" type="xs:string"/> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 38] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
                  <xs:attribute ref="mark"/> 
               </xs:complexType> 
            </xs:element> 
         </xs:choice> 
      </xs:group> 
      <xs:attribute name="mark" type="mark.datatype"/> 
   </xs:schema> 

   Following is the schema which defines the basic datatypes used by the 
   other schema. Note that several regular expressions required them to 
   be split across two lines for formatting reasons. 

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
   <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"  
       elementFormDefault="qualified"  
       attributeFormDefault="unqualified"> 
      <xs:simpleType name="conferenceType.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:enumeration value="audio.basic"/> 
            <xs:enumeration value="audio.advanced"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlInstanceID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="connID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="confID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="operatorID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)+"/> 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="dialogID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 39] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="independentID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="insertID.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)*"/> 
            <xs:pattern  
                value="conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+)*"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="all"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="duplex.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:enumeration value="half"/> 
            <xs:enumeration value="full"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="confclass.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:enumeration value="standard"/> 
            <xs:enumeration value="preferred"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="dialogLanguage.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:enumeration value="application/moml+xml"/> 
            <xs:enumeration value="application/voicexml+xml"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEvent.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"/> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventName.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="msml.dialog.exit"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="msml.conf.asn"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="msml.conf.nomedia"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlTarget.datatype"> 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 40] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value= 
                "conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+|\*)*"/> 
            <xs:pattern value= 
                "conn:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+(/oper:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+|\*)+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventSource.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/> 
            <xs:pattern value="(conf:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+|conn:[a-zA-Z0-
   9.:_-]+)/dialog:[a-zA-Z0-9.:_-]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="msmlEventNameValue.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"/> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
      <xs:simpleType name="mark.datatype"> 
         <xs:restriction base="xs:string"> 
            <xs:pattern value="[a-zA-Z0-9.:-_]+"/> 
         </xs:restriction> 
      </xs:simpleType> 
   </xs:schema> 

Security Considerations 

   MSML can be used to affect the service received by any user connected 
   to a media server. The transport used to carry MSML must use 
   appropriate security measures to insure that only authorized entities 
   are able to use MSML. 

References 

   [1]  J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, J. 
   Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: Session 
   Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, Internet Engineering Taskforce, June 
   2002. 

   [2]  J. Rosenberg, J. Peterson, H. Schulzrinne, and G. Camarillo, 
   "Best Current Practices for Third Party Call Control in the Session 
   Initiation Protocol", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, March 2003. Work in progress. 

   [3]  S. Donovan, "The SIP INFO Method", RFC 2976, Internet 
   Engineering Taskforce, Oct. 2000. 

   [4]  R. Even, O. Levin, and N. Ismail, "Conferencing Media Policy 
   Requirements", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Taskforce, Feb. 
   2003. Work in progress. 
 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 41] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   [5]  R. Mahy and N. Ismail, "Media Policy Manipulation in the 
   Conference Policy Control Protocol", Internet Draft, Internet 
   Engineering Taskforce, Feb. 2003. Work in progress. 

   [6]  J. Van Dyke, E. Burger, and A. Spitzer, "Basic Network Media 
   Services with SIP", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Taskforce, 
   Mar. 2003. Work in progress. 

   [7]  World Wide Web Consortium, "Voice Extensible Markup Language: 
   VoiceXML, Version 2.0", W3C Candidate Recommendation, Feb. 2003. Work 
   in progress. 

   [8]  World Wide Web Consortium, "Voice Browser Call Control: CCXML 
   Version 1.0", W3C Working Draft, Oct. 2002. Work in progress. 

   [9]  T. Melanchuk, "Media Objects Markup Language (MOML)", Internet 
   Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2003. Work in progress. 

   [10] D. Willis, "Packaging and Negotiation of INFO Methods for the 
   Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", Internet Draft, Internet 
   Engineering Task Force, Jan 2003. Work in progress.  

Acknowledgments 

   Adnan Saleem and Yong Xin of Convedia, have provided key insights, 
   both theoretic and through development experience. Gilles Compienne 
   and Ben Smith, both of Ubiquity Software, provided feedback on 
   several versions of this draft. Chris Boulton of Ubiquity, and 
   Michael Rice of VocalData helped clarify several issues in the -00 
   draft, while Bruce Walsh and Kevin Fitzgerald, both of Spectel, 
   provided important feedback on that draft. Peter Danielsen of Lucent 
   has contributed thoughtful and detailed reviews for several versions 
   of the draft. 
















 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 42] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
Authors' Addresses 

   Tim Melanchuk 
   Convedia  
   4190 Still Creek Drive, Suite 300 
   Vancouver, BC, V5C 6C6 
   Canada 

   email: timm@convedia.com 

    

   Garland Sharratt 
   Convedia  
   4190 Still Creek Drive, Suite 300 
   Vancouver, BC, V5C 6C6 
   Canada 

   email: gsharratt@convedia.com 

    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 

Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2003. All Rights Reserved. 


 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 43] 
                Media Sessions Markup Language (MSML)        Feb 2004 
 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Acknowledgement 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 





















 
 
Melanchuk                Expires - Aug. 2004                [Page 44] 

