


Network Working Group                                  D. Papadimitriou
Document: draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt             J. Jones
Category: Internet Draft                                        Alcatel
Expiration Date: September 2001
                                                             March 2001



                         Enhanced LSP Services



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

  Conventions used in this document:
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].

Abstract

   This document describes the LSP parameters and attributes as well as
   the enhanced services they support. In the scope of the domain
   service model, the main objective of this proposal is to integrate
   within these parameters the Optical Multicast concept, the Shared
   Risk Link Group (SRLG) Inference model, the Virtual Private optical
   Network (VPoN) model, the Class-of-Priorities and the Class-of-
   Service (CoS) augmented model; but also enhanced protection and
   restorations mechanisms (in optical meshed networks) as well as
   signalling security levels. This draft covers the User-to-Network
   Interface (UNI) parameters and the specific parameters used within
   Network-to-Network Interface (NNI) signalling. In order to structure
   these services, we also propose to group the corresponding
   parameters in three distinct groups: LSP Identification parameters,
   LSP Service parameters and Policy parameters.

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       1


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

1. Introduction

   Current IP protocols extensions for services (Integrated or
   Differentiated), for traffic-engineering (Multi-Protocol Label
   Switching), for privacy (Virtual Private Networks), for multicast
   applications (IP Multicast protocols) and for security (IPSec
   Protocol) results from the short-term perspective when the IP
   protocol was defined at the beginning of the eighties. Now, the
   current developments on optical networking are challenging the same
   problem: if these features are not included from the beginning
   within the signalling and routing protocols used in optical
   networking, future needs won∆t be covered by the current
   developments.

   The main objective of this proposal is to include within the LSP
   parameters used within signalling and routing protocols the Virtual
   Private optical Network (VPoN) model, the Class-of-Priorities (CoP)
   and the Class-of-Service (CoS) augmented model and the optical
   multicast trees. Enhancement considered in this document cover also
   the protection/restoration and fault-tolerance mechanisms as well as
   signalling security levels.

   In order to structure the integration of these features within the
   signalling and routing protocols, we propose a classification
   separating the parameters distributed within an optical sub-network
   (Identification and Service parameters) from the one centralized on
   directory service (Policy-related parameters). This means that we
   consider for scalability, convergence and performance reasons that
   keeping all the policy-related parameters would result in an
   overflow of information to be distributed throughout the optical-
   network giving rise to an increasing convergence time which could in
   turn increase the setup time of a LSP.

   The remainder of the document is organized as follows:

   Sections 2 ˚ 4 describe the details of the attributes for
   Identification, Service and Policy groups, respectively. Section 5
   describes result and status codes. Annex 1 defines the terminology
   used in the contribution.

   Note that from the previous version of this memo, we remove the
   parameter values already defined in other IETF drafts, in particular
   [GMPLS-RSVPTE] and [GMPLS-CRLDP].


2. Identification parameters


   The following identification-related parameters are considered.


2.1 Connection end-point identification parameters




Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       2


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   Within the scope of the Domain Service model, the concepts developed
   within this section are also related to the address registration and
   allocation mechanisms.

2.1.1 Parameters definition

   The following identification parameters are related to the physical-
   level interfaces of an Optical Network Element (ONE):

   - Port ID: integer indicating and identifying a port within an
     Optical Network Element (ONE)

   - Channel ID: integer indicating and identifying a channel within
     a given port ID

   - Sub-Channel ID: integer indicating a sub-channel within a given
     Channel ID

   - Logical-port ID: identifies a logical port; concatenation of the
     port ID, the Channel-ID and the Sub-channel-ID.

   These definitions can be extended to identify the CNE interfaces.
   Note that the logical-port ID is not used anymore in
   [OIF2000.125.3], however the concept to which it refers is still
   valid and will be used in this document within the context of the
   Virtual Private optical Network (VPoN) model.

   In order to identify the client layer connection end-points, the
   Client Optical Network Administered Address (ONA Address) has been
   defined. Currently, their values are included in the IPv4 address
   space. For more details about the related concepts (address
   registration and allocation mechanisms) we refer to [OIF2001.119]
   and [OIF2001.121].

2.2 Optical network identification parameters


   - The Carrier ID (CID) is an integer defining the identity of the
   carrier to which the ONE element belongs.

   - The Privacy ID (PrID) determines whether a UNI or a NNI interface
   is untrusted (i.e. public) or trusted (i.e. private). Hence, from
   this point-of-view, we consider four types of interfaces: trusted
   UNI, untrusted UNI, trusted NNI and untrusted NNI interfaces.

   These identifiers are provisioned by the administrative authority of
   the optical network and are exchanged during the neighbor identity
   discovery process as described in [IPO-ONNI].

   The Carrier ID uniquely determines the owner of a signalling message
   when travelling over inter-domain NNI signalling channels between
   optical networks.


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       3


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001


   The Privacy ID makes the distinction between trusted and untrusted
   NNI interfaces. Generally, there is a trust relationship between
   intra-domain NNI interfaces and an untrusted relationship between
   inter-domain NNI interfaces.


2.3 Client identification parameters

2.3.1 Parameters definition

   The client identification parameters include additionally to the CNE
   logical-port ID, the Client Identifier (Client ID) and the VPN
   Identifier (VPN ID).

   - Client ID: 32-bit integer (provided by the client) which
     uniquely identifies a client (i.e. a group of client CNE belonging
     to the same administrative authority) against the optical network
     domain.

     This parameter should not have any complex semantic nor meaning
     and could be useful when considering optical broadcast and
     multicast applications.

     Note that the client identifier is not equivalent to the
     Contract ID parameter defined in [OIF2000.61.6] and [IPO-UNIR].
     In this proposal, the Contract ID parameter is defined in section
     4.3.

   - VPN ID: 7-bytes field structure based on the VPN identifiers as
     defined in [VPN-ID].

     The VPN ID is equivalent to the VPoN ID (Virtual Private optical
     Network), however since the corresponding model does not apply
     only to optical networks but also to SDH/Sonet or any kind of
     Ùlayeredˆ transport network, we don∆t refer to a VPoN identifiers
     in the remaining parts of this document. 

     The source and destination ONE are responsible for authentication
     of VPN IDs and for call acceptance policies. In the absence of
     a pre-determined policy, the default behavior is for the
     destination CNE to accept the LSP create request if the
     destination CNE is part of the signaled and authenticated VPN.

     Since a boundary ONE can potentially be connected to multiple
     client CNEs, or a given client CNE can potentially request LSP
     for different VPoNs, this identifier defines the possibility to
     setup Virtual Private optical Networks (VPoN). The corresponding
     models are described in the next section.

     The association of the ONA address (and by extension the ONE
     address) with the logical-port ID (LPID) is used in the context of


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       4


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

     the VPoN model. These mappings which can be defined as
     [<ONA;LPID>;<ONE;LPID>], are then associated through the UNI
     signalling to the VPN ID to which the LSP belongs. The boundary
     ONE need only to maintain only a mapping table where this
     information is stored per VPN ID. This approach enables to easily
     offer VPoN service to the client network.

2.3.2 VPoN Models

   The VPoN - Virtual Private optical Network models considered here
   are based on the following concepts:
    - the Client-ID defines the identification of an optical network
      client (for instance, an ISP)
    - the VPN-ID defines the identification of a group defined
      within this optical network client (for instance an ISP client)

   The first model considers the Client-ID as a potential VPoN
   identifier in addition to the VPN ID and the second one considers
   only the VPN ID as a VPoN identifier.

   If we consider the Client-ID as a potential VPoN identifier, then
   the following alternative could be considered:
   - isolation of the resources within a given VPoN (for instance, a
     given ISP client)
   - isolation of the resources between VPoNs within a given Client-ID
     (for instance, between ISP clients belonging to the same ISP)
   - no-isolation of the resources i.e. sharing of the resource between
     clients within the optical network

   In this example, the optical network has several clients (i.e. ISPs
   identified by a unique Client ID) and each of the optical network
   clients has several clients (i.e. ISP clients identified by a unique
   VPN ID).

   If we only consider the VPN ID as a potential VPoN identifier, then
   the following alternative could be considered:
   - isolation of the resources within a given VPoN (for instance, a
     given ISP)
   - no-isolation of the resources i.e. sharing of the resource between
     VPoNs within the optical network

   In this example, the optical network has several clients (i.e. ISPs
   identified by a unique VPN ID) and there is no dependence of the
   isolation regarding the owner of the VPoN.

2.3.3 VPoN and Address Space Uniqueness

   If we consider one unique address space per optical network, this
   means that any address belonging to any VPoN must be unique.
   Otherwise, if we consider on address space per VPoN (for instance,
   per Client ID), then the address uniqueness is limited to this VPoN.


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       5


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   As specified in [RFC2547], a VPoN may use a private address space,
   which may overlap with the address space of another VPN or the
   Internet public networks. A VPoN may span multiple optical domains
   (BGP AS) meaning that an IP address only has meaning within the VPN
   in which it exists.  For this reason, it is necessary to identify
   the VPoN in which a particular address space is meaningful. Note
   also that [RFC2547] recognized the advantage of identifying any
   particular VPoN at any layer and at any location in which it exists
   using ideally the same VPoN identifier.

   Consequently, the second case is most flexible since it permits to
   connect client having overlapping address spaces. However, this also
   requires for the optical network to maintain one mapping table per
   Client ID.

2.4 LSP identification parameters

   The LSP Identifier (LSP ID) is the unique identifier of the LSP
   assigned by the optical network. The LSP ID is coded as a 64-bit
   field obtained from the concatenation of two fields uniquely
   identifying the LSP within an optical network:
    - IPv4 address of the source ONE considered as an unique IP address
      inside a given optical network
    - An integer assigned by the source ONE that is locally unique
      within a given ONE

   LSP ID is assigned by the source ONE in response to a LSP
   create request. Within the LSP create message (sent by the client
   CNE), the UNSPECIFIED value is assigned to the LSP ID.

   However, an additional distinction could be suitable when
   considering untrusted interfaces. In this case, the Carrier ID
   replaces the IPv4 address in order to hide the ONE identifier (ONE
   IPv4 address) from the client network.

   LSP ID reserved values could be defined as follows:
    - UNSPECIFIED value: 0x0...0 referring to a not-specified LSP ID
    - ALL value: 0xF...F referring to all the LSP IDs


3. Services parameters


   Concerning the LSP services, the basic LSP services, the LSP
   protection and LSP routing parameters are considered.


3.1 LSP services parameters

   The parameters considered within this sub-section, offers the
   possibility to implement the enhanced services proposed as main
   objective of this proposal.

3.1.1 Framing-Bandwidth


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       6


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001


   The Framing-Bandwidth parameter is defined as an integer specifying
   the format and the associated bandwidth of the signal transported
   across the UNI and represents the framing and bandwidth of the
   service requested through the optical network.

   The Framing-type (or LSP Encoding Type [GMPLS-SIG]) possible values
   are defined as follows:
      - Sonet
      - SDH
      - Ethernet
      - Digital Wrapper
      - Clear Channels

   The Bandwidth possible values are defined with respect to the
   Framing-type where the SONET/SDH framing includes the overhead
   termination types:

      - SONET Framing:
       Possible values are OC-<N> where N = 1 (OC-1) to 3072 (OC-3072)
       Or encoded as explicit discrete values VT1.5, VT2, VT3, VT6,
       OC-1, OC-3c, OC-12c, OC-48c, OC-192c, OC-48 Line, OC-48
       Section, OC-192 Line, OC-192 Section.

     - SDH Framing:
       Possible values are coded as STM-<N> where N = 1 (STM-1) to
       N=1024 (STM-1024)
       Or encoded as explicit discrete values VC-11, VC-12, VC-2, VC-3,
       VC-4, VC-4-4c, VC-4-16c, VC-4-64c, MS-16, MS-64, RS-16, RS-64

      - Ethernet Framing:
        Possible values are 10Mbps, 100Mbps, 1 Gbps and 10 Gbps

      - Digital Wrapper:
        Possible values are 2.5 Gbps, 10 Gbps and 40 Gbps

      Note: Digital Wrapper refers to Standard Digital Wrapper layer as
            proposed by the ITU-T G.709 v0.83 recommendation which has
            been integrated within GMPLS Signalling in [GMPLS-G709].

      - Clear Channels (Photonic channels): possible values are OC-<N>
        where N = 0x001 (OC-1) to N = 0xC00 (OC-3072)

3.1.2 SDH/Sonet Connection Service

  The SDH/Sonet parameter applies only to SDH/Sonet framing (i.e. LSP
  Encoding Type). This parameter includes the Transparency levels and
  the Concatenation types.

   Transparency value could take one of the following values:
      - No transparency - Default-value
      - Regeneration section/Section OH (RSOH/SOH) bytes Transparency

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       7


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

      - RSOH/SOH and Multiplex Section/Line OH (MSOH/LOH) Transparency
      - Specific OH bytes Transparency such as J0, K1/K2, etc.

   In PLR-Circuits, all SDH/Sonet overhead bytes are left unchanged
   when transported between clients over the optical network. STE-
   Circuits preserves all SDH/Sonet Line overhead bytes between clients
   but the section overhead bytes are not required to be preserved.
   LTE-Circuits preserves the SDH/Sonet payload but the Section and
   Line overhead bytes are required to be preserved. However, as
   proposed here above, a finest granularity (per overhead byte and on-
   demand) transparency should be defined in order to cover the current
   equipment needs.

   Concatenation could take one of the following values:
      - Default-value (no concatenation)
      - Virtual Concatenation
      - Standard Contiguous Concatenation
      - Arbitrary Contiguous Concatenation

   More details concerning the emulated Transparency and Concatenation
   could be found in [GMPLS-SDH], [GMPLS-G709] and [GMPLS-SIG].

3.1.3 All-Optical Connection Service

   The optical parameter is related to all-optical network. Since
   SDH/Sonet framing is currently the key consideration, this parameter
   should be not included within the LSP service requests (even
   optionally).

   This parameter is divided in two parts; both defines the maximum
   admitted value for an optical signal technology-related parameter:

   - Bit Error Rate: integer defining the exponent of the maximum BER
   admitted for a given optical signal (default value is zero)

   - Jitter: integer defining the maximum jitter admitted for a given
   optical signal (default value is zero) also referred to as jitter
   tolerance

   As currently defined in optical transport systems, there are three
   types of jitter specifications:
   - jitter tolerance: the peak-to-peak amplitude of sinusoidal jitter
   applied on the input signal that causes a 1dB power penalty
   - jitter generation:  the process whereby jitter appears at the
   output port ˚ transmission ˚ in absence of input jitter
   - jitter transfer: a measure of the quantity of input jitter
   attenuation with respect to the output signal

   - Propagation Delay: integer specifying an upper limit for the
   maximum acceptable propagation delay (units in microseconds)
   acceptable for the optical signal. The default value of the
   Propagation Delay is infinite.  The Propagation Delay parameter can

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       8


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   be used as an additive metric (or additive weighted metric) for
   constraint-based path computation.

   Other optical physical-level parameters can be defined as OSNR and
   PMD. Up to now, the need of optical parameter during the lightpath
   creation process is not needed but future packet-over-wavelength
   switched networks might rapidly evolve such that this parameter
   becomes mandatory.

3.1.4 Connection Directionality and Multicast Service

   The directionality parameter is an integer indicating the
   directionality of the LSP. If this optional parameter is omitted,
   the LSP is assumed to be bi-directional. However, as described in
   [GMPLS-SIG], bi-directionality of an LSP is implicitly defined by
   the use of a suggested label within the LSP create request.

   Possible values are: - unidirectional
                        - bi-directional    (default value)
                        - multi-directional (optical multicast)

   Multi-directionality concept is related to point-to-multipoint LSPs
   established throughout the optical network. In this case, one source
   could have many destinations. Optical multicast is detailed in [IPO-
   MULT] as well as the related signalling considerations.

   - Multicast Service ˚

   As described in [IPO-MULT], the optical multicast concept can be
   applied to numerous client- layer applications covering Optical
   Storage Area Networks (O-SAN), Optical Broadband Multimedia (for
   instance, video and HDTV), etc.

   Optical multicast offers advantages in the following critical
   aspects of all-optical networks:
   - Efficient optical (1+1) all-optical protection
   - Improved performance (no store and forward) compared to packet-
   oriented multicast technology
   - Reduction of the total number of transceivers in the all-optical
   network.
   - Overall network throughput improvement by reducing the number of
   wavelengths used per fiber link (i.e. minimizing the overall
   bandwidth usage per fiber link)

   However, the major drawback to overcome in optical multicast-capable
   networks is to compensate the power penalty introduced during the
   optical signal splitting. Moreover, the multicast problem in
   communication networks (described by the Steiner Tree Problem and
   applied to communication networks) is NP-Complete.




Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                       9


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   [IPO-MULT] also describes the diverse possibilities that can be used
   to extend the currently defined (or under-definition) multicast
   signalling protocols.

3.1.5 Priority-Preemption and CoS Augmented Model

   The priority-preemption is an optional parameter defined as a 16-bit
   integer including the setup priority (8-bit integer field) and the
   hold priority (8-bit integer field) and preemption level (8-bit
   integer field) of an LSP.

  1. Priority

  The Priority specification (as described in [MPLS-CRLDP]) includes
  the setup and the recovery priority. The corresponding encoding is
  defined as a 8-bit integer indicating the priority of
  the LSP:
     - Default value: from 0x<C>E (higher) to 0x<C>1 (lower)
     - Priorities from 0x<C>F is reserved
     - Priorities from 0x<C>0 is reserved

   Where <C> (4 MS bits) defines the priority-class: C ranges from 1 to
   E Class 1 is considered as the default class and Class 0 and Class F
   are reserved priority-classes. The priority value (8 LS bits) within
   a given priority-class ranges from 0xEE (higher priority) to 0x11
   (lower priority).

   2. Preemption

   Preemption is a 4-bit integer indicating the preemptability of an
   LSP. This parameter specifies whether a given LSP can be preempted
   by a LSP of higher priority if the resource used by the lower-
   priority LSP need to be used during the setup and/or the recovery of
   this higher priority LSP.

   The possible values for the preemption (4 MS bits ˚ 4 LS bits are
   reserved for future use) are:
     - Setup and Recovery preemptability: 0x00 (Class 1)
     - Recovery preemptability          : 0x10 (Class 2 to 7)
     - Setup preemptability             : 0x20 (Class 8 to D)
     - No_preemptability                : 0x30 (Class E)

   3. CoS Augmented Model

   The CoS augmented model, described in [IPO-COS] and based on [DIFF-
   ARCH] specification, is build upon the following principle: at the
   boundary CNE, if we consider Packet-Switch Capable (PSC) interfaces,
   the DiffServ Codepoint (DSCP) [DIFF-DSF] defining the Per Hop
   Behaviour (PHB) [DIFF-PHB], are mapped to the LSP priority class.
   For this purpose, we propose the following rules:
     - Class 1 corresponds to Best-Effort service
     - Class 2 to D corresponds to Assured Forwarding (AF) services

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      10


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

        . Class AF1 ranges from 2 to 4
        . Class AF2 ranges from 5 to 7
        . Class AF3 ranges from 8 to A
        . Class AF4 ranges from B to D
     - Class E corresponds to Expedited Forwarding (EF) service

   These DiffServ classes are related within the optical network to the
   service-level defined in section 3:
     - Class 1 defines a best-effort service
     - Class 2 to 7 defines a bronze service
     - Class 8 to D defines a silver service
     - Class E defines a gold service

   Within our definition of LSP, the analogy between the drop
   precedence in DiffServ and the priority class could also be related
   to the preemption setting at the UNI during the LSP creation. In
   this case, the priority value setting is performed through the
   following rules:
     - Class 1 defines a priority ranging from 0x110 to 0x1EF
     - Class 2 to 7 defines a priority ranging from 0x210 to 0x7EF
     - Class 8 to D defines a priority ranging from 0x810 to 0xDEF
     - Class E defines a priority ranging from 0xE10 to 0xEEF

   Application of this model will enable to have a selection mechanism
   at the boundary CNE (in most of the cases, it will be a router)
   providing LSP multiplexing based on the mapping between the DiffServ
   Code Points (DSCP) and the LSP service class within the optical
   network. This technique enables the direct mapping of finer
   granularity Packet-based LSP to coarser granularity Lambda-switched
   LSPs without any disruption in the end-to-end QoS offered to the
   client layer networks.

   4. VPoN Model

   The relationship between the Priority/Preemption and the CoS and
   VPoN model is based on the resource isolation concept described in
   section 2.3. Two VPoN models have been defined (using the Client ID
   or not, respectively), so that the Priority/Preemption levels
   considered here are directly related to these models and the
   resource isolation concept.

   If we consider the Client-ID as a potential identifier, then we have
  the following options concerning the preemption levels:
     - preemption within a given VPoN (i.e. within VPoN belonging
      to the same optical network client)
     - preemption within a given Client-ID (i.e. between VPoN
       belonging to the same optical network client)
     - preemption between Client-Ids (i.e. between optical network
       clients)

   If we do not consider the Client-ID as a potential identifier, then
   we have the following options concerning the preemption levels:

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      11


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

     - preemption within a given VPoN (i.e. within VPoN belonging
       to the same optical network client)
     - preemption between VPoNs (i.e. between VPoN belonging to
       the separate optical network client)

3.1.6 Bundles

   The corresponding encoding and semantic is left for further study.
   Note the concept has been considered in [IPO-BUNDLE] and [GMPLS-
   BUNDLE].

3.2 LSP protection parameters

   Protection parameter indicates the protection level desired for the
   LSP inside to the optical network (internal protection) or at the
   UNI (source- and destination-side protection levels) which the
   protection level requested between both side of the client-to-
   network connection.

   This optional parameter indicates the location (i.e. the scope) of
   the protection requested by the client device:
    - the optical network: internal network protection
    - the source drop-side: source-side protection
    - the destination drop-side: destination-side protection
    - no protection (default-value)

   For each of these protection types, the protection levels (8-bit
   integer) defined are the following:

    - Internal Protection (or Network path-level protection):
       . Unprotected (default value)
       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection
       . Shared Protection M:N (particular case 1:N)
       . Enhanced Protection (ring-based protection)
       . Restoration (path-level re-routing)

    - Source-Side Protection (protection between CNE and ONE on source
      side):
       . Unprotected (default value)
       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection
       . Shared Protection M:N (particular case 1:N)
       . Enhanced Protection (ring-based protection)

    - Destination-Side Protection (protection of between CNE and ONE on
      destination side):
       . Unprotected (default value)
       . Dedicated 1+1 Protection
       . Dedicated 1:1 Protection
       . Shared Protection M:N (particular case 1:N)
       . Enhanced Protection (ring-based protection)

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      12


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001


   Related to these protection types and levels, a reversion strategy
   could be defined:
    - a revertive strategy means that a LSP gets restored
      to its original route after a failure has been recovered (or
      restored)
    - a non-revertive strategy means that a LSP does not
      get restored to its original route after a failure has been
      recovered (or restored)

   The network protection mechanisms are extensively detailed in [IPO-
   RES] together with the required signalling protocol extensions.

3.3 LSP routing parameters

   LSP routing parameters are from one side related to the path
   disjointness during the CSPF route computation and from the other
   side related to constraint-based routing (explicit and record route
   concepts).

3.3.1 Routing Diversity

  The routing diversity service is based on the Shared Risk Link Group
  (SRLG) concept. It is commonly admitted [IPO-FRAME] and [IPO-BUNDLE]
  that SRLGs identifiers are exchanged between nodes belonging to the
  same optical domain to prevent the use of shared resources that can
  affect all links belonging to this group in case of shared resource
  failure. For instance, as described in [IPO-SRLG], two LSPs flowing
  through the same fiber link in the same fiber trunk. [IPO-BUNDLE]
  extends the SRLGs concept by demonstrating that a given link could
  belong to more than one SRLG, and two links belonging to a given SRLG
  may individually belong to two other SRLGs.

   Many proposals already include the SRLG concept when considering the
   constraint-based path computation of optical channel routes. In
   optical domains this concept of SRLG is used for deriving a path,
   which is disjoint from the physical resource and logical topology
   point-of-view. However, the definition of SRLG in the current format
   as described in [GMPLS-OSPF] and [GMPLS-ISIS] does not provide:
   - the relationship between logical structures or physical resources
   (For example, a fiber could be part of a sequence of fiber segments,
   which is included in a given geographical region), and
   - the risk assessment during path computation implying the
   allocation of a conditional failure probabilities with the SRLGs
   - the analysis of the specifications of constraint-based path
   computation and path re-optimization taking SRLG information into
   account.

   The model proposed in [IPO-SRLG] document proposes a technique to
   compute the SRLG with respect to a given risk type. This is achieved
   by identifying for a given physical layer the resources belonging to
   an SRLG. The proposed model also permits to compute the dependencies

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      13


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   of these resources into the resources belonging to lower physical
   layers. The result of the computation also enables one to determine
   the risk associated to each of the SRLGs.

   1. Hierarchical Model

   The SRLG model defined in [IPO-SRLG] includes two hierarchies: the
   physical hierarchy and the logical hierarchy.

   The physical hierarchy is related to the fiber topology (more
   generally the physical resources) of the optical network including
   the wavelengths build on top of this physical topology. The network
   (physical) resource model considered in [IPO-SRLG] is based on
   concepts introduced in [IPO-FRAME]. The concepts around network
   resource hierarchy developed within this document are based on the
   following components:
   - Sub-Channel (TDM circuit ˚ only applicable for SDH/Sonet networks)
   - Channel (or Wavelength)
   - Fiber Link
   - Fiber Segment
   - Fiber Sub-segment
   - Fiber Trunks

   The Logical hierarchy is related to the geographical topology of the
   network. The definition of the logical hierarchical structure covers
   an increasing extended logical structure partitioning of the area
   covered by the optical network. For that purposes the concept of
   node, zone and region are defined in [IPO-SRLG].

   2. Risk Assessment

   Risk assessment is defined as the evaluation of the potential risk
   associated to the inclusion of a given resource (this resource
   belongs to a given resource type located within a given logical
   structure such as a geographical location). Since the SRLG
   computation is performed with respect to a given risk type
   associated to a given network resource, a failure probability is
   assigned to the network resources instances included within the same
   logical structure. So, in the approach described in [IPO-SRLG] there
   is a direct mapping between the risk type and the resource type as
   well as the failure probability associated to this resource type
   within a given logical structure.

   3. Inference Model

   The model described in [IPO-SRLG] is provided to automate the
   discovery of the Shared Risk Link Groups (SRLGs) at a given layer
   for a given physical resource type. This resource type could be
   located within a given region and zone.

   Note however, that in the domain service model, when a client ONE
   sends an LSP service request it can only reference about the LSPs it

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      14


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   has already established. Consequently, it can only reference an LSP
   M from which the new LSP N should be diverse. The ONE will interpret
   this request by considering the Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG) of the
   LSP M and find a physical route for the LSP N whose SRLG is diverse
   from.

   The same process applies at the inter-domain NNI interface where the
   outgoing ONE (belonging to the BGP AS i) does only knows about the
   LSPs he has already established to the incoming ONE (belonging to
   the BGP AS j). Consequently, the outgoing ONE can only reference a
   LSP M from which the new LSP N should be diverse.

3.3.2 Explicit Route

   Explicit route parameter applies only at the NNI. However, this
   parameter could be used at the UNI within the scope of the Domain
   Specific Routing model. The semantic of the explicit route parameter
   for optical networks is detailed in [IPO-ONNI].

3.3.3 Record Route

   Record route parameter applies only at the NNI. However, this
   parameter could also be used at the UNI within the scope of the
   Domain Specific Routing model. The semantic of the record route
   parameter for optical networks is detailed in [IPO-ONNI].

4. Policy parameters

   Policy-related parameters are related to directory services provided
   to the client CNE through the UNI services. These parameters include
   the following items:
    - Service-Level parameters
    - Schedule parameters
    - Contract parameters
    - Billing parameters
    - Optional parameters

   By receiving such kind of parameters the source boundary ONE needs
   to forward the content of these request through the NMI interface
   (interface between the ONE and a management server) to a centralized
   directory service or de-centralized service in combination with a
   distributed connection admission control.

4.1 Service-level parameters

   Service level (i.e. service-level specification) parameter could be
   implemented as a 16-bit integer which refer to parameters detailed
   in the previous sub-section (service-related parameters). This
   parameter indicates the class-of-service offered by the optical
   network carrier.



Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      15


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   The first 256 values (0 ˚ 255) are reserved for future inter-
   operability agreements between carriers and service providers. The
   remaining values are carrier specific.

   The service-level parameter could include the following attributes:
    - Priority and Preemption
    - Propagation Delay
    - Protection parameters
    - Routing parameters
    - Signaling security levels

   For instance, value 0x1xxx might indicate through a request to a
   directory service, a best-effort service:
    - unprotected LSP
    - default priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - no signalling authentication

   Value ranging from 0x2xxx to 0x7xxx to might indicate through a
   request to a directory service, a bronze service:
    - M:N protected LSP
    - low-priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - signalling authentication (no signalling encryption)

   Value ranging from 0x8xxx to 0xDxxx to might indicate through a
   request to a directory service, a silver service:
    - M:N protected LSP
    - medium-priority
    - infinite propagation delay
    - no routing diversity
    - signalling authentication (no signalling encryption)

   Value 0xExxx might indicate through a request to a directory
   service, a gold service:
    - 1:1 protected LSP
    - high-priority
    - finite propagation delay
    - global routing diversity
    - signalling authentication and encryption

   Consequently, this means that the client knows the meaning of the
   service-level prior to the corresponding LSP service request. Within
   the LSP request, explicit parameter values take precedence over
   service-level.


4.2 Schedule parameters




Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      16


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   Scheduling refers to the possibility to create, delete or modify LSP
   through a given time-of-day, day-to-day, day-to-week, etc.
   scheduling plan.

   For a given plan, the scheduling functions could be start, stop and
   repeat.

   The attributes of the scheduling function could be:
    - the start/stop time at which the function has to be
      executed/stopped
    - the start/stop date at which the function has to be
      executed/stopped
    - the recurrence interval between two repeated execution of the
      function
    - the number of recurrence intervals

   The default values of the schedule parameter regarding the LSP
   requested service:
    - the start time is the current time (start now)
    - the start date is the current date (start now)
    - the recurrence interval is infinite since the LSP request has
      to be executed only once
    - the number of recurrence intervals equals zero

4.3 Contract parameters

   The contract parameter is defined as an identifier (Contract ID)
   whose value corresponds to a string defined in [OIF2000.61.5]. The
   semantic proposed for this parameter refers to the policy parameters
   defined in this section. Note that a given Client ID could have more
   than one Contract ID.

4.4 Billing parameters

   The billing parameter refers to the billing client identifier onto
   which the requested services will be charged. A given client ID
   could have more than one billing client identifier.

   An optical network client (a Client ID) may have several clients
   (i.e. VPN IDs) and assign to each of them a dedicated billing
   identifier.

   This parameter is implemented as a 16-bit integer. The first 256
   values (0 ˚ 255) are reserved for future inter-operability
   agreements. The remaining values are carrier specific.

4.5 Optional parameters

   Optional parameters could include Vendor-specific parameters, etc.

   The definition of the corresponding mechanisms lead us to two
   options that seems feasible for this purpose:

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      17


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

    - either the client CNE knows the content of the policy-related
      parameters without any additional information coming from the
      optical network
    - or the client CNE initiates an LSP service request (or even a
      dedicated request) with
      appropriate extensions to request the policy-related parameters
      values to the optical network. So the client learns dynamically
      the service-level offered by the optical network through a
      directory service before initiate a LSP create request to the
      ONE. In future release of this memo, we will refer to this as
      service discovery service (SDS) at the UNI.

5. Security Considerations

   By including within the service-level parameter the signalling
   security level, the proposed document, as detailed in section 4,
   takes into account the security of the client signalling request
   in a build-in manner.

6. Acknowledgments

  The authors would like to thank Bernard Sales, Emmanuel Desmet, Hans
  De Neve, Fabrice Poppe, Stefan Ansorge and Gert Grammel for their
  constructive comments and inputs.

7. References

   1. [DIFF-DSF] S.Nichols et al., ÊDefinition of the Differentiated
      Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers∆, RFC
      2474, December 1998.

   2. [DIFF-ARCH] S.Blake et al., ÊAn Architecture for Differentiated
      Services∆, RFC 2475, December 1998.

  3. [GMPLS-SIG] P.Ashwood-Smith et al., ÊGeneralized MPLS - Signaling
     Functional Description∆, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-
     generalized-signalling-01.txt, November 2000.

  4. [GMPLS-CRLDP] P.Ashwood-Smith et al., ÊGeneralized MPLS ˚
     Signaling Functional Description∆, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
     mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-00.txt, November 2000.

  5. [GMPLS-G709] M.Fontana and D.Papadimitriou, ÊGeneralized MPLS
     Control for G.709 ˚ Functional Description∆, Internet Draft,
     draft-fontana-gmpls-control-g709-00.txt, February 2001.

  6. [GMPLS-RSVPTE] P.Ashwood-Smith et al., ÊGeneralized MPLS ˚
     Signaling Functional Description∆, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
     mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-00.txt, November 2000.

  7. [IPO-COS] D.Papadimitriou et al., ÊOptical Class-of-Services ˚ An
     Augmented Approach∆, Work in Progress, draft-papadimitriou-ipo-

Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      18


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

     cos-00.txt, February 2001.

   8. [IPO-MULT] D.Papadimitriou, D.Ooms and J.Jones, ÊOptical
      Multicast ˚ A Framework∆, Internet Draft, draft-poj-optical-
      multicast-00.txt, February 2001.

   9. [IPO-ONNI] D.Papadimitriou et al., ÊOptical NNI Framework and
      Signaling Requirements∆, Internet Draft, draft-papadimitriou-
      onni-frame-02.txt, February 2001.

   10.[IPO-OPM] D.Papadimitriou et al., ÊOptical Signal Performance
      Measurement,∆ Work in progress, draft-papadimitriou-optical-opm-
      00.txt, February 2001.

   11.[IPO-OUNI] B.Rajagopalan et al., ÊSignaling Requirements at
      the Optical UNI∆, Internet Draft, draft-bala-mpls-optical-uni-
      signalling-01.txt, November 2000.

   12.[IPO-SRLG] D.Papadimitriou et al., ÊInference of SRLGs∆,
      Internet Draft, draft-many-inference-srlg-00.txt, February 2001.

   13.[IPO-RES] J.Hahm et al., ÊRestoration Mechanisms and
      Signalling Extensions in Optical Networks∆, Internet Draft,
      draft-many-optical-restoration-00.txt, February 2001.

  14.[IPO-TEIP] O.Duroyon et al., ÊLSP Service Model framework in
      an Optical G-MPLS network∆, Internet Draft, draft-duroyon-te-ip-
      optical-01.txt, November 2000.

   15.[OIF2000.125.3] B.Rajagopalan et al., ÊUser Network Interface
      (UNI) 1.0 Proposal∆, OIF Contribution, December 2000.

   16.[OIF2000.061.6] J.Yates et al., ÊUser to Network Interface (UNI)
      Service Definition and Lightpath Attributes∆, OIF Contribution
      61, December 2000.

   17.[OIF2000.188] R.Barry, ÊLightpath Attributes Proposal∆, OIF
      Contribution 188, August 2000.

   18.[OIF2000.197] J.Heiles, ÊAlignment of the UNI with ITU-T
      Terminology∆, OIF Contribution 197, September 2000.

   19.[OIF2001.119] D.Pendarakis et al., ÊUNI Addressing:
      Overview of Areas of Concern, Comments, and Proposals∆, OIF
      Contribution 119, January 2001

   20.[OIF2001.121] D.Pendarakis, ÊUNI addressing sub-group break-out
      meeting recommendations

   21.[VPN-ID] B.Fox and B.Gleeson, ÊVPN Identifiers∆, Internet RFC
      2685.


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      19


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

8. Author's Addresses

   Dimitri Papadimitriou
   Alcatel IPO-NSG
   Francis Wellesplein 1,
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-84-91
   Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Jim Jones
   Alcatel TND-USA
   3400 W. Plano Parkway,
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: 1 972 519-27-44
   Email: Jim.D.Jones1@usa.alcatel.com

Appendix 1: Terminology

   The following terms are used in this document. These definitions
   take into account the terminology already defined by the IETF for
   some of the concepts defined here and some are adapted from the OIF
   Forum terminology.

   - Optical Network: a collection of optical sub-networks constituted
   by optical network elements

   - Optical Network Element (ONE): a network element belonging to the
   optical network. An optical network device could be an Optical
   Cross-Connect (OXC), Optical ADM (OADM), etc.

   - Boundary ONE: an optical network element (ONE) belonging to the
   optical network and including an UNI-N interface.

   - Internal ONE: an optical network element internal to the optical
   network (also referred as a termination incapable device) which does
   not include a UNI-N interface.

   - Client Network Element (CNE): a network element belonging to the
   client network. A client network element could be a SONET/SDH ADM, a
   SONET/SDH Cross-connect, an ATM Switch, an Ethernet switch, an IP
   router, etc.

   - Label Switched Path (LSP): point-to-point optical layer
   connectivity with specified attributes (mandatory and optional)
   established between two ONE termination-points in the optical
   network. LSPs are considered as bi-directional (and in a first phase
   as symmetric). An LSP could be a Fiber Switched path, Lambda
   Switched path or TDM Switched path (Circuit).

   - UNI Client (UNI-C): signalling and routing interface between a
   Boundary CNE and a boundary ONE belonging to an optical network.


Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      20


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

   - UNI Network (UNI-N): signalling and routing interface between a
   Boundary ONE and a boundary CNE belonging to a client network.

   - UNI Services: the services defined at the UNI are the following:
     - Neighbor discovery service
     - Service discovery service
     - LSP signalling services (create/delete/modify/status)

   - NMI interface: the interface between the ONE controller and the
   centralized management server.







































Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      21


draft-papadimitriou-enhanced-lsps-03.txt                    March 2001

Full Copyright Statement


   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into.






































Papadimitriou et al.    Expires September 2001                      22
