

CCAMP Working Group                         CCAMP GMPLS P&R Design Team
Internet Draft
Expiration Date: December 2002         Dimitri Papadimitriou  (Alcatel)
                                                 Eric Mannie (KPNQewst)
                                            Deborah Brungard     (AT&T)
                                         Sudheer Dharanikota    (Nayna)
                                               Jonathan Lang  (Calient)
                                                 Guangzhi Li     (AT&T)
                                            Bala Rajagopalan  (Tellium)
                                               Yakov Rekhter  (Juniper)

                                                              June 2002


              Analysis of GMPLS-based Recovery Mechanisms
                 (including Protection and Restoration)

        draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   For potential updates to the above required-text see:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt

1. Abstract

   This document provides an analysis grid that can be used to
   evaluate, compare and contrast the large amount of GMPLS based
   recovery mechanisms currently proposed in the CCAMP WG. A detailed
   analysis of each of the recovery phases as identified in [CCAMP-
   TERM] will be given using terminology as defined in [CCAMP-TERM].
   The focus will be on transport plane survivability and recovery
   issues and ***not control plane resilience related aspects***.


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û Expires December 2002      1

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

3. Introduction

   This document provides an analysis grid that can be used to
   evaluate, compare and contrast the large amount of GMPLS based
   recovery mechanisms currently proposed in the CCAMP WG. Here, the
   focus will only be on transport plane survivability and recovery
   issues and not on control plane resilience related aspects. Although
   the recovery mechanisms described in this document impose different
   requirements on recovery protocols, the protocol(s) specifications
   will not be covered in this document. Despite the fact that the
   concepts discussed here are technology independent, this document
   will implicitly focus on SONET/SDH and pre-OTN technologies except
   when specific details need to be considered (for instance, in the
   case of failure detection). Details for applicability to other
   technologies such as Optical Transport Networks (OTN) [ITUT-G709]
   will be covered in a future release of this document.

   In the present release, a detailed analysis is provided for each of
   the recovery phases as identified in [CCAMP-TERM]. Recovery implies
   that the following generic operations need to be performed when a
   LSP/Span failure (or any other event generating such failures)
   occurs:

      - Phase 1: Failure detection
      - Phase 2: Failure correlation
      - Phase 3: Failure localization and isolation
      - Phase 4: Failure notification
      - Phase 5: Recovery (Protection/Restoration)
      - Phase 6: Reversion (normalization)

   Failure detection, correlation, localization and notification phases
   together are referred to as fault management. Within a recovery
   domain, the entities involved during the recovery operations are
   defined in [CCAMP-TERM]; these entities include ingress, egress and
   intermediate nodes.

   In this document the term ôrecovery mechanismö will be used to cover
   both protection and restoration mechanisms. The specific terms
   protection and restoration will only be used when differentiation is
   required. Likewise the term ôfailureö is used to represent both
   signal failure and signal degradation. In addition, a clear
   distinction will be made between partitioning (horizontal hierarchy)
   and layering (vertical hierarchy). Any other recovery-related
   terminology used in this document conforms to the one defined in
   [CCAMP-TERM].



D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              2

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


4. Fault Management

4.1 Failure Detection

   Transport failure detection is the only phase that can not be
   achieved by the control plane alone since the latter needs a hook to
   the transmission plane to gather the resulting information.
   Therefore, by definition, failure detection is transport technology
   dependent (and so exceptionally, we keep here the ôtransport planeö
   terminology).

   As an example, SONET/SDH (see [G.707], [G.783] and [G.806]) provides
   supervision capabilities covering:

   - Continuity: monitors the integrity of the continuity of a trail
     (i.e. section or path). This operation is performed by monitoring
     the presence/absence of the signal. Examples are Loss of Signal
     (LOS) detection for the physical layer, Unequipped (UNEQ) Signal
     detection for the path layer, Server Signal Fail Detection (e.g.
     AIS) at the client layer.

   - Connectivity: monitors the integrity of the routing of the signal
     between end-points. Connectivity is normally only required if
     the layer provides flexible connectivity, either automatically
     (e.g. cross-connects controlled by the TMN) or manually (e.g.
     fiber distribution frame). An example is the Trail (i.e. section,
     path) Trace Identifier used at the different layers and the
     corresponding Trail Trace Identifier Mismatch detection.

   - Alignment: checks that the client and server layer frame start can
     be correctly recovered from the detection of loss of alignment.
     The specific processes depend on the signal/frame structure and
     may include: (multi-)frame alignment, pointer processing and
     alignment of several independent frames to a common frame start in
     case of inverse multiplexing. Loss of alignment is a generic term.
     Examples are loss of frame, loss of multi-frame, or loss of
     pointer.

   - Payload type: checks that compatible adaptation functions are used
     at the source and the sink. This is normally done by adding a
     signal type identifier at the source adaptation function and
     comparing it with the expected identifier at the sink. For
     instance, the payload signal label and the corresponding payload
     signal mismatch detection.

   - Signal Quality: monitors the performance of a signal. For
     instance, if the performance falls below a certain threshold a
     defect û excessive errors (EXC) or degraded signal (DEG) - is
     detected.

   The most important point to keep in mind is that the supervision
   processes and the corresponding defect detection (used to initiate
   the next recovery phase(s)) result in either:

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              3

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   - Signal Degrade (SD): A signal indicating that the associated data
     has degraded in the sense that a degraded defect condition is
     active (for instance, a dDEG declared when the Bit Error Rate
     exceeds a preset threshold).

   - Signal Fail (SF): A signal indicating that the associated data has
     failed in the sense that a signal interrupting near-end defect
     condition is active (as opposed to the degraded defect).

   In optical transport networks (OTN) equivalent supervision
   capabilities are provided at the section layers (OTS, OMS and OTUk)
   and at path layers (OCh and ODUk). Interested readers are referred
   to the ITU-T Recommendations [G.798] and [G.709] for more details.

   On the other hand, in pre-OTN networks, a failure may be masked by
   O/E/O based OLS (Optical Line System), preventing Photonic Cross-
   Connect (PXC) from detecting the failure. In such cases, failure
   detection may be assisted by an out-of-band communication channel
   and reported to the PXC control plane, such as considered in [LMP-
   WDM]. The [LMP] protocol extensions it defines provides IP message-
   based communication between the PXC and the OLS control plane. Also,
   since PXCs are framing format independent, failure conditions can
   only be triggered either by detecting the absence of the optical
   signal or by measuring its quality. Both detection mechanisms are
   out of the scope of this document. Using this communication channel,
   these failure conditions are reported to the PXC and subsequent
   recovery actions performed as described in Section 5. As such from
   the control plane viewpoint, this mechanism makes the OLS-PXC
   composed system appearing as a single logical entity.

   More generally, the following are typical failure conditions in pre-
   OTN networks:
   - Loss of Light (LoL): signal failure condition where the optical
     signal is not detected anymore on a given interfaceÆs receiver.
   - Signal degradation (SD): detection of the signal degradation over
     a specific period of time.
   - For SDH/Sonet payloads, all of the above-mentioned supervision
     capabilities can be used, resulting in SD or SF condition.

   In summary, the following cases are considered to illustrate the
   communication between detecting and reporting entities:

   - Co-located detecting and reporting entities: both the detecting
     and reporting entities are on the same node (e.g., SDH/SONET
     equipment, Opaque cross-connects, and in some cases for
     Transparent cross-connects, etc.).

   - Non co-located detecting and reporting entities:
     - with In-band communication between entities:
       Entities are separated but in-band communication is provided
       between them (e.g., APS, OXCÆs LOS, etc.).
     - with Out-of-band communication between entities:
       Entities are separated but out-of-band communication is provided

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              4

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


       between them (e.g., PXCÆs LOS, PXCÆs LOL, etc.).

4.2 Failure Correlation

   A single failure (such as a span failure) can result into reporting
   multiple failures (such as individual connection failures). Such
   failures can be grouped i.e. correlated to reduce the communication
   on the reporting channel, for both in-band and out-of-band failure
   reporting.

   In such a scenario, it can be important to wait for certain period
   of time, typically called failure correlation time, and gather all
   the failures to report them as a group of failures (or simply group
   failure). For instance, this approach can be provided using LMP-WDM
   for pre-OTN networks (see [LMP-WDM]) or when using Signal
   Failure/Degrade Group in the SONET/SDH context.

   Note that a default average time interval during which failure
   correlation operation can be performed is difficult to provide since
   strongly dependent on the underlying network topology. Therefore, it
   can be advisable to provide a per node configurable failure
   correlation time. The detailed selection criteria for this time
   interval are outside of the scope of this document.

   When failure correlation is not provided, multiple failure
   indication messages may be sent out in response to a single failure
   (for instance, a fiber), each one containing a set of information on
   the failed working resources (for instance, the individual lambda
   LSP flowing through this fiber). This allows for a more prompt
   response but can potentially overload the control plane due to a
   large amount of failure notifications.

4.3 Failure Localization and Isolation

   The failure localization provides the information required in order
   to perform the sub-sequent recovery action(s) at the LSP/span end-
   points. However, in some cases, failure localization may be less
   urgent. This is particularly the case when edge-to-edge LSP recovery
   (edge referring to a domain end-node for instance) is performed
   based on a simple failure notification (including the identification
   of the failed working LSPs) while a more accurate localization can
   be performed after subsequent LSP recovery.

   Failure localization should be triggered immediately after fault
   detection phase. This operation can be performed at the transport
   management plane and/or the control plane level using dedicated
   signaling messages.

   When performed at the control plane level, a protocol such as LMP
   (see [LMP], Section 6) can be used for failure localization and
   isolation purposes.

4.4 Failure Notification

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              5

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002



   Failure notification is used 1) to inform intermediate nodes that a
   LSP/span failure has occurred and has been detected 2) to inform the
   deciding entities (which can correspond to any intermediate or end-
   point of the failed LSP/span) that the corresponding service is not
   available. In general, these deciding entities will be the ones
   taking the appropriate recovery decision. When co-located with the
   recovering entity, they will also perform the corresponding recovery
   action(s).

   Failure notification can be either provided by the transport or by
   the control plane. As an example, let us first briefly describe the
   failure notification mechanism defined at the SDH/SONET transport
   plane level (also referred to as maintenance signal supervision):

   - AIS (Alarm Indication Signal) occurs as a result of a failure
     condition such as Loss of Signal and is used to notify downstream
     nodes (of the appropriate layer processing) that a failure has
     occurred. AIS performs two functions 1) inform the intermediate
     nodes (with the appropriate layer monitoring capability) that a
     failure has been detected 2) notify the connection end-point that
     the service is no longer available.

   For a distributed control plane supporting one (or more) failure
   notification mechanism(s), regardless of the mechanismÆs actual
   implementation, the same capabilities are needed with more (or less)
   information provided about the LSPs/Spans under failure condition,
   their detailed status, etc.

   The most important difference between these mechanisms is related to
   the fact that transport plane notifications (as defined today) would
   initiate a protection scheme (such as those defined in [CCAMP-TERM])
   or a restoration scheme via the management plane. On the other hand,
   using a failure notification mechanism through the control plane
   would provide the possibility to trigger either a protection or a
   restoration action via the control plane. Moreover, as specified in
   [GMPLS-SIG], notification message exchanges through a GMPLS control
   plane may not follow the same path as the LSP/spans they intent to
   notify the unavailability. In turn, this ensures a reliable and
   efficient failure notification mechanism.

   The other important properties to be met by the failure notification
   mechanism are mainly the following:

   - Notification messages must provide enough information such that
     the most efficient subsequent recovery action will be taken (in
     most of the recovery schemes this action is even deterministic)
     at the recovering entities. Remember here that the latter can be
     either intermediate or end-points through which normal traffic
     flows. Based on local policy, intermediate nodes may not use this
     information for subsequent recovery actions (see for instance the
     APS protocol phases as described in [CCAMP-TERM]).


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              6

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


     The trade-off here is to define what information the LSP/span end-
     points (more precisely, the deciding entity) needs in order for
     the recovering entity to take the best recovery action: if not
     enough information is provided, the decision can not be optimal
     (note that in this eventuality, the important issue is to quantify
     the level of sub-optimality), if too much information is provided
     the control plane may be overloaded with unnecessary information
     and the aggregation/correlation of this notification information
     will be more complex and time consuming to achieve. Notice that
     more detailed quantification of the amount of information to be
     exchanged and processed is strongly dependent on the failure
     notification protocol specification.

   - If the failure localization and isolation is not performed by one
     of the LSP/Span end-points or some intermediate points, they
     should receive enough information from the notification message in
     order to locate the failure otherwise they would need to (re-)
     initiate a failure localization and isolation action.

   - Avoiding so-called notification storms implies that failure
     detection output is correlated (i.e. alarm correlation) and
     aggregated at the node detecting the failure(s), failure
     notifications are directed to a restricted set of destinations (in
     general the end-points), notification suppression (i.e. alarm
     suppression) is provided in order to limit flooding in case of
     multiple and/or correlated failures appearing at several locations
     in the network

   - Alarm correlation and aggregation (at the failure detecting
     node) implies a consistent decisions based on the conditions for
     which a trade-off between fast convergence (at detecting node) and
     fast notification (implying that correlation and aggregation
     occurs at receiving end-points) can be found.

5. Recovery Mechanisms and Schemes

5.1 Transport vs. Control Plane Responsibilities

   TBD.

5.2 Technology in/dependent mechanisms

   TBD.

5.3 Specific Aspects of Control Plane based Recovery Mechanisms

5.3.1 In-band vs Out-of-band Signalling

   The nodes communicate through the use of IP control channels. Since
   two classes of transport mechanisms can be considered here i.e. in-
   band or out-of-band (through a dedicated physically diverse control
   network), the potential impact of the signalling transport mechanism
   is not a trivial issue.

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              7

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002



   As such, the distinction between in-fiber in-band and in-fiber out-
   of-band signalling reduces to the consideration of a logically
   versus physically embedded control plane topology with respect to
   the one of the transport plane. In the current scope of this
   document, since we assume that IP control channels between nodes
   must be continuously available in order to enable the exchange of
   recovery-related information and messages, one considers that both
   signalling transports provides at least either one logical channel
   or one physical channel between nodes.

   Therefore, the key issue when using in-band signalling is whether we
   can assume independence between the fault-tolerance capabilities of
   control plane and the failures affecting the transport plane
   (including the nodes). Note also that existing specifications like
   the OTN provide a limited form of independence for in-band signaling
   by assigning control traffic to a separate supervisory optical
   channel.

5.3.2 Uni- versus Bi-directional Failures

   The failure detection, correlation and notification mechanisms
   (described in Section 4) can be triggered when either a
   unidirectional or a bi-directional LSP/Span failure occurs (or a
   combination of both). As illustrated in Figure 1 and 2, two
   alternatives can be considered here:

   1. Uni-directional failure detection: the failure is detected on the
      receiver side i.e. it is only is detected by the downstream node
      to the failure (or by the upstream node depending on the failure
      propagation direction, respectively)

   2. Bi-directional failure detection: the failure is detected on the
      receiver side of both downstream node AND upstream node to the
      failure.

   Notice that after the failure detection time, if only control plane
   based failure management is provided, the peering node is unaware of
   the failure detection status of its neighbor.

    -------             -------           -------             -------
   |       |           |       |Tx     Rx|       |           |       |
   | NodeA |----...----| NodeB |xxxxxxxxx| NodeC |----...----| NodeD |
   |       |----...----|       |---------|       |----...----|       |
    -------             -------           -------             -------

   t0                                >>>>>>> F

   t1                      x <---------------x
                               Notification
   t2  <--------...--------x                 x--------...-------->
          Up Notification                      Down Notification


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              8

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002



    -------             -------           -------             -------
   |       |           |       |Tx     Rx|       |           |       |
   | NodeA |----...----| NodeB |xxxxxxxxx| NodeC |----...----| NodeD |
   |       |----...----|       |xxxxxxxxx|       |----...----|       |
    -------             -------           -------             -------

   t0                      F <<<<<<< >>>>>>> F

   t1                      x <-------------> x
                               Notification
   t2  <--------...--------x                 x--------...-------->
          Up Notification                      Down Notification


    Fig. 1 & 2. Uni- and Bi-directional Failure Detection/Notification


   After failure detection, the following failure management operations
   can be subsequently considered:

   - Each detecting entity sends a notification message to the
     corresponding transmitting entity. For instance, in Fig. 1 (Fig.
     2), node C sends a notification message to node B (while node B
     sends a notification message to node A). To ensure reliable
     failure notification, a dedicated acknowledgment message can be
     returned back to the sender node.

   - Next, within a certain (and pre-determined) time window, nodes
     impacted by the failure occurrences perform their correlation. In
     case of unidirectional failure, node B only receives the
     notification message from node C and thus the time for this
     operation is negligible. However, in case of bi-directional
     failure, node B (and node C) must correlate the received
     notification message from node C (node B, respectively) with the
     corresponding locally detected information.

   - After some (pre-determined) period of time, referred to as the
     hold-off time, after which local recovery actions were not
     successful, the following occurs. In case of unidirectional
     failure and depending on the directionality of the connection,
     node B should send an upstream notification message to the ingress
     node A or node C should send a downstream notification to the
     egress node D. However, in such a case only node A (node D,
     respectively) would initiate a edge to edge recovery action. Note
     that the connection terminating node (i.e. node D or node A) may
     be optionally notified.

     In case of bi-directional failure, and depending on the
     directionality of the connection, node B may send an upstream
     notification message to the ingress node A or node C a downstream
     notification to the egress node D. However, due to the dependence
     on the connection directionality, only ingress node A or egress

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002              9

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


     node D would initiate an edge to edge recovery action. Note that
     the connection terminating node (i.e. node D or node A) should be
     notified. For instance, if a connection directed from D to A is
     under failure condition, only the notification sent by from node C
     to D would initiate a recovery action.

   In the above scenarios, the path followed by the notification
   messages does not have to be the same as the one followed by the
   failed LSP (see [GMPLS-SIG], for more details on the notification
   message exchange). The important point, concerning this mechanism,
   is that either the detecting/reporting entity (i.e. the nodes B and
   C) are also the deciding/recovery entity or the detecting/reporting
   entities are simply intermediate nodes in the subsequent recovery
   process. One refers to local recovery in the former case and to
   edge-to-edge recovery in the latter one.

5.3.3 Partial versus Full Span Recovery

   When given span carries more than one LSP or LSP segment, an
   additional aspect must be considered during span failure carrying
   several LSPs. These LSP can be either individually recovered or
   recovered as a group (bulk LSP recovery) or independent sub-groups.
   The selection of this mechanism would be triggered independently of
   the failure notification granularity when correlation time windows
   are used and simultaneous recovery of several LSP can be performed
   using single request. Moreover, criteria by which such sub-groups
   can be formed are outside of the scope of this document.

   An additional complexity arises in case of recovery a LSP group. The
   LSPs created between a node pair may have been initiated from
   different source (i.e. initiator) nodes. Consequently the node
   downstream to a bi-directional span failure affecting several LSPs
   (or the whole group of LSP it carries) is not necessarily directed
   toward the same destination node. Therefore, such span failure may
   generate recovery actions to be performed a both LSP initiator nodes
   of the pair. In order to facilitate the definition of the recovery
   mechanisms (and their sequence) one assumes here that the initiator
   of the LSP/LSP Segment is also the deciding entity (see [CCAMP-
   TERM]) for its recovery.

5.3.4 Difference between LSP, LSP Segment and Span Recovery

   The recovery definitions given in [CCAMP-TERM] are quite generic and
   apply for link (or local span) and LSP recovery. The major
   difference between LSP, LSP Segment and span recovery is related to
   the number of intermediate nodes the signalling messages have to
   travel. Since nodes are not necessarily adjacent in case of LSP (or
   LSP Segment) recovery, signalling message exchanges from the
   reporting to the deciding/recovery entity will have to cross several
   intermediate nodes. In particular, this applies for the notification
   messages due to the number of hops separating the failure occurrence
   location from their destination. This results in an additional
   propagation and forwarding delay, which can in certain circumstances

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             10

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   be non-negligible e.g. in case of copper out-of-band network one has
   to consider approximately 1 ms per 200km.

   Moreover, the recovery mechanisms applicable to end-to-end LSP and
   to the segments (i.e. edge-to-edge) that may compose an end-to-end
   LSP can be exactly the same. However, one expects in the latter
   case, that the destination of the failure notification message will
   be the ingress of each of these segments. Therefore, taking into
   account the mechanism described in Section 5.3.2, failure
   notification can be first exchanged between LSP segment terminating
   points and after expiration of the hold-off time directed toward
   end-to-end LSP terminating points.

5.4 Difference between Recovery Type and Scheme

   Section 4.6 of [CCAMP-TERM] defines the basic recovery types. The
   purpose of this section is to describe the schemes that can be built
   using these recovery types. Several examples are provided in order
   to illustrate the difference between a recovery type such as 1:1 and
   a recovery scheme such as (1:1)^n.

   1. (1:1)^n with recovery resource sharing

   The exponent, n, indicates the number of times a 1:1 recovery type
   is applied between at most n different ingress-egress node pairs.
   Here, at most n pairs of disjoint recovery and working LSPs/spans
   share at most n times a unique common resource. Since the working
   LSPs/Spans are mutually disjoint, simultaneous requests for use of
   the shared resource will only occur in case of a simultaneous
   failures, which is less likely to happen.

   For instance, in the (1:1)^2 common case if the 2 recovery LSPs in
   the group overlap the same common resource, then it can handle only
   single failures; any multiple working LSP failures will cause at
   least one working LSP to be denied automatic recovery. Consider for
   instance, the following example, with working LSPs A-B and E-F and
   recovery LSPs A-C-D-B and E-C-D-F sharing a common C-D resource.

                          A --------------- B
                           \               /
                            C ----------- D
                           /               \
                          E --------------- F

   2. (M:N)^n with recovery resource sharing

   The exponent, n, indicates the number of times a M:N recovery type
   is applied between at most n different ingress-egress node pairs.
   So the interpretation follows from the previous case, expect that
   here disjointness applies to the N working LSPs/spans and to the M
   recovery LSPs/spans while sharing at most (n x M) common resources.



D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             11

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   In both schemes, one may see the following at the LSP level: we have
   a ôgroupö of sum{n=1}^N N{n} working LSPs and a pool of shared
   backup resources, not all of which are available to any given
   working path. In such conditions, defining a metric that describes
   the amount of overlap among the recovery LSPs would give some
   indication of the groupÆs ability to handle multiple simultaneous
   failures.

   For instance, in the simpler (1:1)^n case situation if n recovery
   LSPs in a (1:1)^n group overlap, then it can handle only single
   failures; any multiple working LSP failures will cause at least one
   working LSP to be denied automatic recovery. But if one consider for
   instance, a (1:1)^4 group in which there are two pairs of
   overlapping recovery LSPs, then two LSPs (belonging to the same
   pair) can be simultaneously recovered. The latter case can be
   illustrated as follows: 2 working LSPs A-B and E-F and 2 recovery
   LSPs A-C-D-B and E-C-D-F sharing the two common C-D resources.

                          A ================ B
                           \\              //
                            C =========== D
                           //              \\
                          E ================ F

   Moreover, in all these schemes, (working) path disjointness can be
   reinforced by exchanging working LSP related information during the
   recovery LSP signalling.

5.5 LSP Restoration Schemes

5.5.1 Classification

   LSPs/spans recovery time depends on the proper recovery LSP (soft)
   provisioning and the level of recovery resources overbooking (i.e.
   over-provisioning). A proper balance of these two mechanisms will
   result in a desired LSP/span recovery time when single or multiple
   failure(s) occur(s).

   Recovery LSP Provisioning phases:

   (1) Route Computation --> On-demand
           |
           |
            --> Pre-Computed
                    |
                    |
                   (2) Signalling --> On-demand
                           |
                           |
                            --> Pre-Signaled
                                    |
                                    |
                                   (3) Resource Selection --> On-demand

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             12

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


                                                |
                                                |
                                                 --> Pre-Selected

   Overbooking Levels:

                    +----- Dedicated (for instance: 1+1, 1:1, etc.)
                    |
                    |
                    +----- Shared (for instance: 1:N, M:N, etc.)
                    |
   Level of         |
   Overbooking -----+----- Unprotected (for instance: 0:1, 0:N)


          Fig 3. LSP Provisioning and Overbooking Classification


   In this figure, we present a classification of different options
   under LSP provisioning and overbooking. Although we acknowledge
   these operations are run mostly during planning (using network
   planning) and provisioning time (using signaling and routing)
   activities, we keep them in analyzing the recovery schemes.

   Proper LSP/span provisioning will help in alleviating many of the
   failures. As an example, one may compute primary and secondary
   paths, either end-to-end or segment-per-segment, to recover an LSP
   from multiple failure events affecting link(s), node(s), SRLG(s)
   and/or SRG(s). Such primary and secondary LSP/span provisioning can
   be categorized, as shown in the above figure, based on:
   (1) the recovery path (i.e. route) can be either pre-computed or
       computed on demand.
   (2) when the recovery path is pre-computed: pre-signaled (implying
       recovery resource reservation) or signaled on demand.
   (3) and when the recovery resources are reserved, they can be either
       pre-selected or selection on-demand.

   Note that these different options give rise to different LSP/span
   recovery times. The following subsections will consider all these
   cases in analyzing the schemes.

   There are many mechanisms available allowing the overbooking of the
   recovery resources. This overbooking can be done per LSP (such as
   the example mentioned above), per link (such as span protection) or
   per domain (such as ring topologies). In all these cases the level
   of overbooking, as shown in the above figure, can be classified as
   dedicated (such as 1+1 and 1:1), shared (such as 1:N and M:N) or
   unprotected (i.e. restorable if enough recovery resources are
   available).

   Under a shared restoration scheme one may support preemptable
   (preempt low priority connections in case of resource contention)


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             13

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   extra-traffic. In this document we keep in mind all the above-
   mentioned overbooking mechanisms in analyzing the recovery schemes.

5.5.2 Dynamic LSP Restoration

   We first define the following times in order to provide a
   quantitative estimation about the time performance of the dynamic
   and pre-signaled LSP restoration:
   - Path Computation Time - Tpc
   - Path Selection Time - Tps
   - End-to-end LSP Resource Reservation û Trr (a delta for resource
     selection is also considered, the total time is then referred to
     as Trs)
   - End-to-end LSP (Resource) Activation Time û Tra (a delta for
     resource selection is also considered, the total time is then
     referred to as Tas)

   Note: failure management operations such as failure detection,
   correlation and notification are considered as equivalently time
   consuming for all the mechanisms described here below:

   1. With Route Pre-computation

   An end-to-end restoration LSP is established after the failure(s)
   occur(s) based on a pre-computed path (i.e. route). As such, one can
   define this as an ôLSP re-provisioningö mechanism. Here, one or more
   (disjoint) routes for the restoration path are computed (and
   optionally pre-selected) before a failure occurs.

   No reservation or selection of resources is performed along the
   restoration path before failure. As a result, there is no guarantee
   that a restoration connection is available when a failure occurs.

   The total time T expected is thus equal to Tps + Trs or when a
   dedicated computation is performed for each working LSP to Trs.

   2. Without Route Pre-computation

   An end-to-end restoration LSP is established after the failure(s)
   occur(s). Here, one or more (disjoint) explicit route for the
   restoration path are dynamically computed and one is selected after
   failure. As such, one can define this as an ôLSP re-provisioningö
   mechanism.

   No reservation or selection of resources is performed along the
   restoration path before failure. As a result, there is no guarantee
   that a restoration connection is available when a failure occurs.

   The total time T expected is thus equal to Tpc + Tps + Trs.
   Therefore, time performance between the two approaches differs only
   by the time required for route computation (and selection).

5.5.3 Pre-signaled Restoration LSP

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             14

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002



   1. With resource reservation without pre-selection

   An end-to-end restoration path is pre-selected from a set of one or
   more pre-computed (disjoint) explicit route before failure. The
   restoration LSP is signaled along this pre-selected path to reserve
   resources (i.e. signaled) at each node but resources are not
   selected.

   In this case, the resources reserved for each restoration LSP may be
   dedicated or shared between different working LSP that are not
   expected to fail simultaneously. Local node policies can be applied
   to define the degree to which these resources are shared across
   independent failures.

   Upon failure detection, signaling is initiated along the restoration
   path to select the resources, and to perform the appropriate
   operation at each node entity involved in the restoration connection
   (e.g. cross-connections).

   The total time T expected is thus equal to (Tps +) Trr + Tas.

   2. With resource reservation and pre-selection

   An end-to-end restoration path is pre-selected from a set of one or
   more pre-computed (disjoint) explicit route before failure. The
   restoration LSP is signaled along this pre-selected path to reserve
   AND select resources at each node but not cross-connected. Such that
   the selection of the recovery resources is fixed at the control
   plane level. However, no cross-connections are performed along the
   restoration path.

   In this case, the resources reserved for each restoration LSP may
   only be shared between different working LSPs that are not expected
   to fail simultaneously. Since one considers restoration schemes
   here, the sharing degree should not be limited to working (and
   recovery) LSPs starting and ending at the same ingress and egress
   nodes. Therefore, one expects to receive some feedback information
   on the recovery resource sharing degree at each node participating
   to the recovery scheme.

   Upon failure detection, signaling is initiated along the restoration
   path to activate the reserved and selected resources and to perform
   the appropriate operation at each node involved in the restoration
   connection (e.g. cross-connections).

   The total time T expected is thus equal to (Tps +) Trs + Tra.
   Therefore, time performance between the two approaches differs only
   by the time required for resource selection during the activation of
   the recovery LSP.

5.5.4 LSP Segment Restoration


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             15

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   The above approaches can be applied on a sub-network basis rather
   than end-to-end basis (in order to reduce the global recovery time).

   It should be also noted that using the horizontal hierarchical
   approach described in Section 7.1, that a given end-to-end LSP can
   be recovered by multiple recovery mechanisms (e.g. 1:1 protection in
   a metro edge network but M:N protection in the core). These
   mechanisms are ideally independent and may even use different
   failure localization and notification mechanisms.

6. Normalization

6.1 Wait-To-Restore

   A specific mechanism (Wait-To-Restore) is used to prevent frequent
   protection switching operation due to an intermittent defect (e.g.
   BER fluctuating around the SD threshold).

   First, a failed LSP/span must become fault-free, e.g. a BER less   
   than a certain recovery threshold. After the recovered LSP/span
   (i.e. the previously working LSP/span) meets this criterion, a fixed
   period of time shall elapse before a normal traffic uses the
   corresponding resources again. This period called Wait-To-Restore
   (WTR) period or timer is generally of the order of a few minutes
   (for instance, 5 minutes) and should be capable of being set. An SF
   or SD condition overrides the WTR.

6.2 Revertive Mode Operation

   In revertive mode of operation, when the recovery LSP/span is no
   longer required, i.e. the failed working LSP/span is no longer in SD
   or SF condition, a local Wait-to-Restore (WTR) state will be
   activated before switching the normal traffic back to the recovered
   working LSP/span.

   During the reversion operation, since this state becomes the highest
   in priority, signalling must maintain the normal traffic on the
   recovery LSP/span from the previously failed working LSP/span.

   Moreover, during this WTR state, any null traffic or extra traffic
   (if applicable) request is rejected. However, deactivation of the
   wait-to-restore timer may occur in case of higher priority request
   attempts.

6.3 Orphans

   When a reversion operation is requested normal traffic must be
   switched from the recovery to the ôrecoveredö working LSP/span. A
   particular situation occurs when the working LSP/span can not be
   recovered such that normal traffic can not be switched back. In such
   a case, the unrecoverable working LSP/span or segment (also referred
   to as ôorphanö) must be cleared. Otherwise, potential de-
   synchronization between the control and transport plane resource

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             16

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   usage can appear. Depending on the signalling protocol capabilities
   and behavior different mechanisms are to be expected here.

   Several ways can be used for that purpose: wait for the elapsing of
   the clear-out time interval, initiate a deletion from the ingress or
   the egress node or trigger the initiation of deletion from an entity
   (such as an EMS or NMS) capable to react on the reception of an
   appropriate notification message.

7. Hierarchies

   Recovery mechanisms are being made available at multiple (if not
   each) transport layers within so-called ôIP-over-opticalö networks.
   However, each layer has certain recovery features and one needs to
   determine the exact impact of the interaction between the recovery
   mechanisms provided by these layers.

   Hierarchies are used to build scalable complex systems. Abstraction
   is used as a mechanism to build large networks or as a technique for
   enforcing technology, topological or administrative boundaries. The
   same hierarchical concept can be applied to control the network
   survivability. In general, it is expected that the recovery action
   is taken by the recoverable LSP/span closest to the failure in order
   to avoid the multiplication of recovery actions. Moreover, recovery
   hierarchies can be also bound to control plane logical partitions
   (e.g. administrative or topological boundaries). Each of them may
   apply different recovery mechanisms.

   In brief, commonly accepted ideas are generally that the lower
   layers can provide coarse but faster recovery while the higher
   layers can provide finer but slower recovery. Moreover, it is also
   more than desirable to avoid too many layers with functional
   overlaps. In this context, this section intends to analyze these
   hierarchical aspects including the physical (passive) layer(s).

7.1 Horizontal Hierarchy (Partitioning)

   A horizontal hierarchy is defined when partitioning a single layer
   network (and its control plane) into several recovery domains.
   Within a domain, the recovery scope may extend over a link (or
   span), LSP segment or even an end-to-end LSP. Moreover, an
   administrative domain may consist of a single recovery domain or can
   be partitioned into several smaller recovery domains. The operator
   can partition the network into recovery domains based on physical
   network topology, control plane capabilities, or various traffic
   engineering constraints.

   An example often addressed in the literature is the metro-core-metro
   application (sometimes extended to a metro-metro/core-core) within a
   single transport layer (see Section 7.2). For such a case, an end-
   to-end LSP is defined between the ingress and egress metro nodes,
   while LSP segments may be defined within the metro or core sub-
   networks. Each of these topological structures determines a so-

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             17

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   called ôrecovery domainö since each of the LSPs they carry can have
   its own recovery type (or even scheme). The support of multiple
   recovery schemes within a sub-network is referred to as a multi-
   recovery capable domain or simply multi-recovery domain.

7.2 Vertical Hierarchy (Layers)

   It is a very challenging task to combine in a coordinated manner the
   different recovery capabilities available across the path (i.e.
   switching capable) and section layers to ensure that certain network
   survivability objectives are met for the different services
   supported by the network.

   As a first analysis step, one can draw the following guidelines for
   a vertical coordination of the recovery mechanisms:
   - The lower the layer the faster the notification and switching
   - The higher the layer the finer the granularity of the recoverable
     entity and therefore the granularity of the recovery resource
     (and subsequently its sharing ratio)

   A vertical hierarchy consists of multiple layered transport planes
   providing different:
   - Discrete bandwidth granularities for non-packet LSPs such as OCh,
     ODUk, HOVC/STS-SPE and LOVC/VT-SPE LSPs and continuous bandwidth
     granularities for packet LSPs
   - Potentially, recovery capabilities with different temporal
     granularities: ranging from milliseconds to tens of seconds

   In SDH/Sonet environments, one typically considers the LOVC/VT and
   HOVC/STS SPE as independent layers, LOVC/VT LSP using the underlying
   HOVC/STS SPE LSPs as links, for instance. In OTN, the ODUk path
   layers will lie on the OCh path layer i.e. the ODUk LSPs using the
   underlying OCh LSPs as links. Notice here that server layer LSPs may
   simply be provisioned and not dynamically triggered or established
   (control driven approach).

   The following figure (including only the path layers) illustrates
   the hierarchical layers that can be covered by the recovery
   architecture of a transmission network comprising a SDH/Sonet and an
   OTN part:

   LOVC <------------------------------------------------------> LOVC
    ||                                                            ||
   HOVC ==== HOVC <----------------------------------> HOVC ==== HOVC
              ||                                        ||
             ODUk ==== ODUk <--------------> ODUk ==== ODUk
                        ||                    ||
                       OCh  <---> OCh  <---> OCh

   In this context, the important points are the following:
   - these layers are path layers; i.e. the ones controlled by
     the GMPLS (in particular, signalling) protocol suite.
   - an LSP at the lower layer for instance an optical channel (=

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             18

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


     network connection) appears as a section (= link) for the OTUk
     layer i.e. the links that are typically controlled by link
     management protocols such as LMP.

   If one considers also the section layers of the OTH then the
   following scheme applies:

   ODUk == . . == ODUk <-------------------------> ODUk == . . == ODUk
                   ||                               ||
                  OTUk <-------------------------> OTUk
                   ||                               ||
                  OCh  <---> OCh <-...-> OCh <---> OCh

   The first key issue with multi-layer recovery is that achieving
   control plane individual or bulk LSP recovery will be as efficient
   as the underlying link (local span) recovery. In such a case, the
   span can be either protected or unprotected, but the LSP it carries
   MUST be (at least locally) recoverable. Therefore, the span recovery
   process can either be independent when protected (or restorable), or
   triggered by the upper LSP recovery process. The former requires
   coordination in order to achieve subsequent LSP recovery. Therefore,
   in order to achieve robustness and fast convergence, multi-layer
   recovery requires a fine-tuned coordination mechanism.

   Moreover, in the absence of adequate recovery mechanism coordination
   (pre-determined for instance by the hold-off time), a failure
   notification may propagate from one layer to the next within a
   recovery hierarchy. This can cause "collisions" and trigger
   simultaneous recovery actions that may lead to race conditions and
   in turn, reduce the optimization of the resource utilization and/or
   generate global instabilities in the network (see [MANCHESTER]).
   Therefore, a consistent and efficient escalation strategy is needed
   to coordinate recovery across several layers.

   Therefore, one can expect that the definition of the recovery
   mechanisms and protocol(s) is technology independent such that they
   can be implemented at different layers; this would in turn simplify
   their global coordination.

   Note: Recovery Granularity

   In most environments, the design of the network and the vertical
   distribution of the LSP bandwidth are such that the recovery
   granularity is finer for higher layers. The OTN and SDH/Sonet layers
   can only recover the whole section or the individual connections it
   transports whereas IP/MPLS layer(s) can recover individual packet
   LSPs or groups of packet LSPs.

   Obviously, the recovery granularity at the sub-wavelength (i.e.
   SDH/Sonet) level can be provided only when the network includes
   devices switching at the same granularity level (and thus not with
   optical channel switching capable devices). Therefore, the network
   layer can deliver control-plane driven recovery mechanisms on a per-

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             19

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   LSP basis if and only if the LSPs class has the corresponding
   switching capability at the transport plane level.

7.3 Escalation Strategies

   There are two types of escalation strategies (see [DEMEESTER]):
   bottom-up and top-down.

   The bottom-up approach assumes that lower layer recovery schemes are
   more expedient and faster than the upper layer one. Therefore we can
   inhibit or hold-off higher layer recovery. However this assumption
   is not entirely true. Imagine a SDH/Sonet based protection mechanism
   (with a less than 50 ms protection switching time) lying on top of
   an OTN restoration mechanism (with a less than 200 ms restoration
   time). Therefore, this assumption should be (at least) clarified as:
   lower layer recovery schemes are faster than upper level one but
   only if the same type of recovery mechanism is used at each layer
   (assuming that the lower layer one is faster).

   Consequently, taking into account the recovery actions at the
   different layers in a bottom-up approach, if lower layer recovery
   mechanisms are provided and sequentially activated in conjunction
   with higher layer ones, the lower layers MUST have an opportunity to
   recover normal traffic before the higher layers do. However, if
   lower layer recovery is slower than higher layer recovery, the lower
   layer MUST either communicate the failure related information to the
   higher layer(s) (and allow it to perform recovery), or use a hold-
   off timer in order to temporarily set the higher layer recovery
   action in a ôstandby modeö. Note that the a priori information
   exchange between layers concerning their efficiency is not within
   the current of this document. Nevertheless, the coordination
   functionality between layers must be configurable and tunable.

   An example of coordination between the optical and packet layer
   control plane enables for instance letting the optical layer
   performing the failure management operations (in particular, failure
   detection and notification) while giving to the packet layer control
   plane the authority to perform the recovery actions. In case of
   packet layer unsuccessful recovery action, fallback at the optical
   layer can be subsequently performed.

   The Top-down approach attempts service recovery at the higher layers
   before invoking lower layer recovery. Higher layer recovery is
   service selective, and permits "per-CoS" or "per-connection" re-
   routing. With this approach, the most important aspect is that the
   upper layer must provide its own reliable and INDEPENDENT failure
   detection mechanism from the lower layer.

   The same reference suggests also recovery mechanisms incorporating a
   coordinated effort shared by two adjacent layers with periodic
   status updates. Moreover, at certain layers, some of these recovery
   operations can be pre-assigned, e.g. a particular link will be


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             20

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   handled by the packet layer while another will be handled by the
   fiber layer.

7.4 Disjointness

   Having link and node diverse working and recovery LSPs/spans does
   not guarantee working and recovery LSPs/Spans disjointness. Due to
   the common physical layer topology (passive), additional
   hierarchical concepts such as the Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG) and
   mechanisms such as SRLG diverse path computation must be developed
   to provide a complete working and recovery LSP/span disjointness
   (see [IPO-IMP] and [CCAMP-SRLG]). Otherwise, a failure affecting the
   working LSP/span would also potentially affect the recovery LSP/span
   resources, one refers to such event as a common failure.

7.4.1 SRLG Disjointness

   A Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG) is defined as the set of optical
   spans (or links or optical lines) sharing a common physical resource
   (for instance, fiber links, fiber trunks or cables) i.e. sharing a
   common risk. For instance, a set of links L belongs to the same SRLG
   s, if they are provisioned over the same fiber link f.

   The SRLG properties can be summarized as follows:

   1) A link belongs to more than one SRLG if and only if it crosses
      one of the resources covered by each of them.

   2) Two links belonging to the same SRLG can belong individually to
      other (one or more) SRLGs.

   3) The SRLG set S of an LSP is defined as the union of the
      individual SRLG s of the individual links composing this LSP.

   SRLG disjointness for LSP:

      The LSP SRLG disjointness concept is based on the following
      postulate: an LSP (i.e. sequence of links) covers an SRLG if and
      only if it crosses one of the links belonging to that SRLG.

      Therefore, the SRLG disjointness for LSPs can be defined as
      follows: two LSPs are disjoint with respect to an SRLG s if and
      only if none of them covers simultaneously this SRLG.

      While the LSP SRLG disjointness with respect of a set S of SRLGs
      is defined as follows: two LSPs are disjoint with respect to a
      set of SRLGs S if and only if the sets of SRLGs they cover are
      completely and mutually disjoint.

   The impact on recovery is obvious: SRLG disjointness is a necessary
   (but not a sufficient) condition to ensure optical network
   survivability. With respect to the physical network resources, a
   working-recovery LSP/span pair must be SRLG disjoint in case of

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             21

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   dedicated recovery type while a working-recovery LSP/span group must
   be SRLG disjoint in case of shared recovery.

7.4.2 SRG Disjointness

   By extending the previous definition from a link to a more generic
   structure, referred to as a ôrisk domainö, one comes to the SRG
   (Shared Risk Group) notion (see [CCAMP-SRG]). A risk domain is a
   group of arbitrarily connected nodes and spans that together can
   provide certain like-capabilities (such as a chain of dedicated/
   shared protected links and nodes, or a ring forming nodes and links,
   or a protected hierarchical TE Link).

   In turn, an SRG represents the risk domain capabilities and other
   parameters, which assist in computing diverse paths through the
   domain (it can also be used in assessing the risk associated with
   the risk domain.)

   Note that the SRLG set of a risk domain constitutes a subset of the
   SRGs. SRLGs address only risks associated with the links (physical)
   and passive elements within the risk domain, whereas SRGs may
   contain nodes and other topological information in addition to the
   links. The key difference between an SRLG and an SRG is that an SRLG
   translates to only one link share risk with respect to server layer
   topology (even hierarchical TE Links) while an SRG translates a
   sequence of SRLGs over the same layer from one source to one or more
   than one destination located within the same area.

   As for SRLG disjointness, the impact on recovery is that SRG
   disjointness is a necessary (but not a sufficient) condition to
   ensure optical network survivability. With respect to the physical
   and logical network resources (and topology), a working-recovery
   LSP/span pair must be SRG disjoint in case of dedicated recovery
   type while a working-recovery LSP/span group must be SRG disjoint in
   case of shared recovery.

8. Recovery Scheme/Strategy Selection

   In order to provide a structured selection and analysis of the
   recovery scheme/strategy, the following dimensions can be defined:

   1. Fast convergence (performance): provide a mechanism that
      aggregates multiple failures (this implies fast failure
      detection and correlation mechanisms) and fast recovery decision
      independently of the number of failures occurring in the optical
      network (implying also a fast failure notification).

   2. Efficiency (scalability): minimize the switching time required
      for LSP/span recovery independently of number of LSPs/spans being
      recovered (this implies an efficient failure correlation, a fast
      failure notification and timely efficient recovery mechanism(s)).

   3. Robustness (availability): minimize the LSP/span downtime

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             22

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


      independently of the underlying topology of the transport plane
      (this implies a highly responsive recovery mechanism).

   4. Resource optimization (optimality): minimize the resource
      capacity, including LSP/span and nodes (switching capacity),
      required for recovery purposes; this dimension can also be
      referred to as optimize the sharing degree of the recovery
      resources.

   5. Cost optimization: provide a cost-effective recovery strategy.

   However, these dimensions are either out of the scope of this
   document such as cost optimization, recovery path computational
   aspects or going in opposite directions. For instance, it is obvious
   that providing a 1+1 recovery type for each LSP minimizes the LSP
   downtime (in case of failure) while being non-scalable and recovery
   resource consuming without enabling any extra-traffic.

   The following sections try to provide a first response in order to
   select a recovery strategy with respect to the dimensions described
   above and the recovery schemes proposed in [CCAMP-TERM].

8.1 Fast Convergence (Detection/Correlation and Hold-off Time)

   Fast convergence is related to the failure management operations. It
   refers to the elapsing time between the failure detection/
   correlation and hold-off time, point at which the recovery switching
   actions are initiated. This point has been already discussed in
   Section 4.

8.2 Efficiency (Switching Time)

   In general, the more pre-assignment/pre-planning of the recovery
   LSP/span, the more rapid the recovery scheme is. Since protection
   implies pre-assignment (and cross-connection in case of LSP
   recovery) of the protection resources, in general, protection
   schemes recover faster than restoration schemes.

   Span restoration (since using control plane) is also likely to be
   slower than most span protection types; however this greatly depends
   on the span restoration signalling efficiency. LSP Restoration with
   pre-signaled and pre-selected recovery resources is likely to be
   faster than fully dynamic LSP restoration, especially because of the
   elimination of any potential crank-back during the recovery LSP
   establishment.

   If one excludes the crank-back issue, the difference between dynamic
   and pre-planned restoration depends on the restoration path
   computation and path selection time. Since computational
   considerations are outside of the scope of this document, it is up
   to the vendor to determine the average path computation time in
   different scenarios and to the operator to decide whether or not
   dynamic restoration is advantageous over pre-planned schemes

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             23

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   depending on the network environment. This difference depends also
   on the flexibility provided by pre-planned restoration with respect
   to dynamic one: the former implies a limited number of failure
   scenarios (that can be due for instance to local storage
   limitation). This, while the latter enables an on-demand path
   computation based on the information received through failure
   notification and as such more robust with respect to the failure
   scenario scope.

   Moreover, LSP segment restoration, in particular, dynamic
   restoration (i.e. no path pre-computation so none of the recovery
   resource is pre-signaled) will generally be faster than end-to-end
   LSP schemes. However, local LSP restoration assumes that each LSP
   segment end-point has enough computational capacity to perform this
   operation while end-to-end requires only that LSP end-points
   provides this path computation capability.

   Recovery time objectives for SDH/Sonet protection switching (not
   including time to detect failure) are specified in [G.841] at 50 ms,
   taking into account constraints on distance, number of connections
   involved, and in the case of ring enhanced protection, number of
   nodes in the ring. Recovery time objectives for restoration
   mechanisms have been proposed through a separate effort [TE-RH].

8.3 Robustness

   In general, the less pre-assignment (protection)/pre-planning
   (restoration) of the recovery LSP/span, the more robust the recovery
   type/scheme is to a variety of (single) failures, provided that
   adequate resources are available. Moreover, the pre-selection of the
   recovery resources gives less flexibility for multiple failure
   scenarios than no recovery resource pre-selection. For instance, if
   failures occur that affect two LSPs sharing a common link along
   their restoration paths, then only one of these LSPs can be
   recovered. This occurs unless the restoration path of at least one
   of these LSPs is re-computed or the local resource assignment is
   modified on the fly.

   In addition, recovery schemes with pre-planned recovery resources,
   in particular spans for protection and LSP for restoration purposes,
   will not be able to recover from failures that simultaneously affect
   both the working and recovery LSP/span. Thus, the recovery resources
   should ideally be chosen to be as disjoint as possible (with respect
   to link, node and SRLG) from the working ones, so that any single
   failure event will not affect both working and recovery LSP/span. In
   brief, working and recovery resource must be fully diverse in order
   to guarantee that a given failure will not affect simultaneously the
   working and the recovery LSP/span. Also, the risk of simultaneous
   failure of the working and restoration LSP can be reduced by re-
   computing a restoration path whenever a failure occurs along the
   corresponding recovery LSP or by re-computing a restoration path and
   re-provisioning the corresponding recovery LSP whenever a failure


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             24

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   occurs along a working LSP/span. This method enables to maintain the
   number of available recovery path constant.

   The robustness of a recovery scheme is also determined by the amount
   of reserved (i.e. signaled) recovery resources within a given shared
   resource pool: as the amount of recovery resources sharing degree
   increases, the recovery scheme becomes less robust to multiple
   failure occurrences. Recovery schemes, in particular restoration,
   with pre-signaled resource reservation (with or without pre-
   selection) should be capable to reserve the adequate amount of
   resource to ensure recovery from any specific set of failure events,
   such as any single SRLG failure, any two SRLG failures etc.

8.4 Resource Optimization

   It is commonly admitted that sharing recovery resources provides
   network resource optimization. Therefore, from a resource
   utilization perspective, protection schemes are often classified
   with respect to their degree of sharing protection resources with
   respect to the working entities. Moreover, non-permanent bridging
   protection types allow (under normal conditions) for extra-traffic
   over the recovery resources. 1+1 LSP/Span protection is the more
   resource consuming protection type since it doesnÆt allow for any
   extra-traffic. 1:1 and 1:N LSP/span protection types require
   dedicated recovery LSP/span while allowing extra (preemptible)
   traffic, shared between the N working LSP/span in case of 1:N
   protection. Obviously, 1+1 and 1:1 protection types do not provide
   protection resource sharing while 1:N and M:N protection type allow
   sharing of 1 (M, respectively) protection LSP/spans between N
   working LSP/spans. However the flexibility in usage of shared
   protection resources (in particular, shared protection links) may be
   limited because of network topology restrictions, e.g. fixed ring
   topology for traditional enhanced protection schemes.

   On the other hand, the degree to which restoration schemes allow
   sharing amongst multiple independent failures is directly dictated
   by the size of the restoration pool. In restoration schemes with re-
   provisioning, a pool of restoration resource can be defined from
   which all restoration routes are selected after failure occurrence.
   Thus, the degree of sharing is defined by the amount of available
   restoration capacity. In restoration with pre-signaled resource
   reservation, the amount of reserved restoration capacity is
   determined by the local bandwidth reservation policies. In all
   restoration schemes, preemptible LSP/span can use spare restoration
   resources when these resources are not being used for LSP/span
   recovery purposes.

   Clearly, less recovery resources (i.e. LSP/spans and switching
   capacity) have to be allocated to a shared recovery source pool if a
   greater sharing degree is required. Thus, the degree to which the
   network is survivable is determined by the policy that defines the
   amount of reserved (shared) recovery resources.


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             25

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


8.4.1. Recovery Resource Sharing

   When recovery resources are shared over several LSP/Spans, [GMPLS-
   RTG] through the use of the Maximum LSP Bandwidth, the Maximum
   Reservable Bandwidth and the Unreserved Bandwidth TE Link sub-TLVs
   provides the required parameters to obtain network resource
   optimization for a given recovery scheme, for instance (1:1)^n.

   However, one has also to consider the resource sharing degree, since
   the bandwidth distribution per component Link ID over a given TE
   Link is by definition unknown. Therefore, a Maximum Sharing Degree
   information can be considered in order to optimize the usage of the
   shared resources. In this case and if one defines the shared
   recovery bandwidth (in terms bandwidth unit) per TE Link i as r[i],
   this implies that the following quantity must be maximized over the
   potential candidates: sum {i=1}^N [r{i}/t{i} û b{i}], where N is the
   total number of links traversed by a given LSP, t{i} the maximum
   reservable bandwidth per TE Link i and b[i] as the sum of the
   bandwidth committed for working LSPs and dedicated recovery purposes
   per TE Link i. Since b{i} =< t{i}, a fully provisioned TE Link i,
   will not be selected during the shared recovery path computation
   while a fully reserved TE Link i would result in a ratio of 1.

   More generally, one can draw the following mapping between the
   available bandwidth at the transport and control plane level:

                                -------- Max Reservable Bandwidth
                                -----
                                -----
   -------- Max LSP Bandwidth   -------- Max LSP Bandwidth
   -----                        -----
   -----    <------ b ------>   -----
   -----                        -----
   -----                        -----
   -----                        -----
   -------- 0                   -------- 0

   The difference between Max Reservable Bandwidth and the Max LSP
   Bandwidth is referred to as the Max Sharable Bandwidth. Within the
   quantity, the amount of bandwidth dedicated for shared resource
   recovery per TE Link i is defined as r[i] and can be expressed in
   terms of component link bandwidth unit.

   It has been demonstrated that this Partial Information Routing
   approach (also referred to as stochastic approach) can also be
   applied to resource shareability given the number of times each SRLG
   is protected by a recovery resource, in particular an LSP (see
   [BOUILLET]). By flooding this summarized information using a link-
   state protocol, recovery path computation and selection for SRLG
   diverse recovery paths can be optimized with respect to resource
   sharing giving a performance difference of less than 5% compared to
   a Full Information Flooding approach (also referred to as
   deterministic approach). Note that the stochastic approach can be

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             26

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   further extended from the GMPLS signalling applicability viewpoint.
   This, by allowing working path-related information (and in
   particular, shared recovery bandwidth and SRLG information) to be
   exchanged over the recovery LSP in order to enable more efficient
   admission control at sharing nodes (as described for instance in
   [CCAMP-LI]).

8.5 Summary

   One can summarize by the following table the selection of a recovery
   scheme/strategy, using the recovery types proposed in [CCAMP-TERM]
   and the above discussion.

   --------------------------------------------------------------------
                |          Path Search (computation and selection)
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
                |          Pre-planned      |         Dynamic
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
            |   | faster recovery           | Does not apply
            |   | less flexible             |
            | 1 | less robust               |
            |   | most resource consuming   |
   Path     |   |                           |
   Setup     ---------------------------------------------------------
            |   | relatively fast recovery  | Does not apply
            |   | relatively flexible       |
            | 2 | relatively robust         |
            |   | resource consumption      |
            |   | depends on sharing degree |
             ---------------------------------------------------------
            |   | relatively fast recovery  | less faster (computation)
            |   | more flexible             | most flexible
            | 3 | relatively robust         | most robust
            |   | resource consumption      | less resource consuming
            |   | depends on sharing degree |
   --------------------------------------------------------------------

   1. Path Setup with Resource Reservation (i.e. signalling) and
      Selection
   2. Path Setup with Resource Reservation (i.e. signalling) w/o
      Selection
   3. Path Setup w/o  Resource Reservation (i.e. signalling) w/o
      Selection

   As defined in [CCAMP-TERM], the term pre-planned refers to
   restoration resource pre-computation, signaling (reservation) and a
   priori selection (optional), but not cross-connection.

8.6 Technology Dependence

   The above analysis applies in fact to any data oriented circuit
   technology with discrete bandwidth increments (like Sonet/SDH, G.709


D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             27

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   OTN, etc.) being controlled by an IP-centric distributed control
   plane.

   NOTE: this section is not intended to favor one technology versus
   another, it just lists pro and cons for each of them in order to
   determine the potential added value of GMPLS-based recovery in their
   respective context.

8.6.1 OTN Recovery

   OTN Recovery specifics are left for further considerations.

8.6.2 Pre-OTN Recovery

   Pre-OTN Recovery specifics (also referred to as ôlambda switchingö)
   presents mainly the following advantages:

   - benefits from a simpler architecture making it more suitable for
     meshed-based recovery schemes (on a per channel basis).

   - when providing suppression of intermediate node transponders
     implies also that failures (such as LoL) propagates until edge
     nodes giving the possibility to initiate upper layer driven
     recovery actions.

   The main disadvantage comes from the lack of interworking due to the
   large amount of failure management (in particular failure
   notification protocols) and recovery mechanisms currently available.

8.6.3 Sonet/SDH Recovery

   Some of the advantages of the Sonet/SDH and more generically any TDM
   layer are:

   - Protection schemes are standardized (see [G.841]) and can operate
     across protected domains and interwork (see [G.842]).

   - Provides failure detection, notification and Automatic Protection
     Switching (APS).

   - Provides greater control over the granularity of the TDM LPS/Links
     that can be recovered with respect to coarser optical channel (or
     whole fiber content) recovery switching

   Some of the current limitations of the Sonet/SDH layer recovery are:

   - Inefficient use of spare capacity: Sonet/SDH protection is largely
     applied for ring topologies, where spare capacity often remains
     idle, making the efficiency of bandwidth usage an issue.

   - Limited topological scope: Use of ring topologies (SNCP or Shared
     Protection Rings), reduces the flexibility to deploy somewhat more
     complex, but potentially more efficient, mesh-based recovery

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             28

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


     schemes.

   - Lack of traffic priority: as with the optical layer, the SDH/Sonet
     layer also cannot distinguish between different priorities of
     traffic. For example, it is not possible in SDH or Sonet to switch
     EF (Expedited Forwarding) and AF (Assured Forwarding) upper layer
     packet flow streams based on priority.

9. Conclusion

   TBD.

10. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce or imply any specific security
   consideration.

11. References

   [BRADNER1]   Bradner, S., ôThe Internet Standards Process --
                Revision 3ö, BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [BRADNER2]   Bradner, S., ôKey words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levelsö, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [BOUILLET]   E.Bouillet et al., ôStochastic Approaches to Compute
                Shared Meshed Restored Lightpaths in Optical Network
                Architecturesö, INFOCOM 2002, New York City, June 2002.

   [CCAMP-LI]   G.Li et al. ôRSVP-TE Extensions For Shared-Mesh
                Restoration in Transport Networksö, Internet Draft,
                Work in progress, draft-li-shared-mesh-restoration-
                01.txt, November 2001.

   [CCAMP-SRLG] D.Papadimitriou et al., ôShared Risk Link Groups
                Encoding and Processing,ö Internet Draft, Work in
                progress, draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-srlg-processing-
                00.txt, June 2002.

   [CCAMP-SRG]  S.Dharanikota et al., ôInter domain routing with Shared
                Risk Groups,ö Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                November 2001.

   [CCAMP-TERM] E.Mannie and D.Papadimitriou (Editors), ôRecovery
                (Protection and Restoration) Terminology for GMPLS,ö
                Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-mannie-ccamp-
                gmpls-recovery-terminology-00.txt, February 2002.

   [DEMEESTER]  P.Demeester et al., ôResilience in Multilayer
                Networksö, IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 37, No.
                8, August 1998, pp. 70-76.



D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             29

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   [G.707]      ITU-T Recommendation G.707, ôNetwork Node Interface for
                the Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH)ö, October 2000.

   [G.709]      ITU-T Recommendation G.709, ôNetwork Node Interface for
                the Optical Transport Network (OTN)ö, February 2001
                (and Amendment n1, October 2001).

   [G.783]      ITU-T Recommendation G.783, ôCharacteristics of
                Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) Equipment
                Functional Blocksö

   [G.798]      ITU-T Recommendation G.798, ôCharacteristics of Optical
                Transport Network (OTN) Equipment Functional Blocksö

   [G.806]      ITU-T Recommendation G.806, ôCharacteristics of
                Transport Equipment û Description Methodology and
                Generic Functionalityö

   [G.826]      ITU-T Recommendation G.826, ôPerformance Monitoringö

   [G.841]      ITU-T Recommendation G.841, ôTypes and Characteristics
                of SDH Network Protection Architecturesö

   [G.842]      ITU-T Recommendation G.842, ôInterworking of SDH
                network protection architecturesö

   [G.GPS]      ITU-T Draft Recommendation G.GPS, Version 2, ôGeneric
                Protection Switchingö, Work in progress, May 2002.

   [LMP]        J.Lang (Editor), ôLink Management Protocol (LMP) v1.0ö
                Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-
                03.txt, February 2002.

   [LMP-WDM]    A.Fredette and J.Lang (Editors), ôLink Management
                Protocol (LMP) for DWDM Optical Line Systems,ö Internet
                Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-wdm-
                00.txt, February 2002.

   [MANCHESTER] J.Manchester, P.Bonenfant and C.Newton, ôThe Evolution
                of Transport Network Survivability,ö IEEE
                Communications Magazine, August 1999.

   [MPLS-REC]   V.Sharma and F.Hellstrand (Editors) et al., ôA
                Framework for MPLS Recoveryö, Internet Draft, Work in
                Progress, draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-03.txt, July
                2001.

   [MPLS-OSU]   S.Seetharaman et al, ôIP over Optical Networks: A
                Summary of Issuesö, Internet Draft, Work in Progress,
                draft-osu-ipo-mpls-issues-02.txt, April 2001.

   [TE-NS]      K.Owens et al, ôNetwork Survivability Considerations
                for Traffic Engineered IP Networksö, Internet Draft,

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             30

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


                Work in Progress, draft-owens-te-network-survivability-
                01.txt, July 2001.

   [TE-RH]      W.Lai, D.McDysan, J.Boyle, et al, ôNetwork Hierarchy
                and Multi-layer Survivabilityö, Internet Draft, Work in
                Progress, draft-team-tewg-restore-hierarchy-00.txt,
                July 2001.

12. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Fabrice Poppe (Alcatel) and Bart
   Rousseau (Alcatel) for their revision effort, Richard Rabbat
   (Fujitsu) and David Griffith (NIST) for their useful comments.

13. Author's Addresses

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Rm. D1-3C22
   200 S. Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
   Email: dbrungard@att.com

   Sudheer Dharanikota (Nayna)
   481 Sycamore Drive
   Milpitas, CA 95035, USA
   Email: sudheer@nayna.com

   Jonathan P. Lang (Calient)
   25 Castilian
   Goleta, CA 93117, USA
   Email: jplang@calient.net

   Guangzhi Li (AT&T)
   180 Park Avenue,
   Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA
   Email: gli@research.att.com
   Phone: +1 973 360-7376

   Eric Mannie (KPNQwest)
   Terhulpsesteenweg 6A
   1560 Hoeilaart, Belgium
   Phone: +32 2 658-5652
   Email: eric.mannie@ebone.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellesplein, 1
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Bala Rajagopalan (Tellium)
   2 Crescent Place
   P.O. Box 901

D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             31

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002


   Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901, USA
   Phone: +1 732 923-4237
   Email: braja@tellium.com

   Yakov Rekhter (Juniper)
   Email: yakov@juniper.net
















































D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             32

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt     June 2002



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




























D.Papadimitriou et al. - Internet Draft û December 2002             33
