


Internet Engineering Task Force                                   SIP WG
Internet Draft                                              G. Camarillo
                                                                Ericsson
draft-ietf-sip-uri-parameter-reg-01.txt
November 18, 2003
Expires: May 2004


      The Internet Assigned Number Authority Universal Resource
  Identifier Parameter Registry for the Session Initiation Protocol

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document creates an IANA registry for SIP URI and SIPS URI
   parameters. It also lists the already existing parameters to be used
   as initial values for that registry.














G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 1]


Internet Draft                    SIP                  November 18, 2003





                           Table of Contents



   1          Introduction ........................................    3
   2          Terminology .........................................    3
   3          Use of the Registry .................................    3
   4          IANA Considerations .................................    3
   4.1        SIP and SIPS URI Parameters Sub-Registry ............    4
   4.2        Registration Policy for SIP Request-URI Parameters ..    4
   5          Security Considerations .............................    4
   6          Acknowledgements ....................................    4
   7          Authors' Addresses ..................................    4
   8          Normative References ................................    5
   9          Informative References ..............................    5

































G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft                    SIP                  November 18, 2003


1 Introduction

   RFC3261 [1] allows new SIP URI and SIPS URI parameters to be defined.
   However, RFC3261 omitted an IANA registry for them. This document
   creates such a registry.

2 Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant SIP implementations.

3 Use of the Registry

   SIP and SIPS URI parameters MUST be documented in an RFC in order to
   be registered by IANA. This documentation MUST fully explain the
   syntax, intended usage, and semantics of the parameter. The intent of
   this requirement is to assure interoperability between independent
   implementations, and to prevent accidental namespace collisions
   between implementations of dissimilar features.

   RFCs defining SIP URI or SIPS URI parameters MUST register them with
   IANA as described below.

   Registered SIP or SIPS URI parameters are to be considered "reserved
   words". In order to preserve interoperability, registered parameters
   MUST be used in a manner consistent with that described in their
   defining RFC. Implementations MUST NOT utilize "private" or "locally
   defined" URI parameters that conflict with registered parameters.


        Note that although unregistered SIP and SIPS URI parameters
        may be used in implementations, developers are cautioned
        that usage of such parameters is risky. New SIP and SIPS
        URI parameters may be registered at any time, and there is
        no assurance that these new registered URI parameters will
        not conflict with unregistered parameters currently in use.

4 IANA Considerations

   Section 27 of RFC 3261 [1] creates an IANA registry for method names,
   header field names, warning codes, status codes, and option tags.
   This specification instructs the IANA to create a new sub-registry
   under http://www.iana.org/assignments/sip-parameters:

        o SIP/SIPS URI Parameters




G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 3]


Internet Draft                    SIP                  November 18, 2003


4.1 SIP and SIPS URI Parameters Sub-Registry

   New SIP and SIPS URI parameters are registered by the IANA. When
   registering a new SIP or SIPS parameter, the following information
   MUST be provided.

        o Name of the parameter.

        o Reference to the RFC defining the parameter

   Table 1 contains the initial values for this sub-registry.


                        Parameter Name  Reference
                        __________________________
                        comp            RFC 3486
                        lr              RFC 3261
                        maddr           RFC 3261
                        method          RFC 3261
                        transport       RFC 3261
                        ttl             RFC 3261
                        user            RFC 3261


   Table 1: IANA SIP and SIPS URI parameter sub-registry


4.2 Registration Policy for SIP Request-URI Parameters

   As per the terminology in RFC 2434 [3], the registration policy for
   SIP and SIPS URI parameters shall be "Specification Required".

   For the purposes of this registry, the parameter for which IANA
   registration is requested MUST be defined by an RFC. There is no
   requirement that this RFC be standards-track.

5 Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations associated to this document.

6 Acknowledgements

   Jonathan Rosenberg, Henning Schulzrinne, Rohan Mahy, and Dean Willis
   provided useful comments.

7 Authors' Addresses

   Gonzalo Camarillo
   Ericsson


G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 4]


Internet Draft                    SIP                  November 18, 2003


   Advanced Signalling Research Lab.
   FIN-02420 Jorvas
   Finland
   electronic mail:  Gonzalo.Camarillo@ericsson.com

8 Normative References

   [1] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. R. Johnston, J.
   Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: session
   initiation protocol," RFC 3261, Internet Engineering Task Force, June
   2002.

   [2] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
   levels," RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1997.

   [3] T. Narten and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for writing an IANA
   considerations section in RFCs," RFC 2434, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, Oct. 1998.

9 Informative References



   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

   Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to



G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 5]


Internet Draft                    SIP                  November 18, 2003


   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





























G. Camarillo                                                  [Page 6]


