


Mext Working Group                                              D. Oulai
Internet-Draft                                               S. Krishnan
Intended status: Informational                                  Ericsson
Expires: September 4, 2009                                    H. Soliman
                                                    Elevate Technologies
                                                           March 3, 2009


  Problem Statement for Route Optimization in dual stack environments
                 draft-oulai-mext-dsmip-v4ro-ps-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 4, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.







Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


Abstract

   Dual Stack MIPv6 (DSMIP) is a MIPv6 extension to support IPv4
   mobility for mobile hosts.  While route optimization is well defined
   for IPv6 traffic, this features is not defined for IPv4.  This
   document looks at the different scenarios where IPv4 route
   optimization is desirable and highlights some problems.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  MIPv6 Route Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Problem space and scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Mobile and correspondent nodes communicate using IPv4  . .  8
     6.2.  Mobile and correspondent nodes communicate using IPv6  . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12





























Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


1.  Introduction

   Dual Stack MIPv6 (DSMIP) is a MIPv6 extension to support IPv4 traffic
   for mobile nodes [I-D.ietf-mext-nemo-v4traversal].  DSMIP introduces
   two new address options: the IPv4 Home Address option and the IPv4
   CareOf Address option.  With those options, a mobile node (MN) can
   send and receive v4 traffic although all the mobility signaling is
   MIPv6 based.  Therefore, there is no need to have a MIPv4 stack on
   the mobile node.

   Route optimisation (RO) is a process that allows an MN to communicate
   directly with a correspondent node (CN) without transiting by the
   home agent.  There are several benefits for RO such as shorter path
   delay, reduced bandwidth consumption and reduced load on the HA.
   MIPv6 RO is done using the return routability procedure (RRP).  RRP's
   main goal is to assure the CN that the MN is reachable through the
   home address (HoA) and the care-of address (CoA) and to configure
   security keys for the binding.  This mechanism does not consider IPv4
   addresses.  However, it is anticipated that IPv4 and IPv6 will
   coexist for a long time and lots of work is being done for IPv4-IPv6
   coexistence.  Therefore, having RO enabled will enhance DSMIP as a
   strong alternative for IPv4-IPv6 coexistence.

   This document briefly describes current MIPv6 RO process and
   scenarios where IPv4 RO would be desirable.  Then specific problems
   related to IPv4 RO and use cases are discussed.

























Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL","SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


3.  Terminology

   All the general mobility-related terms used in this document are to
   be interpreted as defined in the Mobile IPv6 [RFC3775] and DSMIP
   [I-D.ietf-mext-nemo-v4traversal] base specifications.














































Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


4.  MIPv6 Route Optimization

   MIPv6 defines a route optimisation procedure where an MN can send a
   binding update (BU) directly to the CN in order to use a direct path
   [RFC3775].  Before sending the BU, the MN has to perform the RRP in
   order to prove to the CN that it owns both the HoA and the CoA.  To
   perform RRP, the MN sends a HoTI message to the CN through the HA.
   The source address of the HoTI is the HoA.  Simultaneously, the MN
   sends a CoTI message to the CN with its CoA as a source address.  The
   CN responds to these two messages and includes a Home keygen Token in
   the HoT message and a CareOf keygen token in the CoT message.  If the
   MN received those two messages then it is reachable via the HoA and
   CoA.  Next step for the MN is to combine both tokens to get a binding
   management key (Kbm), which is used to authenticate the BU.  The CN
   will then be able to verify that the Kbm was formed using both
   tokens.

   Some optimizations have been proposed for RO.  [RFC4449] proposed to
   precompute several binding management keys to speed up the binding
   update process but this requires the MN and the CN to be in the same
   administrative domain.[RFC4866] introduced an enhanced fast RO
   process, which requires cryptographically generated addresses.





























Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


5.  The Problem

   The DSMIPv6 specification allows a dual stack mobile node to
   communicate with a correspondent node under two fundamental
   scenarios: a) using IPv4, by assigning an IPv4 home address to the
   mobile node and b) while the mobile node is located in an IPv4-only
   foreign link.  In both scenarios the mobile node may be located in an
   IPv4 network that assigns private addresses and is therefore
   separated by a NAT from the rest of the Internet.  In DSMIPv6, the
   mobile node can communicate with a correspondent node in the above
   scenarios by routing traffic through the home agent, which ,manages
   mobility for the IPv4 and IPv6 home addresses by binding them to
   either an IPv4 or an IPv6 care-of address.  However, DSMIPv6 does not
   allow mobile nodes and correspondent nodes to optimise communication
   between them and bypassing the home agent.

   Route optimisation cannot be achieved using the current DSMIPv6
   specification.  Route optimisation is not achievable when the mobile
   node is communicating to an IPv4-only correspondent node.  However,
   if the correspondent node is IPv6-enabled, route optimisation can be
   achieved by extending DSMIPv6 and the current RRP in MIPv6.

   Hence, the problem discussed in this draft is the lack of route
   optimisation support in DSMIPv6.  The following section discusses the
   scenarios that illustrate this problem.  A solution for the route
   optimisation problem for dual stack nodes should address the
   scenarios in the following section.
























Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


6.  Problem space and scenarios

   In this section we present different scenarios that need to be
   addressed in order to provide a complete route optimisation solution
   for dual stack mobile nodes.  In all scenarios we assume that both
   the mobile node and correspondent node are dual stacked with both
   stacks enabled.

   The scenarios in this section discuss the options for encapsulating
   the application payload between the mobile and correspondent nodes.
   The capability of the access network will essentially force the need
   for tunnelling or allow the communication without the use of
   tunnelling.

6.1.  Mobile and correspondent nodes communicate using IPv4

   In this scenario, the mobile and correspondent node's traffic used
   IPv4 only.  This might be due to the fact that either node is located
   in an IPv4-only environment, or because their applications can only
   use IPv4 addresses.  In this scenario, the mobile node needs to
   optimise the route for the IPv4 communication using Mobile IPv6
   signalling.  Essentially, the mobile node needs to optimise the route
   for its IPv4 home address.  This scenario assumes that the
   correspondent node's IPv6 stack is enabled, even if it is not
   assigned a global IPv6 address.

   It should be noted that in this scenario the mobile node can be
   located behind a NAT.  However, it is assumed that the correspondent
   node is reachable with a public IPv4 address.  Also, note that this
   scenario is somewhat orthogonal to the access network's capability.
   That is, the access networks may provide IPv4-only, IPv6-only or dual
   stack access.  In all cases, the nodes encapsulate the application
   payload in IPv4; although, the access capability would require a
   solution to tunnel such traffic according to the IP version supported
   by the access network.

6.2.  Mobile and correspondent nodes communicate using IPv6

   Unlike the scenario above, in this scenario, the mobile and
   correspondent nodes communicate using IPv6.  Hence, the mobile node
   is using its IPv6 home address and needs to optimise the route using
   MIPv6 signalling.

   Note that this scenario is again orthogonal to the access capability,
   which will affect how the IPv6 traffic will be routed (or tunnelled)
   between the mobile node and correspondent node.  That is, if both
   access networks support IPv6, traffic will be routed natively and
   standard MIPv6 will be used to optimise the route.  However, if



Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


   either access network supports IPv4 only, then the solution will need
   to overcome this issue through tunnelling.

















































Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any security vulnerabilities.
   Solutions for the problems presented in this document need to endure
   that they are as secure as the current RRP in [RFC3775].














































Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


8.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mext-nemo-v4traversal]
              Soliman, H., "Mobile IPv6 Support for Dual Stack Hosts and
              Routers", draft-ietf-mext-nemo-v4traversal-09 (work in
              progress), February 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC4449]  Perkins, C., "Securing Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization
              Using a Static Shared Key", RFC 4449, June 2006.

   [RFC4866]  Arkko, J., Vogt, C., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
              Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007.

































Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Problem Statement for DSMIPv6 RO          March 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Desire Oulai
   Ericsson
   8400 Blvd Decarie
   Town of Mount Royal, Quebec
   Canada

   Email: desire.oulai@ericsson.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Blvd Decarie
   Town of Mount Royal, Quebec
   Canada

   Email: Suresh.Krishnan@ericsson.com


   Hesham Soliman
   Elevate Technologies

   Email: hesham@elevatemobile.com



























Oulai, et al.           Expires September 4, 2009              [Page 12]


