


SIP                                                         J. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: Standards Track                           July 14, 2008
Expires: January 15, 2009


       Session Based Trivial Object Transfer and Exchange (TOTE)
                      draft-rosenberg-sip-tote-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document defines a simple protocol - Trivial Object Transfer and
   Exchange (TOTE) - that provides bidirectional exchange of MIME
   objects over a TCP connection.  It is used in conjunction with
   protocols based on the offer/answer model, such as the Session
   Initiation Protocol (SIP).  TOTE can be used for any application
   requiring direct agent-to-agent data communication, such as picture
   exchange or camera controls.




Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Overview of Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Purpose Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Offer-Answer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  Offerer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Answerer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Session Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Sending and Receiving Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Formal Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.1.  SDP Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.2.  TOTE Message Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  Possible Purposes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.1.  Session Mode IM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.2.  Shared Browsing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.3.  Forms and Application Interaction  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.4.  Conference Controls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     9.5.  Picture Sharing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.1. TOTE Purpose Registry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.2. SDP Transport Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     11.3. SDP Attribute Names  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       11.3.1.  Send Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       11.3.2.  Receive Purposes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17


















Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] allows for the
   establishment, management, and termination of interactive sessions
   between user agents.  These sessions are often used for the exchange
   of real time media, such as voice, video or text, using protocols
   such as the Real Time Transport Protocol (RTP).

   Oftentimes, there is a need for agents to exchange non-real time
   application data as part of a communications session.  Examples of
   such data include:

   Camera Controls:  Video conferencing systems often allow a
      participant in the session to control the camera on the far end of
      the call.  This allows them to pan, tilt and zoom in order to see
      the person or people they are talking to.

   Pictures:  During a voice call, a user can snap a picture and send it
      to the other participant in the call.  This requires a mechanism
      to transfer the picture from one end to the other.

   Game Moves:  Users engaging in a real time game may need to exchange
      game moves in addition to having a voice/video chat in concert
      with the game.

   SIP provides three general purpose mechanisms that allow a pair of
   agents to communicate data during a session.  These are:

   Subscription:  One user agent can send a SUBCRIBE request to the
      other, using an event package specific to the application data
      that is desired.  This subscription is ideally done as part of a
      separate dialog.  This technique is recommended for application
      interaction, and is described in
      [I-D.ietf-sipping-app-interaction-framework].

   Media:  A user agent can use SIP to set up another media session
      whose purpose is to carry the application specific data.

   INFO:  A user agent can send the data in a SIP INFO message along the
      existing SIP dialog.  This technique is described in
      [I-D.kaplan-sip-info-events].

   Currently, there is no general purpose protocol that allows agents to
   set up a media session for the exchange of application data.  This
   specification fills that need.  It defines a protocol called Trivial
   Object Transfer and Exchange (TOTE).  TOTE is a TCP-based protocol
   that provides framing and content-typing.  This specification also
   defines parameters for the Session Description Protocol (SDP)



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   [RFC4566] so that TOTE sessions can be established using protocols
   based on the offer/answer model [RFC3264], such as SIP.  These SDP
   extensions allow agents to negotiate the "purpose" of TOTE session,
   along with supported MIME types.  The "purpose" is a parameter that
   operates similarly to the INFO events defined in
   [I-D.kaplan-sip-info-events].


2.  Overview of Operation

   An agent wishing to establish a TOTE session includes a "message"
   media line in an SDP offer.  This m-line indicates that the messaging
   session uses TOTE over TCP or TLS over TCP (TOTE is defined only for
   TCP or TLS/TCP).  The m-line also includes a list of "purpose"
   parameters that the agent wishes to receive or wishes to send.  TOTE
   sessions can be established before there is a need to actually send
   or receive data, or on-demand at the time the exchange is desired.
   Typically the agent that wishes to send will initiate the offer for
   the session.

   The answerer includes the list of "purpose" parameters it wishes to
   send or receive.  These need not be the inverse of those in the
   offer; the agent can indicate that it can receive with "purpose"
   values for which there was no corresponding send value in the offer,
   and vice-a-versa.  This allows easy usage with third-party call
   control.

   TOTE itself involves a direct TCP connection established between
   agents.  All TOTE implementations support at least the lite version
   of Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) for TCP
   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice-tcp].  ICE-tcp negotiates the directionality of
   connection establishment and provides firewall and NAT traversal.
   Secure TOTE is provided using [RFC4572].

   The TOTE message itself is lightweight.  It consists of a length, a
   purpose token, a MIME content type, a CRLF, and then the actual
   content.  An example TOTE message is:



   l:7655
   p:pic
   t:image/jpg

   BINARY-IMAGE-DATA


                      Figure 1: Example TOTE Message



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   This message indicates that it is 7655 bytes long.  Its purpose is
   "pic", which is used to exchange pictures for the purposes of image
   sharing in a communications session.  Purpose tokens can either be
   global, using values registered through an IANA process, or can be
   vendor proprietary using vendor tags, like com.example.vendortag2.
   The content type is image/jpg, and the message contents are the
   binary image data.  TOTE messages look similar to MIME and SIP and
   can be parsed using their parsers, but the syntax is a subset
   designed for low overhead.


3.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


4.  Purpose Tokens

   The purpose token plays an important role in TOTE.  It conveys the
   context in which the exchange content is to be interpreted.  If the
   content-type answers the question, "what", the purpose token answers
   the question "why".  The purpose value tells a sender or recipient
   what it needs to do with the content it receives - how and if to
   render it, process it, store it, and so on.

   As an example, the "bizcard" purpose token signifies that the content
   is being exchanged in order to convey contact information for the
   user.  This knowledge allows a receiver to know that it should prompt
   the user and ask if the data should be imported, to render it to the
   user, and to allow a user to edit it.  A particular purpose can be
   supported by a multiplicity of content types, and more importantly, a
   single content type could be used for many purposes.  HTML is a good
   example of this.  When it contains the hCard attributes in its
   elements, it can be used in conjunction with the "bizcard" purpose.
   It could also be used for a "form-entry" purpose, which could be used
   to push forms to a user for entry, rather than DTMF.

   A purpose token can also be used to signal communication that goes
   beyond just object passing, but represents a full-blown protocol
   running between agents.  For example, imagine that SOAP methods are
   developed to implement a shared whiteboard function.  A purpose token
   called "whiteboard" could be used in conjunction with the content-
   type "application/soap".  The agents can then run the SOAP-based
   protocol over TOTE in order to implement the whiteboard.

   Purpose tokens exist in one of two namespaces.  The global namespace



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   is a flat namespace, managed by IANA.  New purpose tokens are added
   to this namespace based on IETF consensus [RFC2434].  These tokens
   are meant for common applications for which formal standardization is
   desired.  The other namespace is the vendor namespace.  This
   namespace is unmanaged.  Vendors or other organizations can define
   tokens by taking their domain name, reversing the order, and
   appending additional tokens that signify the purpose.  For example,
   the example.com domain has complete control over the com.example
   namespace, and can utilize purpose tokens like com.example.foo at its
   discretion.

   It is possible that purpose values that are defined initially in the
   vendor namespace become sufficiently common and successful that there
   is a desire to formalize the value and standardize it.  In that case,
   based on IETF consensus, the vendor token can be registered in the
   global namespace.

   Whether in the global namespace or the vendor namespace, each purpose
   has to specify the following:

   Baseline content type:  Each purpose MUST specify a mandatory-to-
      implement content type for use with that purpose.  This ensures a
      basic level of interoperability.  Depending on the content type,
      the purpose may also need to specify details on format of that
      object, or usage of it, if the object is actually a protocol.

   Additional content types:  Each purpose MUST specify whether there
      are additional content types that can be utilized for this
      purpose, and if so, what they are.  A purpose can be extended at a
      later time by simply declaring support for additional types.  Note
      that, within a purpose token, the content-type has to uniquely
      define what is to be sent and received.  If two objects can be
      exchanged for a particular purpose but would otherwise have
      identical content types (for example, differently formatted text/
      plain messages), a new content type MUST be defined for one of
      them.

   Semantics:  Each purpose MUST clearly define what its used for.  The
      definition must be sufficiently clear to allow an implementation
      to decide whether to render the object, what kind of UI to apply,
      how and where to store the object, how to process it, and so on.


5.  Offer-Answer Procedures







Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


5.1.  Offerer Procedures

   An agent MAY send an offer at any time to add a tote session, remove
   a tote session, or modify a tote session.  Removing a tote session is
   done by setting the port in the SDP m-line to zero, as is done for
   other media types as defined in [RFC3264].

   A tote offer MUST utilize the "message" media type in the m-line, as
   defined in [RFC4566].  The port MUST be set as defined in
   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice-tcp], and the protocol MUST be "TOTE" for TOTE
   over TCP, or "TOTES" for TOTE over TCP/TLS.  All agents MUST
   implement both TOTE and TOTES.  However, the offerer MAY elect to use
   either.  The format list MUST be "*".

   A single TOTE session corresponds to a single connection (possibly
   through a relay) between agents.  A single TOTE session can support a
   multiplicity of purposes.  However, if a purpose represents a
   significant amount of data, such that head-of-line blocking might
   occur between purposes, an agent SHOULD utilize a separate TOTE
   session for that purpose.

   The offerer MUST include one or more send-purp attributes and MUST
   include one or more recv-purp attributes.  Each attribute contains a
   single purpose name, followed by a list of MIME content types that
   the agent supports for sending or receiving with that purpose
   parameter.  This list MUST include the baseline mandatory content
   type for that purpose.  For example:


   a=send-purp:pic image/jpg image/tiff
   a=recv-purp:pic image/jpg
   a=recv-purp:bizcard text/x-vcard text/html

   This indicates that the agent supports the "pic" purpose, to both
   send and receive, and the "bizcard" purpose, receiving only.  For
   "bizcard", used to exchange contact information in a session, the
   agent supports the classic vcard format as well as the HTML
   microformat, also known as hCard.

5.2.  Answerer Procedures

   An agent receiving an offer with an m=message line including the
   protocol "TOTE" or "TOTES" is being offered the opportunity to set up
   a TOTE session for one or more purposes.  If the agent is capable of
   receiving objects using at least one of the purpose tokens associated
   with the tote session, the agent SHOULD accept the session.  If it
   can receive none of them, it MUST reject the session (by setting the
   port to zero).



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   Construction of the answer follows the same rules for construction of
   the offer.  Note that the values of send-purp and recv-purp do not
   need to be in response to the values of recv-purp and send-purp in
   the offer.  An agent MAY include send-purp values in the answer for
   which there was no corresponding recv-purp in the offer.  Similarly,
   an agent MAY include recv-purp values in the answer for which there
   was no corresponding send-purp in the offer.  The same applies for
   content types.  Of course, since all agents have to support the
   baseline content type for a particular purpose, there will always be
   at least one type overlapping for each purpose between the offerer
   and answerer.  In addition, if a particular purpose isn't listed as a
   valid send purpose in one direction and receive in the other, it
   won't end up being utilized for the TOTE session.


6.  Session Management

   A TOTE session persists for the duration that the offer/answer
   exchanges have signaled an active TOTE session.  The actual TCP
   connection for the TOTE session is managed as defined in ICE-tcp
   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice-tcp].  This includes establishment, re-
   establishment, and termination of the TCP connection.

   The usage of ICE-tcp implies that connections can be established end-
   to-end through firewalls and NATs, possibly with the aid of a TURN
   relay.  ICE-tcp also allows for connections to be re-established mid-
   session without requiring additional signaling.


7.  Sending and Receiving Messages

   Once the TOTE session has been established, messages can be
   exchanged.  Either agent can send a message at any time, with the
   following constraints:

   o  An agent MUST only send objects whose purpose was listed in a
      send-purp attribute placed by that agent in an SDP, and for which
      there was a recv-purp attribute in the SDP generated by its peer.

   o  An agent MUST only send objects whose content type was listed in a
      send-purp attribute placed by that agent in an SDP or the selected
      purpose, and for which there was a recv-purp attribute in the SDP
      generated by its peer for the selected purpose.

   o  The object is permitted to be sent at this time based on any
      constraints defined by the semantics of the purpose itself.

   Sending an object via TOTE is easy.  The purpose, length and content-



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   types are filled into the message.  The length value represents the
   length of the entire TOTE message, in bytes, starting at the the
   first TOTE header after the length itself, and ending at the end of
   the body.  Consequently, the length of the body is equal to the
   remaining length of the message after the headers.

   For example, consider the following TOTE message:



   l:37
   p:name
   t:text/plain

   Jonathan Rosenberg

   This TOTE message has a body containing a text/plain object,
   "Jonathan Rosenberg".  The length field has a value of 37, which
   includes the 24 bytes of TOTE headers starting with the "p" and
   ending with, and including, the CRLF that terminates the headers, and
   then 18 bytes of body.

   Note that the length value needs to be present and is used, even when
   TOTE is run in conjunction with ICE over TCP.  ICE over TCP includes
   a shim layer, utilizing [RFC4571].  That shim defines a length field
   as well.  However, that length is used only to separate the
   application data from the STUN messages.  An actual TOTE message can
   span several RFC4571 frames; this is analagous in general to reads
   off of a TCP connection - the amount of data read at a time has no
   bearing on the length of the actual message.  As a consequence of
   this, even though RFC4571 has a limit of 64k, there is no constraint
   on the length of a TOTE message.

   When an agent receives an object, it processes it based on its
   purpose and content types.


8.  Formal Syntax

8.1.  SDP Extensions

   This specification defines two new proto values for the m-line in
   SDP.  These are "TOTE" and "TOTES".  It also defines two new SDP
   attributes, send-purp and recv-purp:







Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   send-purp       =    "send-purp" ":" purpose 1*(SP content-type)
   recv-purp       =    "recv-purp" ":" purpose 1*(SP content-type)
   purpose         =    global-purp / vendor-purp
   global-purp     =    1*purp-char
   vendor-purp     =    rev-hostname "." global-purp
   rev-hostname    =    toplabel *( "." domainlabel  )
   domainlabel     =    alphanum
                        / alphanum *( alphanum / "-" ) alphanum
   toplabel        =    ALPHA / ALPHA *( alphanum / "-" ) alphanum
   purp-char       =    purp-unreserved / pct-encoded / sub-delims
                        / ":" / "@"
                        ;pct-encoded from RFC 3986
                        ;sub-delims from RFC 3986
   alphanum        =    ALPHA / DIGIT
                         ;DIGIT from RFC 4234
                         ;ALPHA from RFC 4234
   purp-unreserved =    ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "_" / "~"

   content-type    =    media-type
                         ;media-type from RFC 3261

   The purpose value, whether global or vendor, MUST be less than 256
   characters.

8.2.  TOTE Message Syntax

   A TOTE message looks similar to a SIP message, but has a more
   restricted and constrained grammar:


   tote-message    =    tote-header CRLF tote-body
   tote-header     =    len-hdr CRLF
                        purp-hdr CRLF
                        type-hdr CRLF
                        *(ext-hdr CRLF)
   len-hdr         =    "l" ":" 1*50DIGIT
   purp-hdr        =    "p" ":" purpose
   type-hdr        =    "t" ":" media-type
   ext-hdr         =    hdr-name ":" hdr-value
   hdr-name        =    token
                         ;token from RFC3261
   hdr-value       =    *(TEXT-UTF8char / UTF8-CONT)
                         ;TEXT-UTF8char from RFC3261
                         ;UTF8-CONT from RFC3261
   tote-body       =    *OCTET

   In particular, it eliminates the gratuitous usage of whitespace that
   is used in SIP, and defines a fixed order for the mandatory headers.



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   It also defines a length that is always in a fixed position in the
   TOTE message (starting at the third byte).  The length is in ASCII
   and can contain up to a 50 digit number.


9.  Possible Purposes

   This specification itself doesn't define any TOTE purposes.  However,
   there are a few interesting possibilities that are worth mentioning.

9.1.  Session Mode IM

   It is possible to use TOTE as a mechanism for session mode IM.  This
   would make it an alternative to MSRP [RFC4975].  The principle
   difference is that, in TOTE, message relays would be through TURN,
   rather than using an IM-specific relay (the MSRP relay).
   Furthermore, in sessions between different domains, there will always
   be a unique TCP connection per session that runs between the domains,
   rather than a shared connection, which is normally the case for MSRP.
   However, it is the use of a TCP connection per session which allows
   TOTE to work without much of the transport type of functionality
   present in MSRP (chunking, interruption, etc.).

   The author is not, at this time, proposing to formally define a TOTE
   purpose for IM, but rather, is mentioning it for purposes of
   discussion.

9.2.  Shared Browsing

   Another possible application is shared web browsing.  User A could
   connect to user B, and establish a TOTE session for shared browsing.
   Whenever user A goes to a website, the retrieved HTML file is sent to
   user B over TOTE.  User B can then render the HTML.  Whenever user A
   clicks on a hyperlink, or otherwise attempts an http query (for
   example as a result of some AJAX operations), instead of retrieving
   the URL, the actual URL is passed back to user A, and then user A
   actually performs the fetch.

9.3.  Forms and Application Interaction

   The application interaction framework
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-app-interaction-framework] defines a model where
   applications that wish to interact with users can REFER them to HTTP
   URLs, and then use traditional HTTP techniques to provide stimulus-
   based user interaction.

   However, the app interaction framework has the problem that it
   doesn't work effectively for applications which are behind firewalls



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   and NATs; this is because of the difficulties in extending HTTP
   connections to servers behind firewalls and NAT.  Another practical
   drawback, is that it requires support for GRUU in endpoints,
   something that is not yet widely used.

   An alternative solution is to use TOTE.  This solution would only
   work when the application is the other participant in the session.
   The app-interaction framework is more general in this regard,
   allowing multiple applications to interact with the user, not just
   the one that is on the terminating side of the dialog.

   With TOTE, the application would send to the user an HTML page to
   render.  When the user enters form data or clicks on a hyperlink,
   instead of causing an HTTP post or GET to a URL, the actual URL is
   sent as an object to the application via TOTE.  This is similar to
   the shared web browsing approach above.  When the URL is received by
   the application, it is processed just as if it had been clicked by
   the user, and a new page is pushed to the client.

   A significant benefit of this architecture is that the application
   can asynchronously push new web content to the user at any time; TOTE
   is a bidirectional channel, unlike HTTP which is client-server only.

9.4.  Conference Controls

   TOTE could be utilized as a control channel for conferences.  For
   example, instead of using a separate conference event package
   subscription [RFC4575], a TOTE session can be used.  The same XML
   object defined in [RFC4575] can be sent over TOTE.  This would avoid
   the need to have a separate SIP exchange and SIP dialog.  The tote
   session could be setup along with the media for the conference
   itself.

   In addition, the client can send TOTE messages to invoke conference
   commands - requests to add or remove users, requests to mute or
   unmute, and so on.  In essence, TOTE could be used as the transport
   for the conference control operations defined in
   [I-D.ietf-xcon-common-data-model].

9.5.  Picture Sharing

   A less controversial usage would be picture sharing.  During a call,
   a user could send a picture to the person on the other end of the
   call, for purposes of rendering.







Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


10.  Security Considerations

   TOTE could be used to exchange all kinds of data for different
   purposes.  It is reasonable that many of these purposes will have
   requirements for authenticity, encryption, and message integrity.
   TOTE requires endpoints to support end-to-end TLS utilizing
   [RFC4572].  This provides all of those services.  Furthermore, the
   end-to-end TLS works even in the presence of packet intermediaries
   (namely TURN servers) for the purposes of firewall and NAT traversal.


11.  IANA Considerations

   This specification has several IANA considerations.

11.1.  TOTE Purpose Registry

   This specification instructs IANA to create a new registry for TOTE
   purpose tokens.  This registry is defined as a table that contains
   three colums:

   Purpose Token:  This will be a string provided in the IANA
      registrations into the registry.

   Description:  This is text that is supplied by the IANA registration
      into the registry.

   Document:  This is a reference to the RFC containing the
      registration.

   This specification instructs IANA to create this table with no
   initial entries.  The resulting table would look like:


   TOTE Purpose         Description            Document
     Token
   -----------------------------------------------------------


   [[NOTE TO IANA/RFC-EDITOR: Please replace XXXX with the RFC number of
   this specification.]]

   TOTE tokens are registered by the IANA when they are published in an
   RFC.  The IANA Considerations section of the RFC must include the
   following information, which appears in the IANA registry along with
   the RFC number of the publication.





Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   o  Name of the TOTE Token.  The name MAY be of any length, but SHOULD
      be no more than twenty characters long.  The name MUST consist of
      alphanum and mark [RFC3261] characters only.

   o  Descriptive text that describes the purpose.

11.2.  SDP Transport Protocol

   TOTE defines the new SDP protocol field values "TOTE" and "TOTES",
   which should be registered in the sdp-parameters registry under
   "proto".  This first value indicates the TOTE protocol when TCP is
   used as an underlying transport.  The second indicates that TLS over
   TCP is used.

   Specifications defining new protocol values must define the rules for
   the associated media format namespace.  The "TOTE" and "TOTES"
   protocol values allow only one value in the format field (fmt), which
   is a single occurrence of "*".  Actual format determination is made
   using the "send-purp" and "recv-purp" attributes.

11.3.  SDP Attribute Names

   This document registers the following SDP attribute parameter names
   in the sdp-parameters registry.  These names are to be used in the
   SDP att-name field.

11.3.1.  Send Purposes

   Contact Information:  Jonathan Rosenberg, jdrosen@jdrosen.net

   Attribute-name:  send-purp

   Long-form Attribute Name:  TOTE Send Purposes

   Type:  Media level

   Subject to Charset Attribute:  No

   Purpose and Appropriate Values:  The "send-purp" attribute contains a
      list of media types that the endpoint is willing to send for a
      particular purpose.  It contains one or more registered media-
      types.

11.3.2.  Receive Purposes







Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


   Contact Information:  Jonathan Rosenberg, jdrosen@jdrosen.net

   Attribute-name:  recv-purp

   Long-form Attribute Name:  TOTE Receive Purposes

   Type:  Media level

   Subject to Charset Attribute:  No

   Purpose and Appropriate Values:  The "recv-purp" attribute contains a
      list of media types that the endpoint is willing to receive for a
      particular purpose.  It contains one or more registered media-
      types.


12.  Acknowledgements

   I'd like to thank Jonathan Lennox for his comments and support.


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264,
              June 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice-tcp]
              Rosenberg, J., "TCP Candidates with Interactive
              Connectivity Establishment (ICE)",
              draft-ietf-mmusic-ice-tcp-06 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [RFC4572]  Lennox, J., "Connection-Oriented Media Transport over the
              Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in the Session



Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


              Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4572, July 2006.

   [RFC4571]  Lazzaro, J., "Framing Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP)
              and RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) Packets over Connection-
              Oriented Transport", RFC 4571, July 2006.

13.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-app-interaction-framework]
              Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Application Interaction in
              the Session Initiation Protocol  (SIP)",
              draft-ietf-sipping-app-interaction-framework-05 (work in
              progress), July 2005.

   [I-D.kaplan-sip-info-events]
              Kaplan, H. and C. Holmberg, "The SIP INFO Method and Info
              Package Framework", draft-kaplan-sip-info-events-01 (work
              in progress), February 2008.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC4975]  Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message
              Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4975, September 2007.

   [RFC4575]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and O. Levin, "A Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event Package for Conference
              State", RFC 4575, August 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-xcon-common-data-model]
              Novo, O., Camarillo, G., Morgan, D., and R. Even,
              "Conference Information Data Model for Centralized
              Conferencing (XCON)", draft-ietf-xcon-common-data-model-11
              (work in progress), June 2008.


Author's Address

   Jonathan Rosenberg
   Cisco
   Edison, NJ
   US

   Phone: +1 973 952-5000
   Email: jdrosen@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.jdrosen.net




Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    TOTE                         July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Rosenberg               Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 17]

