

ENUM -- Telephone Number Mapping                             M. Haberler
Working Group                                                        IPA
Internet-Draft                                                R. Stastny
Expires: September 7, 2006                                         Oefeg
                                                           March 6, 2006


          Combined User and Carrier ENUM in the e164.arpa tree
                     draft-haberler-carrier-enum-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   ENUM as defined in RFC3761 [1] is not well suited for the purpose of
   interconnection by carriers, as can be seen by the use of various
   private tree arrangements based on ENUM mechanisms.  A combined end-
   user and carrier ENUM tree solution would leverage the ENUM
   infrastructure in e164.arpa, increase resolution rates, and decrease
   the cost per registered telephone number.  This document describes a
   minimally invasive scheme to provide both end-user and carrier data



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   in ENUM.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  The Carrier of Record  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   4.  Introducing a branch into the e164.arpa tree . . . . . . . . .  5

   5.  Resolver behaviour options and the Carrier ENUM branch
       location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   6.  Recommended resolver behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   7.  Zone file examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   8.  The Branch Location Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   9.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   10. IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   11. Interoperability considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18















Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


1.  Introduction

   ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping, RFC 3761 [1]) is a system that transforms
   E.164 numbers [2] into domain names and then uses DNS (Domain Name
   Service) [3] services like delegation through NS records and NAPTR
   records to look up what services are available for a specific domain
   name.

   ENUM as defined currently is based on the end-user opt-in principle.
   While this has great potential to foster new services and end-user
   choice in the long-term, the current requirements for IP-based
   interconnection of carriers and VoIP Service Providers require the
   provisioning of all allocated or served (hosted) numbers of a
   participating carrier of record.  This is especially necessary if
   Carrier ENUM is used for number portability applications and accessed
   eventually from the PSTN via mediation devices.  An interconnection
   scenario through Carrier ENUM typically also implies underlying
   closed usage scenarios where URIs are used in authenticated context,
   an assumption which cannot reasonably be imposed on User ENUM
   entries, but are dealt with within the scope of SPEERMINT [5], for
   instance through SIP federations and DNS-based policy announcement
   [4].

   While in principle solutions like compulsory opt-in through terms and
   conditions for end users are conceivable, there are substantial
   downsides to such an approach.  ENUM for end-user provisioning
   remains an ill-suited solution for the PoI (point-of-interconnect)
   information discovery problem.

   Both from an OPEX (Operational Expenditure) perspective as well as
   overall resolution rates achievable through the given approach, a
   combined ENUM tree both for end-users and carrier of record ENUM
   stands to be superior over a forest of disparate private trees now as
   well as long-term.  Since the common infrastructure easily supports
   both usage scenarios, a combined approach will support the end-user
   ENUM vision by driving down the average cost per number.  Lastly, a
   later convergence between ENUM for end-users and carriers of record
   will be significantly easier and cheaper, thus benefiting users as
   well as carriers.  For the rest of the document the terms User ENUM
   and Carrier ENUM will be used to distinguish between the two
   approaches.  Note: The ENUM WG decided at IETF#64 to prefer the term
   Infrastructure ENUM.  For consistency, this document uses the term
   Carrier ENUM as synonym.


2.  The Carrier of Record

   In User ENUM, the entity or person having the right-to-use of an



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   E.164 number has the sole discretion about the content of the
   associated domain and thus the zone content.

   Within a Carrier ENUM namespace, we use the term "carrier of record"
   for the entity having that discretion.  This right typically lies
   with a service provider authorized to issue E.164 numbers for the
   provisioning of PSTN service for this E.164 number under the
   authority of a National Regulatory Authority (NRA), but generally
   exhibits one or more of the following properties:

   o  it has been assigned one or more national number ranges by an NRA.
   o  it has been assigned a number range directly by the ITU, for
      instance a code under "International Networks" (+882) or
      "Universal Personal Telecommunications (UPT)" (+878).
   o  it can be the recipient of a number porting operation.
   o  it provides a PSTN point-of-interconnect for the number.

   Carrier ENUM is understood to mean a form of ENUM where such entities
   have exclusive discretion about zone content.


3.  Requirements

   A solution for combined User and Carrier ENUM within the e164.arpa
   tree should meet the following requirements:

   o  A single DNS lookup should suffice to resolve any given number in
      the public DNS in any given context, and under both scenarios.
   o  It should leave User ENUM resolution semantics and tree shape
      intact, i.e. requiring no changes to existing User ENUM resolvers
      or tree layout.
   o  Additional functionality should only be imposed on carrier ENUM
      resolvers.
   o  It should work with both fixed and variable-length numbering plans
      without resorting to wildcard records in the non-user controlled
      part of the DNS, both to avoid associated semantic problems as
      well as keeping the route to DNSSEC deployment open.
   o  It should not require the introduction of new constructs within
      existing standards, such as new types or changed semantics of
      NAPTR records.
   o  It should be possible to introduce the scheme in a timely manner,
      supporting current carrier needs.  Consequently, it is desirable
      to deploy the scheme without re-opening already settled questions
      of roles, responsibilities and international coordination, and in
      particular the country code delegation process.
   o  It should meet all reasonable privacy concerns about visibility of
      information an end user has no control over, for example discovery
      of unlisted numbers, or inadvertent disclosure of user identity.



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   o  It should keep the option open for other types of closed-user-
      group type applications, which might not naturally fit into the -
      predominantly voice oriented - Carrier ENUM scenario.

   Note in particular that we assume all entries to properly resolve in
   the public DNS, both user and carrier.  Usage restrictions on Carrier
   ENUM records are to be handled at the URI level, and not by
   restriction on the visibility of entries in the public DNS.  This is
   within the scope of SPEERMINT.


4.  Introducing a branch into the e164.arpa tree

   The method most easily fulfilling the above mentioned requirements is
   to branch off the e164.arpa tree into a subdomain at a given point
   below e164.arpa, and deploy a Carrier ENUM subtree underneath without
   touching User ENUM semantics at all.  For readability, we will use
   the label 'carrier' for this subdomain from now on, while in practice
   any label will suffice, e.g. a single character label like 'c' or
   'i'.

   For interoperability it is desirable to have that branch sit either
   in a commonly agreed or in an easily discoverable place.  Several
   options for this branch location exist, the two most easily
   implemented - both political and technical - are selected:
   1.  above the country code delegation level, directly below e164.arpa
       e.g. '4.9.7.1.carrier.e164.arpa',
   2.  somewhere below the country code delegation level, e.g.
       '4.9.7.carrier.1.e164.arpa' or 'carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa'.

   Option 1 is obviously the most straightforward, because it requires
   no changes to the resolver semantics.  This approach amounts to just
   a different apex definition for the resolver.  Regarding the IETF
   ENUM WG, one additional line to RFC 3761 adding an additional apex
   for Carrier ENUM e.g. "c.e164.arpa" is sufficient, leaving the rest
   of the algorithm and the RFC 3761 unchanged.

   A potential drawback is that heavy involvement of the IAB, RIPE,
   ITU-T, as well as the applicable NRAs (National Regulatory
   Authorities) is needed during the setup phase and therefore may take
   some time to implement.  Also, reopening the discussion of the
   interim procedures already agreed is a tedious process, as is the
   adaptation of the current delegation mechanism.

   On the other hand, it could be that only the IAB and RIPE is
   involved.  The IAB just needs to duplicate the instructions to RIPE
   for "c.e164.arpa" or whatever is defined in RFC3761bis.  RIPE may
   accept any separate request for either "e164.arpa" or "c.e164.arpa"



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   and forward it as instructed to the ITU-TSB.  The ITU-TSB is
   according to the interim procedures instructed to check if 1. the
   request is for a valid CC and 2. the concerned member state agrees to
   the request.  Since the interim procedures do not define the apex at
   all, both a request for "e164.arpa" and "c.e164.arpa" is valid, if it
   concerns a valid CC and is agreed by the member state.

   Option 2 allows to solve the above mentioned issues to be resolved as
   a national matter by the concerned NRA or as a regional opt-in within
   in a given Numbering Plan Area such as the North American NPA.

   However, a convention is needed how, given a fully qualified E.164
   [2] number, a resolver can determine the location of the carrier ENUM
   subdomain for this country.  However, ITU-T and IETF (IAB)
   involvement is only lightweight, e.g. to recommend the proper
   algorithm defined here to enable international interoperability.

   Beyond the setup phase, an NRA need not be involved operationally -
   it is sufficient to establish a convention linking the national
   definition of a carrier of record to the credentials for write access
   to the Carrier ENUM tree.

   We believe the choice among the above options should not be
   predetermined for maximum flexibility and left to national or
   regional environments to decide.  This suggests a method for Carrier
   ENUM resolution which can deal at runtime with whatever the decision
   for a country code, or a group of countries, happens to be.

   It should also be mentioned that Option 1 and 2 could be pursued in
   parallel, because Option 2 can be implemented immediately by any
   country willing to do so.  This could be done either for trials or
   even for production, because Option 2 contains Option 1 as default
   and a migration back to Option 1 is possible at any time, if Option 1
   is finally agreed upon.

   The remainder of this paper addresses therefore only the Option 2.


5.  Resolver behaviour options and the Carrier ENUM branch location

   A Carrier ENUM resolver thus needs to determine the place applicable
   in a given number to search for the 'carrier' subdomain for
   international interoperability, regardless what the national or
   group-of-countries setup decision was.

   We propose a mechanism to discover this boundary dynamically for any
   given shape as follows:




Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   o  the national or group-of-countries decision about subdomain
      location is documented in the e164.arpa tree proper by inserting a
      special DNS record into the country code zone.  This branch
      location record (Section 8) (BLR) carries three values for maximum
      flexibility: 1. an integer value which points to the level in the
      tree where the carrier subtree branches off. 2. an alphanumeric
      value containing the name of the label of the branch 3. an
      alphanumeric value containing the apex of the tree where the tree
      is contained.  Implementation options for the BLR are discussed
      below.
   o  a resolver looking for a Carrier ENUM domain needs to retrieve
      this BLR once during first resolution within a country code,
      caching the result in a local table for later re-use.
   o  while constructing the FQDN, the label given in the BLR is
      inserted at the position indicated by the BLR's integer value and
      finally the apex is appended

   For the abovementioned tree shape options (Section 4), the
   corresponding branch location record values in the 1.e164.arpa zone
   would be as follows:

   +---------------------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+
   |         shape             | branch location | label   |    apex   |
   +---------------------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+
   | 4.9.7.1.carrier.e164.arpa |        0        | carrier | e164.arpa |
   | 4.9.7.carrier.1.e164.arpa |        1        | carrier | e164.arpa |
   | carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa |        4        | carrier | e164.arpa |
   +---------------------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+

   Figure 1

   The only remaining a-priori knowledge a Carrier ENUM resolver should
   have is the current list of country codes, or an equivalent method to
   determine where the country code in the number ends.

   To prime the country code extraction algorithm, the current scheme to
   determine country code length as follows could be employed:


   o  3 digits is the default length of a country code.
   o  country codes 1 and 7 are a single digit.
   o  the following country codes are two digits: 20, 27, 30-34, 36, 39,
      40, 41, 43-49, 51-58, 60-66, 81, 82, 84, 86, 90-95, 98.

   Figure 2

   Given the fact that the ITU recently allocated only 3-digit country
   codes, there are no more spare 1- and 2-digit country codes and



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   existing 1- and 2-digit country codes are extremely unlikely to be
   recovered, the above table consisting of the existing 1- and 2-digit
   country codes can be considered very stable.  The only problem may be
   a country split as happened recently e.g. to Yugoslavia.

   If a branch location record is not found that way (for instance, in
   the unlikely case the ITU allocates a country code not according to
   these rules), it is still possible to determine the branch location
   record by "iterating down" the tree.  Such a fallback strategy would
   rely on the assumption that there is never a branch location record
   inserted above the country code zone, for which there would be no use
   in the first place.

   It seems unlikely that inspection of more than the first five digits
   will be required to locate the branch location record under any
   realistic numbering administrative partitioning.


6.  Recommended resolver behaviour

   A User ENUM resolver as per RFC 3761 need not be aware of any Carrier
   ENUM conventions at all.  A combined User and Carrier ENUM resolver
   shall behave as follows:

   The input to the resolver routine shall be:
   1.  the called number in fully qualified E.164 (international)
       format,
   2.  a 'subtree' parameter indicating whether the search should
       proceed in the User ENUM tree, or in the subtree indicated by the
       parameter (example: 'carrier' to indicate Carrier ENUM
       resolution, or a null value for defaulting to User ENUM
       resolution),
   3.  optionally a table or algorithm to easily detect country codes
       (Section 5),
   4.  any other parameters used to drive the search, for instance an
       enumservice type.  These parameters are outside the scope of this
       draft.

   The resolver shall proceed as follows:
   o  if the subtree parameter indicates a User ENUM search, proceed as
      per RFC3761.
   o  If the subtree parameter indicates a Carrier ENUM query:
      *  determine country code length.
      *  consult cache table if a branch location for this country code
         was already retrieved since resolver boot time.
      *  if not:





Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


            retrieve the branch location record from the country code
            zone, and store the country code and branch location data in
            the cache table.
            optional fallback for irregular country code not covered by
            the CC extraction algorithm: (Figure 2) if the last step
            fails, iterate over the number up to five digits and try to
            retrieve the branch location record each time, again storing
            the country code and branch location data in the cache table
            if successful.
            if both attempts fail, return NXDOMAIN.
      *  valid branch location found: insert the carrier label from the
         table accordingly at the location given and append the given
         apex while creating the inverted dotted domain name.
      *  search the DNS for any NAPTR records for the resulting domain.

   It is assumed that already discovered branch location values are
   stored in a cache table of country code and branch location data.


7.  Zone file examples

   Example 1 - carrier subtree branches of right under the country code
   +43 level, zone files for country code zone and carrier subtree zone.
   The BLR happens to be at the same level as the carrier subtree.
   Since they use the same name, the BLR needs to be below the zone cut
   in the 3.4.e164.arpa zone.  Note there is no change in the e164.arpa
   zone in this case, the carrier subtree can be introduced nationally
   without further external interaction.























Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   ; +43 country code zone

   $ORIGIN 3.4.e164.arpa.

   @         IN   NS     ns1.enum.at.

   @         IN   NS     ns2.enum.at.

   ; Branch location record in e164.arpa at CC level

   @         IN   BLR  2 "carrier" "e164.arpa"

   Note: or with TXT RR according to RFC1464:
   @         IN   TXT    "blr-level=2"
   @         IN   TXT    "blr-label=carrier"
   @         IN   TXT    "blr-apex=e164.arpa"

   ; carrier subtree starts here

   carrier   IN   NS     ns1-ce.enum.at.

   carrier   IN   NS     ns2-ce.enum.at.

   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +43(1)23

   $ORIGIN carrier.3.4.e164.arpa

   3.2.1 IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@telco.at!" .


   Figure 3

   Example 2 - country code +7 opted for carrier subtree under
   7.carrier.e164.arpa, which is documented by the BLR in the
   7.e164.arpa zone.  This implies consent with ITU and RIPE.
















Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   $ORIGIN 7.e164.arpa.

   @         IN   NS      ns1.enum.ru.

   @         IN   NS      ns2.enum.ru.

   ; Branch location record at CC level

   @         IN   BLR  0 "carrier" "e164.arpa"

   carrier   IN   NS      ns1-ce.enum.ru.

   carrier   IN   NS      ns2-ce.enum.ru.


   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +7(90)123

   $ORIGIN carrier.e164.arpa.

   3.2.1.0.9.7 IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@foo.ru!" .


   Figure 4

   Example 3 - country code +1 opted for carrier subtree under +1 (NPA),
   i.e. 4 digits into the number.  This would imply one zone per NPA.
   We show an example for the 794 NPA.  This scenario, again, can be
   introduced without ITU and RIPE involvement.























Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   $ORIGIN 1.e164.arpa.

   @         IN   NS      ns1.cc1enum.ca.

   @         IN   NS      ns2.cc1enum.ca.

   ;

   ; Branch location record at CC level

   @         IN   BLR 4 "carrier" "e164.arpa"

   ; delegation for 794 NPA - User ENUM

   4.9.7     IN   NS ns1-ue.cc1enum.org.

   4.9.7     IN   NS ns2-ue.cc1enum.org.

   ; delegation for 794 NPA - Carrier ENUM

   carrier.4.9.7  IN  NS ns1-ce.cc1enum.org.

   carrier.4.9.7  IN  NS ns2-ce.cc1enum.org.



   ; Carrier subtree for +1 794 NPA

   $ORIGIN carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa

   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +1(794) 123

   3.2.1 IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@foo.com!" .


   Figure 5

   Example 4 - country code +49 opted for a carrier tree in a completely
   different domain e.g. in e164.info, which is documented by the BLR in
   the 9.4.e164.arpa zone.  Note there is no change in the e164.arpa
   zone in this case, the carrier tree can be introduced nationally
   without further external interaction.









Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   $ORIGIN 9.4.e164.arpa.

   @         IN   NS      ns1-ue.enum.de.

   @         IN   NS      ns2-ue.enum.de.

   ; Branch location record at CC level

   @         IN   BLR  0 "" "e164.info"


   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +49 123

   $ORIGIN e164.info.

   @         IN   NS      ns1-ce.enum.de.

   @         IN   NS      ns2-ce.enum.de.

   3.2.1.9.4 IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@foo.de!" .


   Figure 6


8.  The Branch Location Record

   The BLR is located at the country code level and conveys the name and
   location of a specific subtree.  It returns three values: 1. an
   integer value which points to the level in the tree where the carrier
   subtree branches off. 2. an alphanumeric value containing the name of
   the label of the branch 3. an alphanumeric value containing the apex
   of the tree where the tree is contained.

   We envisage several implementation options, such as:
   o  for trial purposes, 3 TXT records carrying the values in the
      string arguments.
   o  a new DNS Resource Record, e.g.  BLR as used in the examples above
   o  a NAPTR record with a new service definition for that purpose.

   While technically equivalent, we believe the NAPTR option to be the
   most flexible.  We solicit suggestions for the final choice.  If on
   the other hand Option 2 is only a temporary solution, TXT records may
   suffice.


9.  Security considerations




Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


   Privacy issues have been raised regarding unwarranted disclosure of
   user information by publishing Carrier ENUM information in the public
   DNS, for instance the use for harvesting of numbers in service, or
   unlisted numbers.

   Given that number range allocation is public information, we believe
   the easiest way to cope with such concerns is to fully unroll
   allocated number ranges in the Carrier ENUM subtree, wherever such
   privacy concerns exist.  Whether a number is served or not would be
   exposed by the carrier of record when an attempt is made to contact
   the corresponding URI.  We assume this to be an authenticated
   operation, which would not leak information to unauthorized parties.

   Entering all numbers in an allocated number range, whether serviced
   or not, or listed or unlisted, will prevent mining attempts for such
   number attributes.

   The result would be that the information in the public DNS would
   mirror number range allocation information, but not more.  Carrier
   ENUM will not tell you more than you can get by just dialing numbers.

   The URI pointing to the destination network of the Carrier of Record
   should also not disclose any privacy information about the identity
   of end-user, it is therefore recommended to use in the user-part of
   the SIP URI either anonymized UserIDs or the E.164 number itself,
   such as sip:441632960084@example.com .

   The definition of a new RR type or a new enumservice does not
   introduce security problems into the DNS.  Usage of the Branch
   Location record conveys only static setup information under a country
   code subtree of e164.arpa.  The intended use of DNSSEC within ENUM
   will prove authenticity of the conveyed value.


10.  IANA considerations

   The following parameters need to be registered with IANA:

   1.  If Option 1 as outlined in this proposal is accepted: the name of
       the Carrier ENUM subdomain as defined in RFC3761bis, for example
       'carrier' (or 'c' for brevity).  In the future other labels could
       be registered for different purposes.
   2.  According to RFC 3761, the IETF requested IANA to delegate the
       E164.ARPA domain following instructions provided by the IAB.
       Names within this zone are to be delegated to parties according
       to the ITU-T Recommendation E.164.  If Option 2 outlined in this
       proposal is accepted, there will be no changes requested of IANA
       with respect to the E164.ARPA domain.  However, if the Option 1



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


       outlined in this document is accepted, this would require IETF to
       request IANA to create a new sub-domain CARRIER.E164.ARPA.
   3.  for the branch location record, eventually an RR type or NAPTR
       service defintion (note: to be defined in a separate RFC?)


11.  Interoperability considerations

   A resolver needs to indicate which information is requested - User or
   Carrier ENUM, or both.  A user-ENUM-only resolver need not be aware
   of the carrier subtree and no changes with respect to RFC3761
   semantics are required.  A resolver desiring to retrieve Carrier ENUM
   or both types of records needs to be aware of the conventions laid
   out in this draft.

   If the parallel approach of option 1 and option 2 as outlined in
   section 4 is accepted, each country using Option 2 may decide on its
   own when to migrate to Option 1.  The BLR records for this country
   would then be changed to the values "blr-level=0", "blr-label=c" and
   "blr-apex=e164.arpa".  If finally all countries have migrated, the
   BLR records may be removed.


12.  Acknowledgements

   We gratefully acknowledge suggestions and improvements by Jason
   Livingood and Tom Creighton of Comcast, Penn Pfautz of ATT, Lawrence
   Conroy of Roke Manor Research, and Alexander Mayrhofer and Otmar
   Lendl of enum.at.


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

13.2.  Informative References

   [2]  ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan",
        Recommendation E.164, May 1997.

   [3]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
        STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [4]  Lendl, O., "Publishing SIP Peering Policy",



Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


        draft-lendl-sip-peering-policy-00 (work in progress),
        December 2005.

   [5]  Meyer, D., "SPEERMINT Requirements and Terminology",
        draft-meyer-speermint-reqs-and-terminology-00 (work in
        progress), February 2006.













































Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Michael Haberler
   Internet Foundation Austria
   Waehringerstrasse 3/19
   Wien  A-1090
   Austria

   Phone: +43 664 4213465
   Email: mah@eunet.at
   URI:   http://www.nic.at/ipa/


   Richard Stastny
   Oefeg
   Postbox 147
   Vienna  A-1030
   Austria

   Phone: +43 664 420 4100
   Email: richard.stastny@oefeg.at
   URI:   http://www.oefeg.at





























Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM           March 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Haberler & Stastny      Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 18]

