Network working group                                      Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Oct, 3, 2014                                        April 3, 2014
                                                                
                                                          

     Information as a bird with wings that flies and hits the user device screen as Icons
				draft-pkx-infobirdiconswww-02

Abstract

    The document proposes a WWW as an intelligent being that delivers information to users.
    This can be combined with a Single SignON solution for the WWW seen as one Giant computer.
    Imagine having a handy device and you travel to Bangkok and in the morning when you authenticate
    to WWW, your WWW navigation screen shows you very useful Icons that can create a better experience
    for you.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Oct 3, 2014.














Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 3, 2014              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft Information as a bird with wings that flies and hits the User device Screen as Icons  Nov 27, 2013

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................4
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................4

1. Introduction

    To implement and runs software in WWW servers that would deliver information to
    the users depending on their profile settings and WWW navigation history.

2. Background
        Currently i OPen my Desktop, i do not see much Information Icons. I navigate and
	search the WWW as i need it. If i want to look for free pilates videos i view the
	URL for http://www.youtube.com and search pilates and it shows me a list. Or i am
	in Chiangmai and its lunch time and i want to look for  where i can eat classy Thai
	red curry rice. If i have done this search few times, then the WWW as an intelligent
	knows me as Pradeep Kumar Xplorer and that i have logged in from a particular device
	with a MAC address or Unique device identification address and i can deliver information
	about restaurents that can be recommended.
        
3. General Information of the service
        
       I would like this combined with Single SIgnON for WWW as a giant computer.
       I created a youtube clip and uploaded it in a storage computer and named it
       xplorer.flv. This is the content. It can be a bird with wings. The wings of the bird
       is derived from the content and it would fly and arrive at Users screens that has logged
       onto WWW using His/Hers device.

       These are the commands that can be developed in the WWW servers.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 3, 2014                		[Page 2]
Internet-Draft Information as a bird with wings that flies and hits the user device Screen as Icons  Nov27, 2013


      > Fly Xplorer.flv
      >Replicate Xplorer.flv This would Copy Xplorer.flv to computers that have sophisticated Fly
      Programs.

      SO I am a naturist into nudism. I assume a role as Nudist@explodingmoon.org. Some Icons
      would hit my screen that would inform me about naturist activities in the area.

      The Content could be two types

      Static webpages

      Dynamic webpages.(The ones that are created at runtime and shown to the users)

      The Fly program can be preconfigured or another intelligent Master program can execute the
      Fly program to particular content on the servers.

      My background Icons on the WWW desktop could change depending on which URLs
      I  am viewing. If I am accessing http://www.myyogaonline.com then other available yoga online services 
      could hit my screen.If I am acccesing http://www.cheaptickets.com Icons showing many travel deals 
      that might interest me should hit my Screen.

      User Profiling

      A User who has authenticated with the WWW Desktop could have a profile.

      This profile Can be constructed by the user

                            OR

      It could be derived from all the WWW words/contents that  flied between computers the user
      Contacted when that User was navigating the WWW.

      So I am a user always visiting a particular website , lets say http://www.explodingmoon.org
      Or http://www.asianspas.com ,then some content from those websites could fly and hit
      Your screen even when I have not explicitly navigated to that WWW site using the browser navigator.

      I recommend a desktop with a Create workspace action that creates another workspace
      Just like the Common Desktop Environment or OpenLook Virtual Window Manager. You can try
      Searching for these interfaces in youtube as they might be extinct Operating system User interfaces.

      I am User Xplorer@mars.org and I also login or assume the role of fitnessbackpacker@fitness.com. 
      When I travel i Visit restaurents that serve Pita with Hummus and pay by my creditcard. 
      I also login into the credit Cardserver. So this information would be get into Xplorer@mars.orgs profile. 
      So When Xplorer@mars.org logs in when He reaches Bangkok, the content from an Israeli Hummus restaurant 
      thats on the WWW should fly and Hit his screen. Or The Xplorer@mars.org can edit his profile and add words 
      that says I like to eat Hummus or I like Practicing Yoga in Yoga studios or drink coffee in Cafes.


Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 3, 2014                		[Page 3]
Internet-Draft Information as a bird with wings that flies and hits the User device sceen as Icons           Nov27, 2013


      Logic that can be used to control the number of Icons and what should fly.

      There has to be some rules of logic  to determine if there are large number of Contents that can be
      flown from a Fly server and to control the number of Icons that can hit the screen. If there are five Icons
      that can hit a Users WWW Desktop and their device is thin and is configured for only two Icons at a time ,
      some rules of logic has to be used. SImilarily a Fly server might have many free computing cycles and 
      a background process might be able to invoke many parallel Fly programs, again some rules of logic have to
       be used to control how many Fly programs can be invoked.

      I also want to propose an Display Interface of a virtual reality 3D surround screen for navigating
      The Bird Icons. A users screen would be too cluttered with Icons. If i can have a goggle that i can wear
      and attach to the display and computer and some gloves that can be used to navigate the 3D surround
      to chose a particular view of the WWW and then remove those and view and use the computer as it is with
      a 2D screen and keyboard and a mouse.

	I noticed Neon light like cubes attached to pillars in front of a bar 999West Khaosan road, bangkok
      in Thailand in susie walking street. And theres some work on Cube devices, so a Cube browser 
      as a tablet like device, with some more meaning semantics linked to sliding a screen from one face to another. 
      Imagine a device on a table in your space that shows you what you want to see without logging onto internet
      in the cubes different faces.


4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
         http://www.dhyanayoga.info

5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. I have used bluehost.com 
    for hosting my website and have found the need to know who views my site,
    their email addresses and not just IP address. If i can be shown a 
    Single SignON identity like a primary email address that when clicked
    on expands to other identities that viewers allows to reveal, it would
    be useful to me as a publisher.The concept of a Single SignOn user identity
    expanded to the idea of a Intelligent WWW being that knows about many kind
    of users and what that user need to know and deliver it to the users
    desktop  without the effort of user going to the search engines and other 
    information retrieval/mining tools.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 3, 2014                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant computer            Nov 27,2013

