

CCAMP Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                             Young Hwa Kim 
Document: draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt              byung Ho Yae 
Expires: November 2003                                       Jin Ho Hahm 
                                                                    ETRI 
                                                           Jun Kyun Choi 
                                                                     ICU 
                                                          Jae Cheol Ryou 
                                                                     CNU 
                                                                                        
                                                          March 2003 
                   
        Requirements for Protecting Control Channels in GMPLS 
                   
                   
Status of this Memo 
                   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
                   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
                   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                   
                   
                   
Abstract 
                   
   This document describes base requirements for protecting control 
   channels(CCs) for GMPLS. It provides guidelines needed in order to 
   switchover an active CC to the one of standby CCs when a failure 
   occurs about the active CC. It defines terminology, base concepts 
   for CC protection, necessities and considerations of CC protection 
   that should be primarily noted in order to complete the mechanism 
   of CC protection. 
                
                
                
                
                
                
Kim et al                                                       [Page 1]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
                
Table of Contents 
                   
   1. Terminology....................................................2 
   2. Introduction...................................................3 
   3. Signaling Modes and Signaling Transport Configurations.........3 
   4. C-path and PGs.................................................4 
   5. Necessities for CC Protection..................................5 
   6. CC Protection Considerations...................................6 
   7. Functions provided in CCPP.....................................7 
   Security Considerations...........................................7 
   References........................................................8 
   Acknowledgments...................................................8 
   Author's Addresses................................................8 
                   
                   
1. Terminology 
                   
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
                   
   Some terms used throughout this document are listed below. 
                   
   Active Control Channel (ACC) :
   A physical control channel which is currently carrying a logical 
   control channel. An active control channel becomes a standby control 
   channel when it is not carrying a logical control channel. 
                
   Bearer Channel (BC) :
   Channels used to provide the unidirectional or bidirectional 
   transmission capability for clients of optical transport networks. 
                   
   Control Channel Protection Protocol (CCPP) :
   A new protocol used to protect control channels between adjacent 
   nodes in GMPLS.  
                   
   Control Channel (CC) :
   A pair of mutually reachable interfaces that are used to enable 
   communication between nodes for routing, signaling, and link 
   management. 
                   
   Control Path (C-path) :
   A path used to carry any one of several control information as 
   routing, signaling, link management, and protection protocols. 
                   
   Logical Control Channel (LCC) :
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   A group of one or more control paths, all of different types, 
   including the control path for control channel protection protocol 
   (CCPP). 
                   
   Physical Control Channel (PCC) :
   Timeslots or wavelengths which have been assigned for logical control 
   channel. A physical control channel not used for carrying bearer 
   channels. 
                   
   Protection Group (PG) :
   group of control channels using the same type of signaling transport 
   configuration. 
                   
   Standby Control Channel (SCC) :
   Physical control channels which are not carrying a logical control 
   channel, but are use for the protection of logical control channels. 
   Once it is used carry a logical control channel, a standby control 
   channel becomes an active control channel, and is controlled under 
   allocated priority. 
                   
                   
2. Introduction 
                   
   A CC is a pair of mutually reachable interfaces that are used to 
   carry control packets between nodes for routing, signaling and link 
   management, see [LMP]. 
                   
   In traditional MPLS, there is an implicit one-to-one association of a 
   CC to a bearer channel (BC). Under the one-to-one association between 
   CCs and BCs, the protection of CCs may be resolved using the 
   protection scheme of BCs. There is no need of using the scheme to 
   protect CCs.  
                   
   However, as indicated in [GMPLS-ARCH], the CCs between two adjacent 
   nodes are no longer required to use the same physical medium as the 
   data-bearing links between those nodes. A consequence of allowing the 
   CCs between adjacent nodes to be physically diverse from the 
   associated data-bearing links is that the configuration of a CC does 
   not necessarily correlate to the one of the data-bearing links, and 
   vice-versa. Consequently, the mechanism for CC protection could be 
   used not in in-fiber(or in-band) network configurations but in out-
   of-fiber(or out-of-band) network configurations. 
                   
                   
3. Signaling Modes and Signaling Transport Configurations 
                   
   In case of in-fiber signaling, the control scope of CC is limited to 
   a single fiber bearing the CC. However, out-of-fiber signaling does 
   not mean only the configuration that the CC has to be different from 
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   the fiber including BCs. That is, the signaling also includes that 
   the CCs within the fiber including BCs may also control BCs within 
   other fibers, in addition to the configuration physically separated 
   from the fiber including BCs.                
                   
   As indicated in [G.807], a signaling network supports the control 
   plane by the act of transferring service-related information between 
   the user and the network and also between network entities. The 
   signaling network shall be based upon common channel signaling, 
   thereby allowing a network operator the capability of developing a 
   separate signaling network. Common channel signaling links are   
   associated with user channels in the following ways:  
                   
   - In associated mode, signaling messages related to traffic between 
   two network elements are transferred over signaling links that 
   directly connect the two network elements;  
                   
   - In non-associated mode, signaling messages between two network 
   elements A and B are routed over several signaling links, whilst 
   traffic signals are routed directly between A and B. The signaling 
   links used may vary with time and network conditions;  
                   
   - In quasi-associated mode, signaling messages between nodes A and B 
   follow a predetermined routing path over several signaling links  
   whilst the traffic channels are routed directly between A and B.  
                   
   In addition to signaling modes, as indicated in [O-UNI], types of 
   signaling transport configurations to transport signaling messages 
   are as follows:  
                   
   - In in-fiber type, signaling messages are carried over a CC embedded 
   in the data-carrying optical link between network elements;  
                   
   - In out-of-fiber type, signaling messages are carried over a 
   dedicated CC between adjacent nodes, separate from the data-bearing 
   optical links. 
                   
                   
4. C-path and PGs 
                   
   C-path includes information types of GMPLS protocols for routing, 
   signaling, and link management. OSPF and IS-IS extensions are 
   candidates for routing, CR-LDP and RSVP-TE are ones for signaling, 
   and LMP is a candidate for link management. The proposed CCPP is 
   another candidate for link management. 
                   
   In the signaling transport configuration of out-of-fiber type, 
   associated, non-associated, and quasi-associated modes could be 
   applied to GMPLS based networks. For the mechanism of CC protection, 
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   three PGs may be considered, and it is assumed that an higher PG is 
   applied based on the general transmission speed of control packets. 
   For a example, CCs of associated mode could be PG-1, CCs of quasi-
   associated mode could be PG-2, and finally CCs of non-associated mode 
   could be PG-3. CCs within the same PG and other PGs could be switched 
   via automatic operation or operator intervention based on priority 
   assigned to each CC. They are assigned their supporting PGs, 
   priorities within the own PG, logical CC identifiers, and C-paths on 
   which peer entities have to verify their protection attributes 
   between nodes through automatic operation. 
                   
                   
5. Necessities for CC Protection 
                   
   There could be following advantages of out-of-fiber signaling over 
   in-fiber signaling: 
                   
   - Basically, in-fiber signaling requires more resources such as HDLC 
   controllers, whereas out-of-fiber signaling may reduce the number of 
   these resources;  
                   
   - In case of in-fiber signaling it looks that there is no room for 
   protecting CCs. However, out-of-fiber signaling may apply the various 
   and effective S/W based protection schemes according to the 
   protection methodology;  
                   
   - In-fiber signaling is difficult to separate control plane from 
   transport plane, whereas out-of-fiber signaling is easy to separate 
   control plane;  
                   
   - In-fiber signaling may provide only GMPLS features within a single 
   fiber, and not provide the extended features such as connection 
   control beyond a single fiber, whereas out-of-fiber signaling may 
   provide these features easily.  
                   
   When out-of-fiber signaling is used, CCs may be shared to control 
   several fibers. If there is no protection of CCs on that situation, a 
   failure of the ACC may cause the problem like temporary suspension of 
   control entities although they are running well. If recovery of the 
   failed CC takes long time, the failure will result in the out-of-
   service of the control plane. In particular, in case of RSVP variant 
   protocols, the failure of CCs may result in the effect such as 
   unwanted connection teardown. Eventually, in order to provide the 
   stable and responsible communication environment between control 
   entities of control plane in out-of-fiber signaling, the protection 
   mechanism of CCs is needed under the current network configurations 
   without addition of H/W based facilities. 
                   
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   For the support of concepts such as link bundling, explicit BC 
   identification, and non-impact between failures of CCs and BCs, the 
   separation between control plane and transport plane has been 
   introduced in MPLS and GMPLS, see [GMPLS-ARCH] and [GMPLS-SIG]. This 
   situation means that failure of CC does not cause failure of BCs. 
   However, if there is no recovery even beyond the time limits in RSVP 
   or LMP, it may result in the deletion of previously established 
   connections, or invoke operator intervention to manually treat the 
   failure of CC. In the end, it may degrade the quality of service from 
   the view-point of connection control.  
                   
   As indicated in [LMP], there may not be any ACCs available while the 
   data links are still in use. For many applications, it is 
   unacceptable to tear down connections on the reason that there is no 
   available CC. And, on this situation, the traffic that is using the 
   data links under the failed CC may no longer be guaranteed to the 
   same level of service. In [LMP], it is said that the TE link is in a 
   degraded state. 
                   
   CCs are also very important as much as BCs. If there is no ACC 
   between adjacent nodes, although the fault handling procedures of 
   protocols such as [GMPLS-RSVP] are supported, these special 
   procedures are of no use until the failed CCs are recovered. In that 
   there is no path to exchange any control packets between adjacent 
   nodes, control entities that are running well may not provide 
   potential and eminent services of control plane any more. 
                   
                   
6. CC Protection Considerations 
                   
   First of all, the design of protection protocol for CCs depends upon 
   the identification of appropriate requirements. The following items 
   are the requirements to be applied preferentially for the protection 
   protocol proposed, CCPP: 
                   
   - Using the neighbor discovery provided by LMP, the configuration of 
   CCs is resolved. In case of in-fiber signaling, automatic 
   configuration of CCs is possible. However, In case of out-of-fiber 
   signaling, there is still no automatic configuration mechanism of CCs, 
   and the work for the automatic configuration is in progressing in 
   IETF. LMP has very close relation to the protection of CCs due to CC 
   configuration and hello initiation in the neighbor discovery. If the 
   automatic configuration of CCs for out-of-fiber signaling supports 
   several signaling types using LMP, more natural mechanisms for 
   protecting CCs may be supported. Here, there may be a discussion 
   whether LMP is performed first, or the protection protocol proposed 
   is performed first. On nature of a protection protocol, it is 
   desirable to first of all perform CCPP than LMP and other GMPLS 
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 6]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   protocols. In any case, this item needs the negotiation with the LMP 
   community for more efficient protection of CCs. 
                   
   - Reverting mode on recovery may cause the unnecessary protection 
   operation within the same PG. Although the priority of an CC is lower 
   than that of another CC recovered from failure, it is appropriate to 
   keep the current status for more simple protection operation. That is, 
   non-reverting mode shall be applied within the same PG. However, 
   recovery between PGs is different from that within the same PG. It is 
   desirable to take reverting mode than non-reverting mode to provide 
   more quality of service (QoS); 
                   
   - The CCPP operates not over TCP or raw IP but over UDP. 
                   
7. Functions provided in CCPP 
                   
   The functions provided in CCPP are follows: 
                   
   - The function of negotiation for protection attributes is the 
   optional one provided in CCPP that an entity negotiates the 
   protection attributes such as PGs, CCs, priorities, and C-paths with 
   the other; 
                   
   - The function of inquiry into protection attributes is the one that 
   an entity request the information of protection attributes to the 
   other to compare the own attributes; 
                   
   - As a primary function of CCPP, it is the automatic switchover of 
   CCs on which an entity requests a switchover of the ACC to SCC about 
   the LCC without operator's intervention when a failure in the ACC 
   occurs; 
                   
   - As other primary function of CCPP, it is the non-automatic 
   switchover of CCs on which an operator requests a switchover of the 
   ACC to SCC about the LCC; 
                   
   - The function of reset for sequence number of CCPP is the one that 
   indicates the peer entity that a misalignment of state variables has 
   occurred and that all state variables shall be set to zero; 
                   
   - The function of notification on protocol error is the one that 
   indicates that a protocol error has been identified in a received 
   CCPP message. 
                   
Security Considerations 
                   
   Security issues are not considered in this proposal. However, It  
   looks that the security considerations mentioned in [LMP] may be  
   also applied in this protocol. 
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 7]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
                   
                   
References 
                   
                   
   [G.807] ITU-T Recommendation G.807, "Requirements for Automatic  
   Switched Transport Networks (ASTN)", Jul. 2001. 
                   
   [G.965] ITU-T Recommendation G.965, "V-Interfaces at the digital 
   local exchange (LE) : V5.2 interface (Based on 2048 kbit/s) for the 
   support of access network (AN)", Mar. 2001. 
                   
   [O-UNI] OIF, OIF2000.125.7, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0  
   Signaling Specification", Oct. 2001. 
                   
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Eric Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Architecture", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-
   architecture-03.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
   [LMP] J. Lang, et al, "Link Management Protocol", Internet Draft, 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-06.txt, Sep. 2002. 
                   
   [GMPLS-SIG] Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS ?Signaling 
   Functional Description", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-
   signaling-09.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
   [GMPLS-RSVP] Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling - RSVP-TE 
   Extensions", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-
   09.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
                   
Acknowledgments 
                   
   The authors would like to speak that base concepts for protecting CCs 
   in GMPLS are cited from the protection protocol of G.965 document in 
   ITU-T. 
                   
                   
Author's Addresses 
                   
   Young Hwa Kim  
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: yhwkim@etri.re.kr  
                   
   Byung Ho Yae 
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 8]

Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-02.txt      March 2003 
                
                
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: bhyae@etri.re.kr  
                   
   Jin Ho Hahm  
   ETRI  
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 6048  
   E-mail: jhhahm.etri.re.kr  
                   
   Jun Kyun Choi   
   Information and Communications University (ICU) 
   58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-732   
   Phone: +82-42-866-6122   
   Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr   
                   
   Jae Cheol Ryou  
   Dept. of Computer Science, Chungnam National University (CNU)  
   220 Gung-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-764  
   Phone: +82 42 821 7443  
   E-mail: jcryou@home.cnu.ac.kr 
                                    
                
                
                
Kim, et al                                                      [Page 9]
