
Internet Engineering Task Force                          Fred Baker 
Internet Draft                                          Bill Foster 
Document: <draft-baker-slem-architecture-01.txt>         Chip Sharp 
Category: Informational                                   June 2003 
 
 
 
         Cisco Architecture for Lawful Intercept In IP Networks 
 
Status of this Document 
 
  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 
   
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts. 
   
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
Abstract 
   
  For the purposes of this document, lawful intercept is the lawfully 
  authorized interception and monitoring of communications. Service 
  providers are being asked to meet legal and regulatory requirements 
  for the interception of voice as well as data communications in IP 
  networks in a variety of countries worldwide. Although requirements 
  vary from country to country, some requirements remain common even 
  though details such as delivery formats may differ. This document 
  describes Cisco's Architecture for supporting lawful intercept in IP 
  networks. It provides a general solution that has a minimum set of 
  common interfaces.  This document does not attempt to address any of 
  the specific legal requirements or obligations that may exist in a 
  particular country.  
 
Conventions used in this document 
   
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119. 





 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 1] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

                            Table of Contents 
   
Abstract..............................................................1 
Conventions used in this document.....................................1 
1. Introduction.......................................................2 
 1.1. Key Requirements................................................3 
 1.2. Document Organization...........................................3 
2.0. Reference Model..................................................4 
 2.1. Reference Model Components......................................5 
 2.2. Operational Considerations......................................7 
3.0. Interfaces.......................................................9 
 3.1. Content Intercept Request Interface.............................9 
 3.2. Intercept Content Interface (e).................................9 
 3.3. PacketCable(TM) Interfaces.....................................10 
4.0. Applying the Reference Model....................................11 
 4.1. Voice over IP networks.........................................11 
   4.1.1. Interception of Voice over IP Services.....................11 
   4.1.2. Local Voice Services.......................................12 
 4.2. Data Services..................................................13 
5.0. Security Considerations.........................................13 
 5.1. Content Request Interface (c) - SNMPv3 Control.................14 
6.0. References......................................................14 
7.0. Acronyms........................................................15 
8.0. Authors' Addresses..............................................16 
   
   
   
1. Introduction 
 
  For the purposes of this document, lawful intercept is the lawfully 
  authorized interception and monitoring of communications of an 
  intercept subject. The term "intercept subject", "subject", "target 
  subscriber" or "target" in this document refers to the subscriber of 
  a telecommunications service whose communications and/or intercept 
  related information has been lawfully authorized to be intercepted 
  and delivered to a Law Enforcement Agency (LEA). 
   
  Service providers are being asked to meet legal and regulatory 
  requirements for the interception voice as well as data 
  communications in IP networks in a variety of countries worldwide. 
  Although requirements vary from country to country, some requirements 
  remain common even though details such as delivery formats may 
  differ. This document describes Cisco's Architecture for supporting 
  lawful intercept in IP networks. It provides a general solution that 
  has a minimum set of common interfaces. This document does not deal 
  with legal requirements or obligations. 
   
  This document describes one method for supporting lawful intercept.  
  Other methods may be available.  
   




 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 2] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

1.1. Key Requirements 
   
  There are a variety of requirements that have been defined for 
  lawfully authorized intercept throughout the world. Some of these 
  requirements have been defined by standards bodies (e.g. [16]), while 
  others are country specific. The requirements described in this 
  document are a distillation of some of these requirements, although a 
  given requirement may or may not apply to a specific country.  The 
  requirements laid out in this document do not imply any legal 
  requirements on service providers or equipment vendors although such 
  requirements might be coincident. The procedures described in this 
  document address the following requirements: 
                          
     * Lawful Intercept (LI) MUST be undetectable by the intercept 
       subject. 
   
     * Mechanisms MUST be in place to limit unauthorized personnel from 
       performing or knowing about lawfully authorized intercepts. 
   
     * There is often a requirement (especially for telecommunications 
       services) to provide intercept related information (IRI) 
       separately from the actual Internet Protocol (IP) traffic (or 
       content) of interest (Note: some authorizations may be 
       restricted to IRI). 
 
     * If IRI is delivered separately from content, there MUST be some 
       means to correlate the IRI and the content with each other. 
 
     * If the information being intercepted is encrypted by the service 
       provider and the service provider has access to the keys, then 
       the information MUST be decrypted before delivery to the Law 
       Enforcement Agency (LEA) or the encryption keys MUST be passed 
       to the Law Enforcement Agency to allow them to decrypt the 
       information. 
 
     * If the information being intercepted is encrypted by the 
       intercept subject and its associate and the service provider has 
       access to the keys, then the service provider MAY deliver the 
       keys to the LEA. 
 
     * There is often a requirement for a service provider to be able 
       to do multiple simultaneous intercepts on a single subject.  The 
       fact that there are multiple intercepts should be transparent to 
       the LEAs. 
 
     * There is often a requirement that the service provider should 
       not deliver any unauthorized information to the LEA. 
 
  This document attempts to address these requirements. 
   
1.2. Document Organization 
 
  Section 1 of this document lists some of the key requirements. 
  Section 2 of this document describes a reference model along with 
 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 3] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

  some operation considerations. Section 3 provides more detailed 
  requirements on the interfaces related to content interception. 
  Section 4 applies the reference model to voice over IP and data 
  intercepts and Section 5 examines security considerations. 
   
   
   
2.0. Reference Model 
 
  This section describes a generic reference model (Figure 1) for 
  lawful intercept.  
   
   
                         +--------------------+ 
                         |  LI Administration | 
                         |      Function      | 
                         +--------------------+ 
                                | 
                                | Authorization 
                                | Interface(a) 
                                | 
  +-----------+           +--------------------+ 
  |           |<---(b)----|                    |              +-----+ 
  |  IRI IAP  |--IRI(d)-->|      Mediation     |----IRI(f)--->|     | 
  |           |           |      Device (MD)   |              | LEA | 
  +-----------+           |                    |-Content(g)-->|     | 
                          +--------------------+              +-----+ 
                               |         ^ 
                     Intercept |         | Intercepted 
                    Request(c) |         | Content(e) 
                               |         | 
                               v         | 
                             +--------------------+ 
                       User  |       Content      |  User 
                     ------->|         IAP        |--------> 
                     Content +--------------------+  Content 
   
 
     Figure 1: Intercept Architecture 
   














 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 4] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

  A brief description of the interfaces is included in table 1 below. 
  For a more detailed description of the interfaces refer to section 3.  
  For a description of the components refer to section 2.1. 
 
     Table 1 LI Interfaces 
 
      Interface            Description 
    ---------------------  ------------------------------------------- 
   (a) LI Provisioning    LI Administrative provisioning interface;  
                          parameters include target identifier;  
                          duration of intercept, type of intercept,  
                          etc. 
 
   (b) IRI Target         Specifies Target identifier, duration, etc. 
                          for provisioning of delivery of Intercept  
                            Related Information (IRI). 
    
   (c) Content Intercept  Provisioning of content intercept. 
 
 
   (d) IRI to MD          Internal interface between IRI Intercept  
                            Access Point (IAP) and Mediation device  
                           (MD) for delivery of IRI. 
 
   (e) Content to MD      Internal interface between content 
                          IAP and MD for delivery of Content. 
 
   (f) IRI to LEA         Interface between the MD and LEA for  
                          delivering IRI. This may vary from country  
                          to country. 
 
   (g) Content to LEA     Interface between the MD and LEA for  
                          delivering Content. This may vary from  
                          country to country. 
   
2.1. Reference Model Components 
 
  A brief description of the key components in the reference model is 
  as follows: 
   
  Lawful Intercept (LI) Administration Function: 
     This function provides the (typically manual) provisioning 
     interface for the intercept as a result of a court order or 
     warrant delivered by the Law Enforcement Agency (LEA). It could 
     involve separate provisioning interfaces for several components, 
     but more typically is a single interface to the Mediation Device 
     (MD), which then takes care of provisioning of other components in 
     the network. Because of the requirement in some laws to limit 
     accessibility to authorized personnel, the Authorization Interface 
     (a) in Figure 1 MUST be strictly controlled. In many cases, the 
     identity of the subject received from the LEA has to be translated 
     into an identity that can be used by the network to enable the 
     intercept.   
 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 5] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

                              
  Intercept Access Point (IAP): 
     An IAP is a device within the network that is used for 
     intercepting lawfully authorized intercept information. It may be 
     an existing device that has intercept capability or it could be a 
     special device that is provided for that purpose. Two types of 
     IAP's are discussed here: IAP's that provide content; and IAP's 
     that provide intercept related information (IRI). 
      
  Content IAP: 
     A content IAP is an IAP that is used to intercept the IP traffic 
     of interest. 
      
  IRI IAP: 
     This is an IAP that is used to provide intercept related 
     information (IRI). IRI is information related to the IP traffic of 
     interest.  There is currently no standardized definition for IRI 
     for IP traffic.  IRI has been defined for a few services that 
     might run over IP (e.g., Voice over IP) or that IP runs on top of 
     (e.g., GPRS).  For example, IRI for voice over IP could be the 
     called and calling phone numbers. The definition of IRI from [17] 
     is shown below: 
      
               Intercept Related Information: collection of 
               information or data associated with 
               telecommunication services involving the target 
               identity, specifically communication associated 
               information or data (e.g. unsuccessful 
               communication attempts), service associated 
               information or data (e.g. service profile 
               management by subscriber) and location 
               information. 
      
      
  Law Enforcement Agency (LEA): 
     This is the agency that has requested the intercept and to which 
     the service provider delivers the information. 
   
  Mediation Device (MD): 
     The MD requests intercepts from IAPs through interfaces (b) and 
     (c) in Figure 1. The Mediation Device receives the data from the 
     IAP, packages it in the correct format (which may vary from 
     country to country) and delivers it to the LEA. In the case where 
     multiple law enforcement agencies are intercepting the same 
     subject, the mediation device may replicate the information 
     multiple times. The assumption is that the service provider 
     operates the MD (via specially authorized personnel) and that the 
     LEA only has access to interfaces (f) and (g) in Figure 1. 
   





 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 6] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

2.2. Operational Considerations 
      
     In a typical operation, a lawfully authorized surveillance request 
     arrives for a specified intercept subject. Authorized personnel 
     provision the intercept using interface (a) in Figure 1, which may 
     be for content only, IRI only or both. Once the intercept is 
     provisioned, the IAP's send the IRI and/or content to the MD, 
     which formats the information into the appropriate format for 
     delivery to the LEA. Some operational issues that need to be 
     considered: 
      
       * Location and Address Information for Content Intercepts: In 
          some cases where the location and/or addressing information 
          for the intercept is not known until the subject registers 
          (or makes a call in the case of voice), the IRI may provide 
          needed information in order to do the content tap (e.g. the 
          IP address and port for the content streams). 
      
       * Content Encryption: If the intercept content is encrypted and 
          the service provider has access to the encryption keys (e.g., 
          receives keys in Session Description Protocol for Voice over 
          IP), then the keys can be sent via IRI. It is, however, 
          possible for end-users to exchange keys by some other means 
          without any knowledge of the service provider in which case 
          the service provider will not be able to provide the keys. In 
          any case, content formatting at the MD SHOULD NOT modify the 
          original intercepted information such that it would make 
          decryption at the LEA impossible. This is why in the case of 
          voice over IP intercepts for example, it is RECOMMENDED that 
          the original voice packets be sent to the LEA rather than 
          attempting to convert them to some other format (TDM for 
          example). 
 
       * Detection by the Intercept Subject: One of the key 
          requirements is to ensure that the intercept subject is 
          unable to detect that they are being intercepted. This 
          document assumes a sophisticated subject:  
 
            - Able to check IP addresses, use traceroute, etc. 
                
            - Able to check if any unusual signaling is occurring on 
               their customer premises equipment (CPE). 
   
            - Able to detect degradation or interruptions in service. 
           
          This implies that the intercept mechanism MUST NOT involve 
          special requests to the CPE, re-routing of packets or end-to-
          end changes in IP addresses. This in turn implies that the 
          content intercept MUST be done on a device along the normal 
          content path (i.e. no re-routing has occurred) that is within 
          the service provider (rather than the customer's) network. A 
          convenient content IAP is a router or switch at the edge of 
          the service provider∆s network to which the intercept subject 
          connects. This is illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 7] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

           
   
                               |                             
            Customer Premises  | Service Provider's Network 
                               | 
                                    +-------+ 
                +-----+             |       | 
                | CPE |-------------| Router|---------- 
                +-----+             | (IAP) | 
                                    |       | 
                                    +-------+ 
   
                  Figure 2  Content IAP - Router 
      
          Another possibility of course is to provide a special device 
          along the path to provide the content IAP capabilities. 
           
          Note that in the case where there is multi-homing (two or 
          more routers connected to provide access for the CPE), 
          intercept taps may have to be installed on more than one 
          access router.  If the CPE is multihomed to multiple service 
          providers, then the intercept will have to be installed on 
          each service provider separately and the LEA will have to 
          correlate the data. 
           
       * Unauthorized Creation and Detection: Another concern is the 
          prevention of unauthorized creation and detection of 
          intercepts. This is particularly important when a network 
          element such as a router is used as a content IAP. Those 
          routers that have the capability MUST be carefully controlled 
          with access to intercept capability and information only via 
          authorized personnel. The approach RECOMMENDED in this 
          document is illustrated in the reference model in Figure 1. 
          In this approach the MD is in a controlled environment and 
          the MD does the intercept request to the content IAP over an 
          encrypted link.  In addition, logging and auditing MUST be 
          used to detect unauthorized attempts to access the intercept 
          capability. 
        
       * Maintenance & Management:  The lawful intercept solution 
          SHOULD minimally interfere with normal maintenance and 
          management procedures. 
        
       * Capacity:  Support for lawful intercept on a network element 
          supporting customers consumes resources on that equipment.  
          Therefore, support for lawful intercept requires capacity 
          planning and engineering to ensure that revenue-producing 
          services are not adversely affected. 
 





 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 8] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

3.0. Interfaces 
 
This section provides a brief description of the interfaces in the 
reference model (Figure 1). A list of these interfaces is included in 
Table 1 in Section 2. 
   
  One of the objectives in defining these interfaces is to keep the 
  internal interfaces (a to e) the same regardless of country-specific 
  requirements. The MD then formats the IRI and the content to meet the 
  country specific requirements for interfaces (f) and (g).  
   
3.1. Content Intercept Request Interface 
   
  This section describes some of the requirements for the content 
  intercept request interface (c) in Figure 1. It recommends the use of 
  a common request protocol (SNMPv3) regardless of the type of 
  application (e.g. voice, data) and suggests the usage of a TAP-MIB, 
  which is defined in a separate document [1]. Some of the 
  considerations that lead to the use of SNMPv3 and to the definition 
  of the specific Management Information Base (MIB) defined in [1] are 
  provided here. 
   
  In order to provide a generic interface for intercepting, 
  replicating, encapsulating and transporting content packets to the 
  MD, the content intercept interface ((c) in Figure 1) MUST specify: 
   
     * A Filter specification for classifying the packets to be 
       intercepted. 
      
     * The destination address of the MD (where to send the packets). 
 
     * Encapsulation and Transport parameters. 
   
  In addition, a timeout value for the intercept SHOULD be specified. 
  This defines a limited lifetime for the intercept. If a failure of 
  the MD occurs such that it is not able to supply the refresh to the 
  timeout, then the intercept SHOULD cease to exist after the timeout 
  expires. Similarly, if the IAP re-boots, then the intercept SHOULD 
  not survive the re-boot unless the IAP is capable of ascertaining 
  that the intercept lifetime requirements will continue to be met. 
   
  In order for this to work, it MUST be possible for the mediation 
  device to realize that there is a failure in the IAP such that it 
  must re-establish the intercept. This MAY be in the form of an audit 
  (from the MD to the IAP), or in the form of a heartbeat mechanism in 
  the content stream, or both. 
   
3.2. Intercept Content Interface (e) 
 
  The encapsulation method SHOULD retain all of the information in the 
  original packets (source and destination addresses as well as 
  payload) and provide an identifier for correlating the packets with 
  the IRI. One encapsulation that meets those requirements is described 
  in Section 4 of [2].  For non-voice intercepts, the ÊÊIntercepted 
 
Baker et al                  Informational                     [Page 9] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

  Information∆∆ field in Table 1 of [2] contains the original 
  intercepted IP packet. 
   
  Note, however, that the interface defined in [2] is based on UDP 
  which is an unreliable and unordered transport protocol (i.e., 
  provides neither retransmission on detection of errors nor ordering 
  of data).  If this transport is used, the underlying network (Layers 
  1 -    - 3) should be engineered to meet the overall reliability 
  requirements for delivery of content. 
   
  If a more reliable transport protocol is required, then a mechanism 
  that provides timely delivery as well as limits the burden (both 
  processing and buffering) on the Content IAP should be used. One 
  mechanism that meets these requirements is a NACK-oriented 
  retransmission scheme based on [15].   
   
  If [15] is used, the call content channel identifier may be placed in 
  the SSRC field of the encapsulating RTP packet.  The payload type may 
  be used to identify the type of packet encapsulated in RTP (e.g., IP, 
  PPP, Ethernet MAC).  Usage of [15] is still under investigation and 
  may need further specification.  Usage of [15] in the content IAP 
  places more processing burden on the content IAP than a UDP-based 
  intercept and can affect the capacity of the content IAP. 
 
3.3. PacketCable(TM) Interfaces 
   
  PacketCable is a trademark of Cable Television Laboratories, Inc. 
   
  Although this document does define interfaces (a), (b) or (d) to (f), 
  some of these interfaces have been defined by Packetcable for Voice 
  over IP on Cable networks. Packetcable also uses a different 
  reference model for interface (c): 
   
       * For content intercept provisioning - interface (c), two 
          interfaces have been defined using two different protocols: 
          one for the Cable Modem Termination System (CMTS) [4] and one 
          for PSTN gateways [5]. These requests are performed by a call 
          control element rather than the MD (so follow a different 
          reference model that the one described in Figure 1). 
   
       * The IRI interface to the MD (d) is defined in Appendix A of 
          [3]. 
   
       * The content interface to the MD (e) is the same as the 
          content interface to the LEA (g) and is defined in [2]. 
 
       * The IRI interface to the LEA (f) is defined in [2]. 
 






 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 10] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

4.0. Applying the Reference Model 
 
  This section applies the reference model to some example 
  applications. 
   
4.1. Voice over IP networks 
 
  This section will look at some of the issues surrounding interception 
  of voice over IP calls, taking local voice services as a specific 
  service example. The reference model from Figure 1 will be applied 
  with the use of a common set of interfaces that are independent of 
  the call signaling protocols in use. 
   
4.1.1. Interception of Voice over IP Services 
   
  There are a variety of architectures in use for voice over IP (e.g., 
  centralized versus distributed) as well as various protocols (SIP 
  [9], H.323 [12], MGCP [10], H.248 [11]). There are also a variety of 
  services that may be offered: 
   
     * Local Voice Services (i.e. service to a user that has an IP 
       phone or a phone connected to a gateway) 
      
     * Transit services 
      
     * Long distance access services (e.g. calling/debit card). 
   
  This document does not address any obligations that a service 
  provider might or might not have to support intercepts. It simply 
  describes how intercept might be done using the reference model in 
  Figure 1. 
   
  Note that in the case of services where the intercept subject 
  accesses the network via a non-IP endpoint (e.g., TDM), the 
  detectability issue is less acute (e.g. re-routing of packets to 
  intercept them in a special device is a possible option), since the 
  intercept subject does not have access to the IP addresses or to 
  traceroute.  
   
  However, in the case of local services, this is a much more difficult 
  problem. The intercept for a call originating and terminating on-net 
  (i.e. a call that is voice over IP end-to-end) has to be intercepted 
  along its normal route in order to be undetectable. In addition, the 
  call-forwarding feature that is often provided as a local service 
  feature makes interception even more difficult: If call forwarding is 
  invoked, a call that was intended to terminate on the intercept 
  subject may be forwarded anywhere in the network resulting in the 
  media stream bypassing the original content IAP (since in voice over 
  IP, the media stream goes directly from end-to-end). Also, since call 
  forwarding can often be set up on a call-by-call basis, the location 
  of the content IAP will often not be known until the call is set up. 
     


 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 11] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

4.1.2. Local Voice Services 
   
  This sub-section will look at the specific case in which the 
  intercept subject under surveillance is being provided with a local 
  voice service by the same provider that also provides the network 
  access (e.g., controls the edge router or switch). This is an 
  important assumption, since in VoIP the entity providing call control 
  (e.g., SIP server) can be totally separate from the entity providing 
  network access (e.g., operates edge routers). 
   
  Suppose that a subscriber that subscribes to a local (e.g. 
  residential) voice service is a target for a lawfully authorized 
  surveillance. Part of the system providing these services is a 
  subscriber database that includes addressing information about the 
  subscriber as well information on what features are in effect (e.g. 
  call forwarding). Some call control entity (CCE) accesses that 
  database in order to provide local services. For example, if the 
  subject has call forwarding invoked, that fact (and where to forward 
  the call) is indicated in the subscriber database. A call arriving at 
  the CCE that "owns" that subscriber can then take the appropriate 
  action (e.g. forward the call). 
   
  The CCE that "owns" the target subscriber (which could be an H.323 
  gatekeeper, a SIP proxy or a Media Gateway Controller) is provisioned 
  with the intercept parameters (e.g. subject identification 
  information such as the telephone number and where to deliver the 
  IRI). The provisioning of this CCE could be through interface (b) in 
  Figure 1. The CCE in question is the IRI IAP and once provisioned, it 
  passes the IRI to the MD. In the scenario being discussed, the CCE 
  typically remains in the signaling path throughout the call, even in 
  the call-forwarding case. Part of the IRI it passes to the MD is the 
  media signaling information (i.e. SDP [14] or H.245 [13]), which 
  includes endpoint IP address and port information for the media 
  (content) streams. Armed with this media address information, the MD 
  can determine the content IAP (e.g. [8]) and make the request via 
  interface (c).  The request identifies the voice stream to be 
  intercepted based on information received in the call signaling 
  (i.e., IP addresses and UDP port numbers). 
   
  Note that the content IAP in the case of voice over IP could be an 
  edge router or a PSTN gateway (e.g. a call from the PSTN forwarded to 
  the PSTN). SIP, H.323, MGCP or H.248 call signaling protocols could 
  be used. However, the protocol (SNMPv3 [1]) used for interface (c), 
  is not dependent on the type of call signaling protocol used; nor is 
  the encapsulation format and transport protocol (interface "e"). The 
  same reference model (Figure 1) with the same interfaces can be used 
  for lawfully authorized surveillance, regardless of the signaling 
  protocol and regardless of the type of service being provided (Note: 
  even though a local voice service was used in this example, other 
  voice services could use the same model and interfaces). 
   
   


 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 12] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

4.2. Data Services 
 
  The same model (Figure 1) can also be used for data services. In this 
  case the IRI IAP could be a server that acts as registration, 
  authentication and authorization point for the data service (e.g. a 
  RADIUS server). If a potential IRI IAP does not have the available 
  interfaces (b) and (d), the MD may have to do a content tap on 
  registration signaling in order to obtain the IRI. 
   
  The IRI in the case of a data service could include: 
   
     * The time that the user registered or de-registered for the 
       service. 
     * Addressing information (i.e. given the user identity, what IP 
       address or other information is available that could be used in 
       interface (c) to do the content tap). 
   
  Once suitable addressing information is available in order to do 
  content tapping the MD can invoke the tap via interface (c). 
   
  Clearly the IRI interfaces (b, d, f) are different for data than they 
  are for voice services. However, the content IAP is typically the 
  same (an edge router). Interfaces (c, e, and g) may also be the same. 
   
5.0. Security Considerations 
 
  Given the sensitive nature of lawful intercept (LI) -- both from the 
  standpoint of the need to protect sensitive data, as well as conceal 
  the identities of the intercept subjects, the LI solution must 
  contain stringent security measures to combat threats such as 
  impersonation of MD's, privacy and confidentiality breaches, as well 
  as message forgery and replay attacks.  
   
  While this document doesn∆t discuss issues of physical security, 
  operating system, or application hardening within the principals of 
  the LI solution, they are clearly important. In particular, the MD 
  server must be considered a prime target for attacks.  
   
  In general, all interfaces MUST have the capability of providing 
  strong cryptographic authentication to establish the identity of the 
  principals, and MUST correlate the identity of the principal with the 
  action they are attempting to perform. All interfaces MUST perform 
  some sort of cryptographic message integrity checking such as, for 
  example, HMAC-MD5. Message integrity checking MUST also counter 
  replay attacks. Given privacy and confidentiality considerations, the 
  solution SHOULD allow the use of encryption. 
   
  Every usage of LI MUST be authorized and logged. 
   
  The content and IRI IAPs also MUST protect the identity of the 
  intercept subject and the existence of an intercept. 
   


 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 13] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

5.1. Content Request Interface (c) - SNMPv3 Control 
   
  Native SNMPv3 security module mechanism MUST be used. The additional 
  requirement is that the IAP MUST support the ability to protect the 
  TAP MIB's [1] from disclosure or control by unauthorized USM [6] 
  users. VACM [7] provides the necessary tools to limit the views to 
  particular USM users, but there are also special considerations: 
   
     * There SHOULD NOT be any access to the appropriate TAP MIB's by 
       anything other than SNMPv3 USM users which have keys established 
       and the proper VACM views defined. 
   
     * The TAP MIB SHOULD be segregated such that only operators of 
       sufficient privilege level can create VACM views that include 
       the TAP MIB [1]. 
 
6.0. References 
 
     [1]  F. Baker, Cisco Lawful Intercept Control MIB, draft-baker-
       slem-mib-00, (work in progress) 
     [2]  PacketCable(TM) Electronic Surveillance Specification, PKT-
       SP-ESP-I01-991229, http://www.packetcable.com/specifications/ 
     [3]  PacketCable(TM) Event Messages Specification, PKT-SP-EM-I06-
       030415, http://www.packetcable.com/specifications/  
     [4]  PacketCable (TM) Dynamic Quality-of-Service Specification, 
       PKT-SP-DQOS-I06-030415, 
       http://www.packetcable.com/specifications/  
     [5]  PacketCable(TM) PSTN Gateway Call Signaling Protocol 
       Specification, PKT-SP-TGCP-I04-021127, 
       http://www.packetcable.com/specifications/  
     [6]  Blumenthal, U. and B. Wijnen, User-based Security Model(USM) 
       for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol 
       (SNMPv3), STD 62, RFC3414, December 2002. 
     [7]  B. Wijnen, et al, View-based Access Control Model (VACM) for 
       the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), STD62, RFC3415 
       December 2002 
     [8]  E. Warnicke, DNS Resolution of Networks and Gateways, IETF 
       Draft draft-warnicke-network-dns-resolution-01.txt (work in 
       progress) 
     [9]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
       Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, SIP:  
       Session Initiation Protocol, RFC3261, June 2002. 
     [10] F. Andreasen, B. Foster, Media Gateway Control Protocol 
       (MGCP) Version 1.0, RFC3435, January 2003 

 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 14] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

     [11] ITU-T Recommendation H.248.1, Gateway Control Protocol: 
       Version 2, May 2002 
     [12] ITU-T Recommendation H.323, Packet-based Multimedia 
       Communications Systems, November 2000 
     [13] ITU-T Recommendation H.245, Control Protocol for Multimedia 
       Communications, February 2003 
     [14] M. Handley, V, Jacobson, SDP: Session Description Protocol, 
       RFC2327 April 1998 
     [15] J. Rey, D. Leon, A. Miyazaki, V. Varsa, R. Hakenber, RTP 
       Retransmission Payload Format, draft-ietf-avt-rtp-
       retransmission-07.txt (work in progress) 
     [16] ETSI TS 101 331, Telecommunications security; Lawful 
       Interception (LI); Requirements of law enforcement agencies. 
     [17] ETSI TS 33.108 v1.0.0, 3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
       Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 3G 
       Security; Handover Interface for Lawful Interception. 
   
7.0. Acronyms 
 
CCE            Call Control Entity 
CMTS           Cable Modem Termination System 
CPE            Customer Premises Equipment 
ETSI           European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
GPRS           Generalized Packet Radio Service 
HMAC-MD5       Hash-based Message Authentication Code -                                                      -  
               Message Digest 5 
IAP            Intercept Access Point 
IETF           Internet Engineering Task Force 
IRI            Intercept Related Information 
ITU-T          International Telecommunications Union -                                                      -  
               Telecommunications Sector 
LEA            Law Enforcement Agency 
LI             Lawful Intercept 
MGCP           Media Gateway Control Protocol 
MD             Mediation Device 
MIB            Management Information Base 
NACK           Negative Acknowledgement 
PSTN           Public Switched Telecommunications Network 
RFC            Request for Comment 
RTP            Real-time Transport Protocol 
SDP            Session Description Protocol 
SIP            Session Initiation Protocol 
SSRC           Synchronization Source 
TDM            Time Division Protocol 
UDP            User Datagram Protocol 
USM            User Service Model 
VACM           View-based Access Control Model 
VoIP           Voice over IP 

 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 15] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

 
 
8.0. Authors' Addresses 
 
    
     Fred Baker 
     Cisco Systems 
     1121 Via Del Rey 
     Santa Barbara, CA  93117 
     US 
   
     Phone: +1-408-526-4257 
     Fax:   +1-413-473-2403 
     EMail: fred@cisco.com 
 
     Bill Foster 
     Cisco Systems 
     Email: bfoster@cisco.com 
   
     Chip Sharp 
     Cisco Systems 
     Email: chsharp@cisco.com 
































 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 16] 

                   Architecture for Lawful Intercept          June 2003 

  9.0. Full Copyright Statement 
 
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
   
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 
   
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
   
  Acknowledgement 
   
  Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
  Internet Society. 
 
   
 



















 
Baker et al                  Informational                    [Page 17] 
