
Network Working Group                                     D.Pinkas(Bull)
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 July 2005
Expires January 2006
Target Category: not intended to be published as an RFC






               Conforming CRL validation for relying parties
               <draft-pinkas-pkix-conf-crl-validation-01.txt>





Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   This document may only be posted in an Internet-Draft.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Abstract

   The text currently present in section 6.3 from RFC 3280 is dedicated
   to CRL validation. This text needs to be more detailed to explain 
   exactly how it can made be sure that a CRL is issued by the right 
   entity.  In addition, a text dedicated to the characteristics that
   conforming applications MUST support needs to be provided: the 
   current text covers the most complex case and is too complicated to 
   be easily simplified.  Text is proposed to be included in 3280 bis 
   and to partially replace section 6.3 .


Pinkas                                                         [Page 1]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005



1. Introduction

   Section 6.3 from RFC 3280 [1] covers many features that are not 
   required to be supported by conforming relying party applications.

   According to section 5, conforming applications are NOT REQUIRED to 
   support processing of delta CRLs, or CRLs with a scope other than 
   all certificates issued by one CA. 

   According to section 5.2.5, conforming implementations are NOT 
   REQUIRED to support the CRL Issuer Distribution Point extension 
   (IDP) that MAY be present in a CRL.

   According to section 4.2.1.14, this profile RECOMMENDS to support 
   the CRL distribution points extension.  So the two cases where this 
   extension is present and not present need to be covered.

   Its also currently unclear to know which key shall be used to verify 
   a CRL and how it can be made sure that this key is the right one.

   The current text which covers the most complicated case should be 
   reviewed and aligned with the proposed text since it contains many 
   points to be fixed (e.g. incorrect initial variables, insufficient 
   output variables, insufficient tests, etc ...).

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document (in uppercase,
   as shown) are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [STDWORDS]


2. Scope

   The text below is a proposal to clarify the above issues.  The 
   section numbering of RFC 3280 has been kept below.  The next 
   section of this document (i.e. Security considerations )is numbered 
   section 3.

The proposed text is as follows:


 6.3  CRL Validation

   This section describes the steps necessary to determine if a
   certificate is not revoked, revoked, or revoked with an on hold 
   status when CRLs are the revocation mechanism used by the 
   certificate issuer.  

   Conforming applications are NOT REQUIRED to support processing of 
   delta CRLs, or CRLs with a scope other than all certificates issued 
   by one CA. 



Pinkas                                                         [Page 2]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005


   According to section 5.2.5, conforming implementations are NOT 
   REQUIRED to support the Issuer Distribution Point extension (IDP) 
   that MAY be present in a CRL.

   According to section 4.2.1.14, this profile RECOMMENDS to support 
   the CRL distribution points extension.  So the two cases where this 
   extension is present and not present are covered.

   Conforming implementations that support CRLs are not required to 
   implement this algorithm, but they MUST be functionally equivalent 
   to the external behavior resulting from this procedure.  Any 
   algorithm may be used by a particular implementation so long as it 
   derives the same result.

   This algorithm assumes that a certification path has already been 
   constructed and that it is only needed to verify that none of the 
   certificates from that revocation path is revoked.

   In order to simplify the description, the algorithm focuses on 
   the last certificate from the certification path, called the target 
   certificate, but the same checks MUST be done on every certificate 
   from the certification path.

   This algorithm assumes that all of the available CRLs are 
   accessible in a local cache, whether or not CRL DP extensions have 
   been used to fetch them.  Further, if the next update time of a CRL 
   has passed, the algorithm assumes that a mechanism to fetch a 
   current available CRL, if any is available , and place it in the 
   local CRL cache is existing.

   This algorithm defines a set of inputs, a set of state variables, and
   processing steps that are performed for each certificate in the path.

   The algorithm output is the revocation status of the certificate and,
   if indicated, the revocation reason.

   In order to simplify the description of the algorithm, the 
   description is first limited to the case of conforming applications.
   These applications do NOT need to support processing of delta CRLs, 
   indirect CRLs, or CRLs with a scope other than all certificates 
   issued by one CA, nor to support the processing of the Issuer 
   Distribution Point extension (IDP) from CRLs.

6.3.1  Revocation Inputs

   To support revocation processing, the algorithm requires two inputs:

      (a) the target certificate.  The basicConstraints extension is 
      used to determine whether the supplied certificate is associated 
      with a CA or an end entity.




Pinkas                                                         [Page 3]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005



      Note that implementations supporting legacy PKIs, such as RFC 
      1422 and X.509 version 1, will need an additional input 
      indicating whether the supplied certificate is associated with 
      a CA or an end entity.

      (b) certificates from the certification path: all the 
      certificates from the certification path to be validated MUST 
      be known.


6.3.2  Initialization and Revocation State Variables

   To support CRL processing, the algorithm requires the following two 
   state variables:

      (a)  cert_revoc_status:  This variable contains the revocation 
      status of the certificate.  This variable may be assigned one of 
      the following three values: REVOKED, NOT_REVOKED or UNKNOWN.
      This variable is initialized to UNKNOWN.

      (b)  revoc_reason:  This variable contains the revocation reason. 
      This variable is initialized to an empty value.


6.3.3  CRL Processing

   This algorithm begins by assuming that the revocation status of the 
   target certificate is UNKNOWN.  The algorithm checks one or 
   more CRLs until either the certificate revocation status is 
   determined, if possible, to be REVOKED or NOT_REVOKED.

6.3.3.1  CRL Processing start for all applications

   It is first necessary to select a candidate CRL and then verify 
   that this CRL is adequate for the target certificate.

   The candidate CRL MUST first be selected in the following way:

      (a) If the target certificate does not include a CRL DP 
          extension, then the candidate CRL MUST have the following 
          properties:

          (1)  The issuer field from the CRL MUST be identical to the 
               issuer field from the target certificate.

          (2)  The signature from the CRL MUST be verified using an 
               issuing key from the CA that has issued the target 
               certificate.





Pinkas                                                         [Page 4]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005

               NOTE:  This key may be the same key as the key used to 
               issue the target certificate, but it may be a different 
               key.  In the later case, the same sequence of CA DNs, 
               up to the same trust anchor, MUST be used.

          (3)  The thisUpdate field from the CRL MUST be both greater 
               than the notBefore field from the validity field of the 
               target certificate and smaller than the notAfter field 
               from the validity field of the target certificate. If 
               several CRLs in the local cache satisfy these conditions, 
               then the CRL that has the thisUpdate field closest to the 
               current time SHALL be chosen.

      (b) If the target certificate includes a CRL DP extension with 
          the cRLIssuer field present, then the candidate CRL MUST 
          have the following properties:

          (1)  The issuer field from the CRL MUST be identical to one 
               of the values contained the cRLIssuer field from CRL DP 
               extension of the target certificate.

          (2)  A CRL Issuer certificate issued by the same CA that has 
               issued the target certificate MUST be found.  That 
               certificate MUST have the cRLSign bit set, and MUST 
               include in its subject field the same DN as the one 
               of the DNs present in the crLIssuer field and MUST be 
               within its validity period.

               NOTE:  The key used to sign the CRL Issuer certificate 
               may be the same key as the key used to issue the target 
               certificate, but it may be a different key.  In the 
               later case, the same sequence of CA DNs, up to the same 
               trust anchor, MUST be used.

          (3)  The signature from the CRL MUST be verified using the 
               key found in the subjectPublicKeyInfo field from the 
               CRL Issuer certificate.

          (4)  The thisUpdate field from the CRL MUST be both greater 
               than the notBefore field from the validity field of the 
               target certificate and smaller than the notAfter field 
               from the validity field of the target certificate. If 
               several CRLs in the local cache satisfy these conditions, 
               then the CRL that has the thisUpdate field closest to the 
               current time SHALL be chosen.

   If no CRL has the above properties, then the variables keep their 
   initial values and the algorithm terminates.

6.3.3.2  CRL Processing for conforming applications

   If one CRL with the above properties may be found, then look for 
   a CRL entry where the userCertificate field matches the certificate 
   serial number of the target certificate :

Pinkas                                                         [Page 5]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005

          (a)  if such an entry is found, then make sure that this CRL 
               entry does not include a CRL entry extension that is 
               critical and not recognized and then set the 
               cert_revoc_status variable to REVOKED. In that 
               case, if the CRL entry extension " reasonCode " is 
               present in that CRL entry, then set the revoc_reason 
               variable to the value contained in that CRL entry 
               extension and the algorithm terminates.

               NOTE: if that CRL entry includes a CRL entry extension 
               that is critical and not recognized, then the CRL SHALL 
               be discarded, the variables keep their initial values
               and the algorithm terminates.

          (b)  if such an entry cannot be found, then check if the 
               nextUpdate field is less than the current time and, 
               if this is the case, then set the cert_revoc_status 
               variable to UNKNOWN and the algorithm terminates; 
               otherwise set the cert_revoc_status variable to 
               NOT_REVOKED and the algorithm terminates.

6.3.3.3. CRL Processing for applications supporting Certificate 
         Issuer CRL entry extensions

   Conforming applications are NOT REQUIRED to support the issuing 
   distribution point extension (IDP) which is a critical CRL extension. 

   As a consequence they are NOT REQUIRED to support the indirectCRL 
   boolean from the IDP extension that indicates that the scope of the 
   CRL includes certificates issued by more than one authority.

   However, the following applies when the IDP extension is present 
   and the indirectCRL boolean is set to TRUE. 

   If one CRL with the properties from section 6.3.3.1 has been found, 
   then the following applies :

          Look for a CRL entry where the userCertificate field matches 
          the certificate serial number of the target certificate.

          (a)  If such an entry cannot be found, then check if the 
               nextUpdate field is less than the current time and, 
               if this is the case, then set the cert_revoc_status 
               variable to UNKNOWN and the algorithm terminates; 
               otherwise set the cert_revoc_status variable to 
               NOT_REVOKED and the algorithm terminates.

          (b)  If such an entry can be found, then check if the entry 
               contains a Certificate Issuer CRL entry extension. 

               (1) If it does, then check if its content matches the 
                   content of the issuer field of the target certificate.



Pinkas                                                         [Page 6]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005

                     - If it does, then :

                       (i) set the cert_revoc_status variable to 
                           REVOKED and if the CRL entry extension 
                           " reasonCode " is present in that CRL entry, 
                           then set the revoc_reason variable to the 
                           value contained in that CRL entry extension 
                           and the algorithm terminates.

                     - If it does not, then :

                      (ii) check if there exists a previous CRL entry 
                           and if that CRL entry contains a Certificate 
                           Issuer CRL entry extension and go back to (1). 

                           If there is no previous CRL entry, then 
                           check if the name of the issuer of the CRL 
                           matches the name of the issuer field of the 
                           target certificate.

                           - If it does, then set the cert_revoc_status 
                             variable to REVOKED and if the CRL entry 
                             extension " reasonCode " is present in 
                             that CRL entry, then set the revoc_reason 
                             variable to the value contained in that CRL 
                             entry extension and the algorithm 
                             terminates.

                           - If it does, then set the cert_revoc_status 
                             variable to NOT_REVOKED and the algorithm 
                             terminates.

               (2) If it does not, then proceed with (ii).

6.3.3.4. CRL Processing for applications supporting delta CRLs

   Conforming applications are NOT REQUIRED to support delta CRLs.
   However, for applications supporting delta CRLs, as well as the 
   previous features, the following applies:

   [Text to be provided, e.g. by David Cooper]



3 Security considerations

1. A CA is free to allocate the DN of an entity as it wishes. Therefor 
   name collision may happen: the same DN, as assigned by two different 
   CAs, may designate two different entities.  Name collision between 
   CA names is a particular concern and the proposal takes care of 
   such a issue, if an additional requirement that applies to CRL 
   Issuers issuing indirect CRLs (and which is currently not present) 
   in RFC 3280 is added.


Pinkas                                                         [Page 7]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005


   A CRL Issuer is delegated the responsibility to generate and 
   publish the revocation status information for the certificates 
   issued by a CA by accepting this duty and by receiving a CRL Issuer 
   certificate from the CA that delegated that responsibility.  The CRL 
   Issuer name will be assigned by the CA and name collision between 
   CRL Issuer names is not an issue.

   However, a CRL Issuer shall not accept this duty, if it already 
   agreed to perform that task for another CA that has the same DN.

   This avoids the possible confusion between CA names that may be 
   contained in the Certificate Issuer CRL entry extension from an 
   indirect CRL.

2. RFC 3280 is dedicated to the case where CRL Issuer receives the 
   delegation to generate and issue certificate revocation information 
   from CAs.

   The OCSP model recognizes another case, where the relying party is 
   directly trusting a given OCSP responder independently of what CAs 
   are saying.

   In the same way, a model where an entity is directly trusted by 
   some relying parties, for some kind of certificates, to issue CRLs 
   for some CAs, could exist, but that model is not supported nor 
   described in RFC 3280. 

   In such an hypothetical case, the current CRL structure of an 
   indirect CRL might be used, provided that additional local trust 
   conditions are defined in a validation policy.  Such definitions 
   are outside the scope of RFC 3280.


4. IANA Considerations

   Not applicable


5. References

5.1 Normative references

   [1]    IETF RFC 3280 (2002): "Internet X.509 Public Key 
          Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List 
          (CRL) Profile".

   [STDWORDS] IETF RFC 2119 Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
              Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2

5.2 Informative references

          None.


Pinkas                                                         [Page 8]
INTERNET DRAFT                  CRL Validation                July 2005


6. Authors' address

      Denis Pinkas
      Bull S.A. 
      Rue Jean-Jaures 
      78340 Les Clayes sous Bois CEDEX
      FRANCE

      EMail: Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

Disclaimer

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   An "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
    PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.


Pinkas                                                         [Page 9]
