
 
   PKIX Working Group 
   Internet Draft                                              Ed Gerck
   Document: draft-gerck-pkix-revocation-00.txt                NMA, Inc.
   Expires: November 2004                                      May 2004
    
                     Certificate Revocation Revisited 
                 Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
    
Status of this Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
Abstract 
    
   PKIX certificate revocation protocols are primarily described in 
   RFC3280. This Document revisits limitations on determining the 
   revocation status of a certificate.  Ambiguous aspects of revocation 
   and revocation delegation are resolved.  An objective point of view 
   is introduced as a reference that does not depend on the observer 
   (e.g., the RP).  The revocation status of a certificate issued by a 
   conforming CA is shown to be always well-defined from a relying 
   party's point of view -- i.e., it is unambiguous (revoked or not 
   revoked) and ultimately determinable at any period in time. The 
   limitations on determining the revocation status of a certificate 
   have nothing to do with the eventual result of the determination 
   process by a relying party. The limitations have to do with the 
   efforts for that determination, which may require a large (actually 
   unspecified) amount of time and work. Some practices are also 
   suggested, allowing a relying party to determine the revocation 
   status of a certificate with higher reliability in less time. The 
   same considerations apply to determinations of status "change" 
   processes, including certificateHold and removefromCRL. 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 1] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   In this document, a relying party (RP) is a user who processes a 
   certificate chain, and then acts in reliance on the end-entity (EE) 
   certificate issued by a CA (the issuer CA) and any associated 
   revocation information.  "Trust" is defined in [Ger98]. The 
   "objective point of view" is defined as a coincident view that any RP 
   can see in a given time period when not constrained by access, amount 
   of work and processing time. The "RP point of view" is defined as a 
   view that a particular RP can see in a given time period, which is 
   constrained by several factors including access, amount of work and 
   processing time. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
    
   1. Overview.......................................................3 
   2. Relying Party, RP Reliance and Reliance Limitations............5 
   3. Revocation Revisited...........................................6 
      3.1 Objective Point Of View....................................7 
      3.2 RP Point Of View...........................................8 
      3.3 RP Reliance Limitations....................................9 
      3.4 Revocation vs. Validity....................................9 
      3.5 Reliance vs. Use..........................................10 
      3.6 When is a Certificate Revoked?............................10 
      3.7 Conclusion................................................10 
   4. Revocation Conditions and Improvements........................11 
      4.1 Summary of Revocation Conditions..........................11 
      4.2 Available Revocation of Delegation........................11 
      4.3 Limitations of Indirect CRLs..............................12 
      4.4 Limitations of Revocation Status Services.................12 
      4.5 Limitations of Revocation Status Processing...............13 
      4.6 Increasing Reliability....................................13 
      4.7 Can A Certificate Be Valid When Revoked?..................14 
      4.8 Alternative Authoritative Revocation Mechanisms...........14 
      4.9 Validation Services.......................................14 
      4.10 New Environments.........................................15 
   Security Considerations..........................................15 
   References.......................................................15 
   Acknowledgments..................................................16 
   Author's Addresses...............................................16 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................16 
    

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 2] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
1. Overview 
    
   This Document revisits the limitations of RP reliance on the 
   revocation status of a X.509/PKIX certificate. This Document also 
   points out the conditions on those limitations with a view to 
   reducing their effect in current and future implementations, allowing 
   a relying party to determine the revocation status of a certificate 
   with higher reliability in less time.  
    
   The same considerations apply to determinations of status "change" 
   processes, including certificateHold and removefromCRL. 
    
   PKIX certificate revocation protocols are primarily described in 
   RFC3280, involving the conditions for designating a certificate as 
   revoked as well as the conditions that enable a user to actually 
   determine the revocation status of a certificate. The PKIX 
   standardization effort aimed to safely automate the process of RP 
   reliance. This goal required the PKIX certificate path processing 
   algorithm to eliminate any violations of those policies (i.e., 
   vulnerabilities) that might be hard to recognize or difficult to 
   foresee, which would interfere with the goal of specifying a wholly 
   automated process of handling certificates.  
    
   For a particular certificate, revocation can be delegated to entities 
   other than the issuer of the certificate. Similarly, parties other 
   than the issuer, including the delegate responsible for revocation, 
   can perform publication of revocation information. This means that an 
   RP verifying the certificate's revocation status (e.g., using 
   mechanisms such as querying a repository or receiving notices 
   delivered via a message service) will depend on the administration 
   and management of that status by one or more authoritative entities. 
   In addition, different RPs may or may not have access to one or more 
   of the authoritative repositories and/or authoritative message 
   notification services. 
    
   Also, each one of the repositories and notification services may 
   possibly have different values and different delay properties 
   concerning communication of revocation status for the same 
   certificate, at any given time. Therefore, the revocation status of a 
   particular certificate may appear to be revoked, non-revoked and 
   undefined, all at the same time, for different RPs.  
    
   Similar issues have been recognized and addressed in distributed 
   transaction coordination protocols, such as file-locking in a multi-
   user environment, and these techniques are also useful for the 
   reliance problem at hand.  
    
   This document revisits and resolves the ambiguities besetting 
   certificate revocation in PKIX, answering the following questions: 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 3] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
    
   1. What are the conditions for a certificate's revocation status to 
      be true?  
    
   2. Can a certificate be, at the same time, revoked and not revoked? 
 
   3. Can a revocation status service ever correctly indicate a given 
      certificate to be revoked when its revocation conditions are 
      false? 
 
   4. Can a revocation status service ever correctly indicate non-
      revocation status for a given certificate when its revocation 
      conditions are true? 
 
   5. When is a certificate revoked? 
 
   6. What are the limitations for an RP relying on the revocation 
      status of a certificate? 
 
   7. Can current limitations for RP reliance on revocation information 
      be reduced? 
    
   This Document also calls attention to the distinction between 
   "revocation conditions" and "revocation status". Revocation status is 
   a binary value (revoked or not revoked) that depends on time and the 
   revocation conditions. The revocation conditions are the logical 
   conditions for defining the revocation status. Revocation conditions 
   are normally defined for the life of the certificate, when the 
   certificate is issued; however, they may also be authoritatively 
   redefined from time to time. For example, to better address the needs 
   of RPs. 
    
   The revocation status of a certificate is not enough to define the 
   validity of that certificate from a particular RP's point of view. 
   Certificate validity is a function of a number of additional 
   parameters, including the certificate path that the RP trusts to 
   validate the certificate, the access to revocation status information 
   available to the RP, the local policy used by the RP, and the PKI 
   application that motivates the RP to employ certificates. The 
   validity of a certificate refers to conditions that are 
   authoritatively defined locally.  
    
   The distinction between "revocation" and "validation" has been 
   somewhat blurred in the documentation and practice. The distinction 
   is, however, necessary to preserve both the control needs for PKI, 
   requiring centralized conditions of revocation that are 
   authoritatively defined by the issuer CA, and those business and user 
   needs, requiring local authoritative definition of validation.  
    
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 4] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   RP reliance is discussed as a technical term. The concept of RP 
   reliance is needed in PKIX/X.509 because not every aspect of 
   certificate management can be fully verified by an RP. For example, 
   an RP does not rely on the CA for certificate path processing but may 
   rely on the CA for ensuring that the CA's signing key is properly 
   secure and not compromised. The latter cannot be verified by the RP 
   and becomes, thus, a limitation for reliance. 
    
   Another important distinction is between "reliance" and "use". PKIX 
   defines certificate reliance by an RP in terms of its issuance and 
   revocation conditions as determined by the issuer CA. This may 
   include how, where and when the revocation status is provided for a 
   certificate. However, there is no violation of PKIX if a user 
   (otherwise known as an RP) decides to be on its own and simply "uses" 
   the certificate and its information, ignoring one or even all the 
   limitations for reliance defined in PKIX and by an authority. A user 
   can also use any source it desires for the revocation status of a 
   certificate, including none at all. 
     
   Notwithstanding all the above limitations, the conclusion of this 
   Document is that the revocation status of a certificate issued by a 
   conforming CA is always well-defined from the issuer's, the issuer's 
   delegates and any RP's point of view -- i.e., it is objectively 
   unambiguous (revoked or not revoked) and ultimately determinable at 
   any period in time by any entity. 
    
   The above limitations on determining the revocation status of a 
   certificate have nothing to do with the eventual result of the 
   determination process. The limitations have to do with the effort an 
   RP must expend to make that determination, which may require a large 
   (actually unspecified) amount of time and work. Depending on the 
   users' reliance obligations, furthermore, Human intervention may also 
   be necessary to augment automated path processing in those situations 
   when complete elimination of Human oversight might cause foreseeable 
   policy violations. For example, for the purpose of a user reading a 
   timely message subject to a legal policy requiring it to be read upon 
   receipt, a user may override waiting for the automated path 
   processing result. 
    
   In addition, some practices are suggested for publishing and 
   verifying revocation information, allowing an RP to verify the 
   revocation status of a certificate with greater reliability in less 
   time. 
    
2. Relying Party, RP Reliance and Reliance Limitations 
 
   A relying party (RP) is a user who processes a certificate chain, and 
   then acts in reliance on the end-entity (EE) certificate issued by a 
   CA (the issuer CA) and any associated revocation information. 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 5] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
    
   RP reliance is a technical term in PKIX. The concept of RP reliance 
   is needed in PKIX/X.509 because not every aspect of certificate 
   management can be fully verified by an RP.  
    
   For example, a user verifying a certificate's revocation status 
   (e.g., using mechanisms such as querying a repository or receiving 
   notices delivered via a message service) will depend on the 
   conforming administration and management of that status by one or 
   more authoritative entities -- i.e., the user becomes a relying party 
   to these entities.  
    
   More generally, a user who depends on values provided by an entity 
   (e.g., CA) that seem reasonable on their face value to the user but 
   are especially hard to check by the user is an RP to that entity. 
    
   What does the RP rely on? The RP relies on entities (e.g., the CA) 
   following PKIX recommendations that the RP CANNOT verify. For 
   example, an RP does not rely on the CA for certificate path 
   processing (because the RP CAN verify it) but may rely on the CA for 
   ensuring that the CA's signing key is properly secure and not 
   compromised. The latter cannot be verified by the RP and becomes, 
   thus, a limitation for reliance. 
    
   RP reliance limitations are objectively defined in PKIX, without 
   reference to domain policies, user security policy, jurisdiction-
   based rules of laws and contracts or anything else that needs to be 
   locally defined. 
    
   As a literal value, RP reliance on the revocation status of a 
   certificate is defined by a conforming certificate path procedure 
   leading to a bit value -- "revoked" or "not revoked". The literal bit 
   value depends both on processes that the RP CAN verify and processes 
   that the RP CANNOT verify. The latter defines the limitations of RP 
   reliance. The lesser the limitations of RP reliance, the lesser the 
   risk faced by the RP that RP reliance might be broken by factors 
   outside RP control. 
    
   The literal bit value has no associated semantics outside the scope 
   of PKIX. In other words, RP reliance is syntactic, not semantic. Any 
   semantic value (e.g., legal reliance, contractual obligations 
   concerning use, public policy, etc.) MUST lie outside the scope of 
   PKIX and is, for example, regulated by terms in the CA's CPS. 
    
3. Revocation Revisited 
    
   Certificate revocation, involving the conditions for certificate 
   revocation as well as the actual value of the revocation status for a 
   certificate, has been defined in the PKIX specification with the 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 6] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   requirement that a certificate path processing could be securely 
   mechanized in support of RP reliance. 
    
   Because a particular certificate may be used by different RPs at 
   different times, it is desirable that all RPs have the same view of 
   the revocation status of the certificate at a given time. Otherwise, 
   the information that the certificate is not revoked at a given time 
   cannot be relied on by an RP, or represented to another RP, at a 
   later time. 
    
   In other words, while the PKIX notion of RP reliance defines a value 
   that is determined subjectively (i.e., the revocation status of a 
   certificate from the RP's point of view) at a point in time, the 
   application PKI requires the RP to use such value as an objective 
   representation of the revocation status when communicating with other 
   entities at a later point in time. 
    
   A clear definition of the revocation status of a certificate from an 
   objective point of view is necessary, therefore, to eliminate the 
   ambiguity as to what that status might be for different RPs and 
   entities. Central to this requirement is the determination when the 
   certificate was revoked, also expressed in terms that an RP can use 
   in communication with other entities. 
    
2.13.1 Objective Point Of View 
    
   The "objective point of view" is defined as a coincident view that 
   any RP can see in a given time period when not constrained by access, 
   amount of work and processing time. This point of view is called 
   objective because it does not depend on the observer (e.g., the RP). 
    
   What matters to the objective point of view is the revocation status 
   of a certificate, be this represented in a repository or as a status 
   message, and whether it has been published by some means reasonably 
   available to any RP.  
    
   3.1.1 Does the objective point of view exist for PKIX certificates? 
    
   Yes. In X.509/PKIX each certificate is unique and there is only one 
   issuer CA for a given certificate. Only the issuer CA of a 
   certificate is authoritative for revocation conditions of the 
   certificate. Therefore, the issuer CA can define conditions leading 
   to an objective view (i.e., a coincident view that any RP can see in 
   a given time period when RPs are not constrained by practical limits 
   such as access, amount of work and processing time) of the revocation 
   status of a certificate. 
    
   3.1.2 What are the conditions for a certificate's revocation status 
   to be true from the objective point of view? 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 7] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
    
   If a certificate is listed as revoked by means of one of those 
   mechanisms identified by the issuer CA in a conforming certificate 
   extension (e.g., a CRL signed by the CA, an indirect CRL signed by 
   the CRL issuer, an OCSP status, an HTTP CRL list), OR if any other 
   revocation condition defined by the issuer CA applies (e.g., a root 
   certificate is compromised), the certificate is revoked. Otherwise, 
   the certificate is not revoked. 
    
   3.1.3 Can a certificate be, at the same time, revoked and not revoked 
   from the objective point of view? 
    
   No. Because the revocation status of a certificate refers to 
   conditions that a conforming issuer CA authoritatively and 
   unambiguously defines for each certificate, a certificate is either 
   revoked or not from the objective point of view.  
    
   3.1.4 Is the revocation status of a certificate ambiguous, for 
   different RPs? 
    
   No. When not limited by access, amount of work and time, any RP sees 
   the same value for the revocation status of a certificate at any 
   period in time.  
    
2.23.2 RP Point Of View 
    
   From a particular RP's point of view, there are several limitations 
   on determining the revocation status of a certificate at any given 
   period in time. Generally, the RP's point of view is limited by 
   access, amount of work and processing time, which are locally defined 
   and may be different for each RP. 
    
   For example, if an RP does not support any of the mechanisms defined 
   by the issuer CA to verify the revocation status, or times out during 
   such verification, or cannot find a path to verify the authenticity 
   of messages used in certificate status protocols, then the revocation 
   status is undefined for that RP. According to RFC3280, this can 
   happen even for a conforming CA and conforming RP software. For 
   example, conforming CAs are not required to issue CRLs if other 
   revocation or certificate status mechanisms are provided. This fails 
   to interoperate with conforming applications, that are NOT REQUIRED 
   to support processing of delta CRLs, indirect CRLs, or CRLs with a 
   scope other than all certificates issued by one CA. Furthermore, 
   since no CA MUST offer even one of the standardized mechanisms, 
   conforming applications may be left groping in the dark for 
   revocation information. 
    
   Also, since there may be more than one scheme used to determine the 
   revocation status of the same certificate, the occurrence of race 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 8] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   conditions, differently available paths (even within the same 
   scheme), and the conditions affecting the revocation status of the 
   parent certificates can lead to ambiguous results for different RPs. 
   Therefore, different RPs may arrive at a different "view" of the 
   revocation status of a EE, CA or cross certificate at a particular 
   time. 
    
2.33.3 RP Reliance Limitations 
    
   What are the limitations for an RP relying on the revocation status 
   of a certificate? 
    
   An RP relying on the revocation status of a certificate, determined 
   by any mechanism (i.e., whose reliance is authorized or not by the 
   issuer CA of the certificate), is nonetheless limited by the 
   revocation conditions defined by the issuer CA. Those conditions may 
   change from time to time. Some mechanisms may not include direct 
   evidence of the issuer CA's assertion of a certificate's revocation 
   status or conditions, at a particular time. 
    
2.43.4 Revocation vs. Validity 
    
   Another important distinction concerns the processes of "revocation" 
   and "validation". Revocation and validation should be understood as 
   distinct technical terms -- revocation has to do with the issuer's 
   actions (or the actions of an issuer's delegate) while validation has 
   to do with a relying party's actions. 
    
   This distinction reflects the needs of the issuer (who seeks to 
   control RP reliance limitations in order to impose uniform conditions 
   of revocation and hence RP reliance) and the concurrent needs of each 
   domain of business and individual users (whose reliance obligations 
   require them to comply with their own domain's local, and possibly 
   conflicting to other domains', authoritative definition of 
   certificate validity).  
    
   Clearly, revocation could not be well-defined if it were defined to 
   be, at the same time, centralized and local. Introducing the 
   validation concept provides the richer conceptual framework that 
   addresses the presumed antagonistic needs of the issuer and the user, 
   in the handling of RP reliance. 
    
   There are also those cases in which user communities (i.e., domains) 
   may choose to adopt one or other validation model based on some 
   prevailing operational rationale. The flexibility of having both a 
   centralized control over the conditions of revocation while 
   supporting localized validation is an important feature of 
   X.509/PKIX.  
    
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004                [Page 9] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
2.53.5 Reliance vs. Use 
    
   Another important distinction is between "reliance" and "use". The 
   PKIX standards define the limitations for certificate reliance by an 
   RP in terms of a certificate user complying with the issuance and 
   revocation conditions for a certificate. Furthermore, PKIX requires 
   that compliance must occur through execution of the standardized 
   certificate path processing algorithm. However, there is no act of 
   non-compliance if an RP simply decides to act independently of the 
   authority, with a "use" of the certificate, rather than a "reliance 
   upon" the certificate, its revocation conditions and its revocation 
   status.  When merely "using" a certificate in this sense, the user 
   will normally be ignoring any or all the compliance requirements 
   defined in PKIX and/or the authority, when processing a chain of 
   certificates and using an EE certificate issued by a CA. 
    
2.63.6 When is a Certificate Revoked? 
    
   Here we ask the critical question: When is a certificate revoked? The 
   answer is: when the corresponding revocation status is published by 
   means of one of those mechanisms identified by the issuer CA in a 
   conforming certificate extension, OR when any other revocation 
   condition defined by the issuer CA applies. It does not matter when a 
   particular RP is able to verify that status, or what mechanisms an RP 
   can use for such purpose. Nor does it depend on the ultimate purpose 
   of reliance, or the actual secondary use made of reliance during 
   private communications between the RP and others after the reliance 
   determination has been made. The revocation status of a certificate 
   issued by a conforming CA does not depend on an RP and is always 
   well-defined from an RP's point of view -- i.e., it is unambiguous 
   (revoked or not revoked) and ultimately verifiable by the RP at any 
   period in time. 
    
2.73.7 Conclusion 
    
   From an objective point of view, valid for all RPs relying on a 
   particular certificate, a PKIX certificate is either revoked or not 
   revoked at any period in time. 
    
   From a particular RP's point of view, the limitations on determining 
   the revocation status of a certificate have nothing to do with the 
   eventual result of that determination, which is always well-defined -
   - i.e., it is unambiguous (revoked or not revoked) and ultimately 
   determinable by the RP at any period in time. The limitations have to 
   do with the efforts for that determination, which may require a large 
   (actually, unspecified) amount of time and work. Human intervention 
   may also be necessary.   
    

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 10] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   The same considerations apply to determinations of status "change" 
   processes, including certificateHold and removefromCRL . 
    
3.4. Revocation Conditions and Improvements 
 
   This section expands and points out the conditions on some of the 
   limitations discussed in section 2, with a view to reducing their 
   effect. Further, practices are suggested for publishing and verifying 
   revocation information, allowing an RP to determine the revocation 
   status of a certificate with higher reliability in less time. 
 
3.14.1 Summary of Revocation Conditions 
    
   In X.509/PKIX there is only one issuer CA for a given certificate. 
   Only the issuer CA of a certificate is authoritative for revocation 
   conditions of the certificate, which is assumed to be uniquely 
   identifiable (e.g., issued with a unique serial number for that CA).   
    
   One of those revocation conditions is that the certificate must be 
   signed by the CA's private "certificate signing" key. This key must 
   be issued formally by the issuer CA, must not be expired and must not 
   be presently revoked.  Another condition is that the issuer CA may 
   delegate the authority for a particular certificate's revocation 
   notices and/or status publication to another entity called the CRL 
   issuer, identified by the CA in the CRL Distribution Point (CDP) 
   extension of the certificate.  Another condition is that the issuer 
   CA may send the revocation notice for a particular certificate as a 
   status service to other types of delegated status services, 
   identified by the CA in the Authority Information Access (AIA) 
   extension of the certificate with an OCSP access descriptor or an 
   HTTP CRL access descriptor. 
    
   The RP should also determine if any of the CA certificates along the 
   chain from the issuer CA to an acceptable root CA is expired or has 
   been revoked or suspended, because such expiration, revocation or 
   suspension could have the effect of prematurely terminating the 
   operational period of the certificate and all certificates signed by 
   it.  
    
3.24.2 Available Revocation of Delegation 
    
   Is there a mechanism to limit the period of delegation?  
    
   Yes. The issuer CA can authoritatively revoke delegation to the CRL 
   issuer, or other types of delegated status services. Delegation is 
   not decided, although implied, for the whole lifetime of the 
   certificate. Delegation is also not necessarily done for all 
   certificates issued by a CA (e.g., an indirect CRL issuer may be a 
   partial CRL issuer, in X.509). The issuer CA could revoke any signing 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 11] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   certificate in the chain and re-issue all certificates it desires 
   with a different delegation specification or even no delegation.  
    
   This mechanism provides the CA with ultimate control over a wayward 
   CRL issuer or other type of delegated status service provider. 
    
3.34.3 Limitations of Indirect CRLs 
    
   If the indirect CRL is verified by an RP, is there any requirement 
   for the RP to also verify any CRL issued by the issuer CA? 
    
   Yes. Because the RP must verify the signed CRL using certificates, 
   and in particular must recursively rely upon the certificate showing 
   that the CRL issuer (or other party) has current delegation 
   authority, certificate revocation status also depends on whether the 
   issuer CA signing certificate (or any certificate in an acceptable 
   chain to the root) is expired, revoked or suspended, OR whether any 
   other revocation condition defined by the issuer CA applies. See 
   (2.3), (3.1), and (3.2). 
    
3.44.4 Limitations of Revocation Status Services 
    
   4.4.1 Can a revocation status service or a CRL publishing service 
   indicate a certificate to be revoked when the certificate is not 
   revoked? 
    
   Yes. If a CA sends status data to an OCSP Responder including a 
   revocation notice before creating a CRL, the certificate in question 
   is revoked for an RP receiving the OCSP Responder's status but not 
   for an RP accessing only the current CRL. Even along a single 
   certificate chain, different RPs may have access to different 
   revocation status for the CA's own certificate or any cross 
   certificate used in the chain. 
    
   Further, as demanded by chain processing rules, an expired, revoked 
   or suspended parent certificate may or may not cause an RP to deduce 
   that a child certificate status is revoked, independently of the 
   current authoritative revocation status of the certificate.  
    
   Similarly, by recursion, an expired certificate used when relying 
   upon an indirect CRL can also influence whether or not a user 
   performs the act of reliance. 
    
   4.4.2 Can a revocation status service indicate non-revocation status 
   when the certificate is revoked? 
    
   Yes. As given above. 
    

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 12] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
3.54.5 Limitations of Revocation Status Processing 
 
   Resolution of revocation status may be difficult for the RP's 
   software. For example: the software may need, under the local 
   validation policy, to wait for a fresher CRL then that currently 
   available; the software may need more time than what is available for 
   the desired action; the software may need additional communication 
   channels that are not available to the software at the time of 
   checking; the validation policy might require human intervention, and 
   so on. Using any single mechanism to verify revocation status can be 
   seen by an RP as introducing a single point of failure, which might 
   not be acceptable.  
    
   An RP relying on the revocation status of a certificate is also 
   subject to the RP Reliance Limitations described in section (2.3). 
    
3.64.6 Increasing Reliability 
    
   With a view to reducing the effect of the limitations discussed in 
   this Document, an RP can verify bounds on the extent of those 
   limitations, or at least establish bounds.  
    
   An RP can also define multiple paths, to provide redundancy and 
   diversity. The additional efforts should increase the ability of the 
   RP to make a reliance determination of a certificate's revocation 
   status in less time.  
    
   For example: 
    
   - There are various unspecified and unpublished delays between the 
     time a CA, CRL issuer or OCSP Responder receives notice to revoke, 
     suspend, or reinstate a certificate and the time the information 
     status is made available through the CA's CRL, an indirect CRL, a 
     delta CRL, an OCSP Responder, a DPV Server, or a client. 
     Nonetheless, some of these bounds can be actually known or modeled 
     by an RP, and be addressed in the local validation policy 
     underpinning the decision to rely. 
      
   - To prevent single access faults and race conditions, a certificate 
     can include multiple mechanisms to specify revocation information, 
     some of which can be redundant mechanisms, where an RP should be 
     able to interoperate with any of those mechanisms that it trusts. 
     Multiple mechanisms available to an issuer CA include a CDP 
     extension with a URI DistributionPointName, an AIA extension with 
     an OCSP access descriptor, and an AIA extension with an HTTP CRL 
     access descriptor. An RP receiving both an OCSP Responder's status 
     and the CA's CRL for a certificate is less susceptible to race 
     conditions caused by CA's delays when sending status data to the 

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 13] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
     OCSP Responder with a revocation notice and publishing a CRL for 
     the certificate in question. 
    
3.74.7 Can A Certificate Be Valid When Revoked?  
    
   4.7.1 Can a certificate be valid when its revocation status is 
   revoked? 
    
   Yes. The validity of a certificate refers to conditions that are 
   authoritatively defined locally (see section 2.4). For example, for 
   the purpose of an RP reading a timely message, a validation policy 
   may consider a certificate to be valid when no revocation status can 
   be contacted.  
    
   Generalizing this behavior is an implementation flaw, however. For 
   example, the widely used TLS/SSL security application in Internet 
   browsers does not currently verify the revocation status of EE and CA 
   certificates and always considers the resulting undefined revocation 
   status as valid. 
    
   4.7.2 Can an RP rely on validity information alone?  
    
   Yes. As above. 
    
3.84.8 Alternative Authoritative Revocation Mechanisms 
    
   The PKIX WG has defined a number of certificate revocation protocols.  
   However, it may be sometimes desirable to revoke certificates using 
   alternative schemes as well. For example, a certificate can also be 
   authoritatively revoked when the issuer CA or the CRL issuer makes 
   the revocation status available to an RP in a reasonable way. For 
   example, by signed XML messages in a wireless network, by SQL over 
   HTTPS, or in a signed SOAP response for database lookup over web 
   services. What matters to the RP is the revocation status, in a 
   repository or as a status message, and whether it has been published 
   by some means acceptable by the RP under its validation policy. 
    
3.94.9 Validation Services 
    
   A CRL Issuer or an OCSP responder may perform additional processing, 
   beyond aggregating and republishing revocation notices as revocation 
   status services. If the operator of the service knows an RP's 
   validation policy/criteria, they may apply those criteria when 
   creating a validation service for that RP. In this case, the 
   "validation service" is a policy-enhanced validation (not revocation) 
   status service tuned to the acceptance processes of the RP, rather 
   than only to the revocation processes of CAs and their delegates.  
    

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 14] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   A validation service can help reduce the limitations described in 
   this Document, for example by implementing the multiple mechanisms 
   discussed in section (3.6). In this case, the service provider is an 
   agent of the RP, performing the same validation processing as the 
   user would have performed when making a reliance determination. 
    
3.104.10 New Environments 
    
   This Document also intends to provide a framework for the development 
   of new PKI environments, including IPSEC, Internet 2, IPv6 and 
   routing table distribution schemes, DNS, and spam control. These new 
   environments will also present new demands on PKI techniques, in 
   particular on the handling of revocation information.  
    
Security Considerations 
    
   Revocation lists, or CRLs, are needed to notify that an otherwise 
   valid certificate is not valid. This, which relies on the issuer CA 
   for centralized revocation conditions, presents several unsolved 
   (implementation wise) and unsolvable (design wise) problems in 
   X.509/PKIX.  
    
   For example, there may be a considerable delay (no boundaries are 
   provided within PKIX on upper limits for such delays) between a 
   revocation notice (e.g., as submitted by the certificate's subject) 
   and the reflection of this need in a CRL or revocation status. The 
   available documentation is also silent about some aspects of 
   revocation and revocation delegation. This silence may be read as 
   implying some affirmations and denying others. This is faulty, 
   because the meaning of the text is ambiguous for security purposes.  
    
   This Document clarifies affirmations and limitations on certificate 
   revocation that are coherent with the corpus of X.509/PKIX documents, 
   thereby potentially improving security. The final section of this 
   Document also points out the conditions on those limitations, with a 
   view to reducing their effect. Using any single mechanism to verify 
   revocation status is seen as introducing a single point of failure 
   from the RP's software point of view. Using multiple sources of 
   information on the revocation status of a certificate can provide 
   diversity and redundancy, reducing the influence of race conditions 
   and ambiguity. 
    
References 
    
   [Ger98]  In terms of a communication process, trust has nothing to do 
            with feelings or emotions. Trust is qualified reliance on 
            information, based on factors independent of that 
            information. Trust needs multiple, independent channels to 
            be communicated. Trust cannot be induced by self-assertions. 
 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 15] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
            More precisely, "Trust is that which is essential to a 
            communication channel but cannot be transferred using that 
            channel." See "Trust Points" by E. Gerck in "Digital 
            Certificates: Applied Internet Security" by Jalal Feghhi, 
            Jalil Feghhi and Peter Williams, Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-20-
            130980-7, pages 194-195, 1998. 
    
   [Sha48]  Shannon, C. A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell 
            Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379-423, July 1948.  
            http://cm.belllabs.com/cm/ms/what/shannonday/paper.html  
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The names cited do not mean endorsement of this work, which is the 
   sole responsibility of the author. I would like to thank very useful 
   comments by Santoshi Chokhani, Tom Gidin, Paul Hoffman, David Kemp, 
   Steve Kent, Stefan Santesson, Peter Williams, Julien Stern and the 
   PKIX list. I am also thankful to Peter Williams for final editing 
   comments. 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Questions about this Document can be directed to: 
    
   Ed Gerck 
   NMA, Inc. 
   1001 D Street 
   San Rafael, CA 94901 
   Email: egerck@nma.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    

 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 16] 
               Certificate Revocation Revisited  May 2004  
 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 








































 
 
Gerck                  Expires - November 2004               [Page 17] 

