


Network Working Group                                         K. Fischer
Internet-Draft                         Siemens Enterprise Communications
Intended status: Standards Track                        January 22, 2008
Expires: July 25, 2008


                   End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP
                 draft-fischer-sip-e2e-sec-media-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   The end-to-end security properties of DTLS-SRTP depend on the
   authenticity of the certificate fingerprint exchanged in the
   signalling channel.  In current approaches the authenticity is
   protected by SIP-Identity or SIP-Identity-Media.  These types of
   signatures are broken if intermediaries like Session Border
   Controllers in other domains change specific information of the SIP
   header or the SIP body.  The end-to-end security property between the
   originating and terminating domain is lost if these intermediaries



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   re-sign the SIP message and create a new identity signature using
   their own domain credentials.

   This document defines a new signature type 'Fingerprint-Identity'
   which is exchanged in the signalling channel.  Fingerprint-Identity
   covers only those elements of a SIP message necessary to authenticate
   the certificate fingerprint and to secure media end-to-end.  It is
   independent from SIP-Identity and SIP-Identity-Media and can be
   applied in parallel to them.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Identity Signatures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  SIP-Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  SIP-Identity-Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Fingerprint-Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14





















Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


1.  Introduction

   DTLS-SRTP [I-D.ietf-avt-dtls-srtp] specifies a key management
   protocol for SRTP [RFC3711] based on DTLS.  The SRTP master key is
   derived from a common DTLS master secret established during the DTLS
   handshake.  In contrast to other key management protocols like MIKEY
   [RFC3830] or Security Descriptions [RFC4568], the keys are exchanged
   within the media channel and not in the signalling channel.  In most
   scenarios the DTLS handshake is authenticated mutually by
   certificates.  In principle it is possible that DTLS-SRTP endpoints
   are authenticated by certificates issued by trusted PKI providers,
   but typically the endpoints use self-signed certificates since the
   deployment and management of official signed PKI credentials is
   complex and expensive.  Unfortunately, an endpoint cannot be
   authenticated by a self-signed certificate - the certificate is only
   a container for a public key without a trusted identity binding.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework] addresses the problem by
   transferring the fingerprint of the self-signed certificate as
   attribute in the SDP offer/answer exchange [RFC4572] and protecting
   the SIP request by means of SIP-Identity [RFC4474], which provides
   cryptographic evidence from the user's domain that the request (and
   hence the fingerprint) originate from a UA having the credentials of
   the user identified in the From header field.  However, this approach
   fails in inter-domain scenarios in which a SIP message traversed
   multiple domains and was modified during transit.  The signature is
   broken and needs to be renewed by the intermediate domain, e.g. a
   service provider domain.  This renewal process necessitates changing
   the From header field URI to something based on the intermediate
   domain's name.  The receiving partner is not able to detect if the
   request really originated in the domain indicated by the From header
   field URI or elsewhere.

   Another approach [I-D.ietf-wing-sip-identity-media] addresses the
   limitations of SIP-Identity by specifying an Identity-Media
   signature, which signs less information than the Identity signature.
   However, there are still problems with intermediate domains which
   modify specific information in the SIP header, e.g. the URI in the
   From header field.  This results in a need to renew the Identity-
   Media signature and again a loss of the end-to-end security property
   of DTLS-SRTP between the originating and terminating domains.

   This document defines a new signature type 'Fingerprint-Identity'
   which covers only those elements of a SIP message necessary to
   authenticate the certificate fingerprint and to secure media end-to-
   end.  Modifications of the SIP message by intermediate domains do not
   affect the Fingerprint-Identity signature.  The original identity
   information of the From header is kept and transferred to the



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   terminating domain along with the signature.  This mechanism is
   independent from SIP-Identity and SIP-Identity-Media and can be
   applied in parallel to them.  The focus of this document is to
   provide a solution for securing DTLS-SRTP end-to-end.  However, since
   the fingerprint attribute is originally specified and used in
   [RFC4572], the Fingerprint-Identity mechanism is also applicable to
   the Comedia scenarios.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3.  Identity Signatures

   The following diagram shows an inter-domain scenario, in which the UA
   of domain A (UA-A) calls the UA of domain B (UA-B).  Both domains
   have deployed an outgoing SBC (SBC-A and SBC-B).  The call is routed
   over two service provider domains S1 and S2.  An SBC is deployed in
   each service provider domain, e.g. to hide topologies between service
   providers.  For simplicity one SBC per domain is shown only.  Each of
   these SBCs may change information in the SDP body, such as the IP
   address in a c-line and the port in an m-line.  Each of these SBCs
   may also change certain SIP header fields (e.g.  Contact URI, From
   URI) that are signed in accordance with [RFC4474] or
   [I-D.ietf-wing-sip-identity-media].  The present document makes no
   judgment as to whether such changes to SIP requests are necessary or
   good practice, but simply takes account of widespread current
   practice in SIP deployments.

         Domain A        Domain S1   Domain S2      Domain B
     +----+   +-----+    +------+    +------+    +-----+   +----+
     |UA-A|---|SBC-A|----+SBC-S1|----+SBC-S2+----+SBC-B|---|UA-B|
     +----+   +-----+    +------+    +------+    +-----+   +----+

                      Figure 1: Inter-domain scenario

   Domain A can populate the From header using general SIP-URIs (e.g.
   'sip:alice@domaina.com') or E.164 telephone numbers (e.g.
   'sip:+1234567890@domaina.com;user=phone').  The fingerprint of UA-A's
   certificate used during the DTLS-handshake is inserted as a separate
   SDP attribute in the body.  Two mechanisms exist to protect the
   authenticity of the certificate fingerprint ([RFC4474] and
   [I-D.ietf-wing-sip-identity-media]).  The next two sub-sections
   describe the limitations of these approaches in providing an end-to-



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   end security property between A and B. In this context end-to-end
   security means security between the two end domains A and B, so that
   neither service provide S1 nor S2 is able to intercept the call.

3.1.  SIP-Identity

   SIP-Identity generates a signature over specific SIP headers and the
   whole SIP body [RFC4474].  The signature is added as an Identity
   header field to the SIP message and the link to the associated
   certificate is added as an Identity-Info header.  Relating to the
   example depicted above, the following high-level steps are executed:

   o  UA-A generates a SIP INVITE message.

   o  SBC-A modifies the private IP address of UA-A to a public one and
      afterwards generates a Identity signature using credentials of
      domain A.

   o  SBC-S1 validates domain A's Identity signature and modifies the IP
      addresses according to the service provider's policy, thus
      invalidating the signature.  SBC-S1 can renew the Identity
      signature with the credentials of domain S1, but only if the From
      header field URI domain name matches the domain name of S1.  This
      means either the From header field URI has to be changed or the
      signature cannot be renewed (in which case it either has to be
      removed or left as invalid).  The following steps assume the
      signature has been renewed.

   o  SBC-S2 validates domain S1's Identity signature, modifies the IP
      addresses according to the service provider's policy and needs to
      renew the Identity signature with the credentials of domain S2
      (again assuming the From header field URI can be changed).

   o  SBC-B sends the SIP INVITE message to UA-B after successful
      validation of domain S2's Identity signature.

   In this example scenario the authenticity of the fingerprint is not
   protected end-to-end.  It is only a hop-by-hop protection, since
   every traversed domain creates a new signature.  Each traversed
   domain is principally able to exchange the certificate fingerprint
   with a fingerprint of the certificate of a media device within its
   own domain and thus intercept the media traffic.

   Note, that a SBC may not only change the IP address in the SDP body,
   but may also change certain SIP header fields covered by the Identity
   signature like Contact URI, Call-ID or CSeq
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-sbc-funcs].




Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   In order to renew a signature, an intermediate service provider
   domain must also change the From header field URI so that the domain
   part is its own domain, i.e., a domain for which it possesses a
   private key and certificate.  An E.164 telephone number as mentioned
   above ('sip:+1234567890@domaina.com;user=phone') can be changed in a
   way that the domain part representing domain A is replaced by the
   domain of the service provider
   ('sip:+1234567890@domains1.com;user=phone').  Even SIP-URIs in the
   From header field like 'sip:alice@domaina.com' can be changed by an
   SBC in the service provider domain.  Due to possible name conflicts
   between different domains, a SBC cannot simply exchange the domain
   part, but can move the original domain part into the user-info part,
   e.g. 'sip:alice%domaina.com@domains1.com'.  In both cases, a change
   of the From header field URI breaks the Identity signature.  In the
   case of E.164 telephone numbers the receiving domain is not even able
   to determine the originating domain of UA-A.

3.2.  SIP-Identity-Media

   SIP-Identity-Media works similar as SIP-Identity and generates a
   signature over specific SIP headers and parts of the SIP body
   [I-D.ietf-wing-sip-identity-media].  In contrast to SIP-Identity the
   Identity-Media signature includes less information.  It omits those
   parts of the SIP message which are probably subject to change.  All
   body information is omitted apart from certain SDP attributes needed
   for cryptographic purposes like the certificate fingerprint, so that
   a change of the IP address in SDP does not break the Identity-Media
   signature.  Moreover, certain SIP header fields are omitted too, like
   the Contact URI, Call-ID and Cseq.  The signature is added as an
   Identity-Media-Signature header field and the link to the associated
   certificate is added as an Identity-Info header field.

   SIP-Identity-Media improves the mechanism of SIP-Identity, since a
   change of SDP information (e.g.  IP addresses in the c-line) does not
   break the signature and still provides an end-to-end security
   property between the originating and terminating domains.  However,
   this approach has an issue with the From header field URI.  As
   mentioned above a service provider may change the domain part of an
   E.164 telephone number or may even change the domain part of other
   types of SIP-URI by manipulating the original information.  A change
   of the From header field URI breaks the signature and necessitates a
   renewal by intermediaries.  In the case of E.164 telephone numbers
   the receiving part (in the example domain B) is not able to determine
   the originating domain (here domain A).







Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


4.  Fingerprint-Identity

4.1.  Overview

   Fingerprint-Identity protects the authenticity of the certificate
   fingerprint SDP attribute between the originating and terminating
   domains.  Fingerprint-Identity is a signature over specific SIP
   header and body elements.  In contrast to the approaches described in
   Section 3 the Fingerprint-Identity signature covers only that
   information in a SIP message that is necessary for authenticating the
   fingerprint (and hence the source and destination of media) without
   introducing new security threats (refer to Section 6 for an analysis
   of the security properties).  This information comprises:

   o  the SDP fingerprint attribute representing the fingerprint of the
      certificate used in the DTLS handshake,

   o  the original identity information of the From header field and

   o  the Date header field.

   As described in Section 3 intermediaries may change the From header
   field URI.  Therefore, the signature is not generated over the From
   header field URI of the SIP message, but rather a copy of the addr-
   spec part that is preserved between the originating and terminating
   domains.  A change of the From header field URI does not invalidate
   it.

   The signature is added as a new SIP header field 'Fingerprint-
   Identity' and the link to the domain certificate with which the
   signature was generated is inserted as new header field 'Fingerprint-
   Identity-Cert'.

4.2.  Operation

   The operation of Fingerprint-Identity is similar to [RFC4474] and
   likewise uses an authentication service and a verifier.  Figure 2
   shows the same inter-domain example as in Section 3.

         Domain A        Domain S1   Domain S2      Domain B
     +----+   +-----+    +------+    +------+    +-----+   +----+
     |UA-A|---|SBC-A|----+SBC-S1|----+SBC-S2+----+SBC-B|---|UA-B|
     +----+   +-----+    +------+    +------+    +-----+   +----+
               Auth.-                           Verifier-
              Service                            Service

          Figure 2: Inter-domain scenario (Fingerprint-Identity)




Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   Here, the SBC in domain A acts as authentication service and the SBC
   in domain B as verifier.  Note, that the authentication service and
   verifier need not to be realized necessarily on the SBC, they can be
   deployed also on a SIP proxy in domain A and/or domain B.

   UA-A wants to call UA-B and the call is routed through the domains of
   service provider S1 and S2.  As in Section 3.1 each of these SBCs may
   change information in the SDP body like the IP address in a c-line or
   the port in an m-line.  SBCs may also change certain SIP header
   fields (e.g.  Contact URI, From header field URI).  Following steps
   are performed:

   Step 1:

   UA-A generates a SIP INVITE message.  The From header field URI
   expresses the identity of UA-A.  The SIP request MUST contain an SDP
   fingerprint attribute representing the certificate used in the DTLS
   handshake.

   Step 2:

   The authentication service MUST determine whether or not the sender
   of the request is authorized to claim the identity given in the
   identity field.  In order to do so, the authentication service MUST
   authenticate the sender of the message.  After successful
   verification, the authentication service copies the identity
   information of the From header field into a new SIP header field
   'Original-Identity'.  The authentication service SHOULD ensure that
   any preexisting Date header in the request is accurate.  If no Date
   header is present then it MUST be added to the SIP request.

   The authentication service calculates a hash over the 'Original-
   Identity' header field, the 'Date' header field and the fingerprint
   attribute in the SDP body.  The fingerprint attribute can be included
   on session-level as well as on media-level [RFC4572].  If specified
   on media-level this may result in multiple fingerprint attributes.
   The fingerprints might be equal for each media streams if the same
   certificate is used or they might differ by using different
   certificates (e.g. the media streams are terminated on different
   devices).  The hash calculation considers in either case all
   fingerprint attributes included in the SDP body.  The hash is signed
   with domain A's private key whereas the public key is associated with
   domain A in a certificate.  The signature is added as new SIP header
   field 'Fingerprint-Identity' and the URI from which the domain
   certificate can be obtained is added as new SIP header field
   'Fingerprint-Identity-Cert'.  Note, that Identity-Info is not used
   for this purpose, since Fingerprint-Identity is independent of SIP-
   Identity and SIP-Identity can be applied in parallel.  Moreover an



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   intermediate domain can introduce or renew SIP-Identity and will thus
   place a different certificate in the Identity-Info header field.

   Dependent on the scenario and the requirements the authentication
   service may also add a SIP-Identity signature to the SIP request.
   However, for the end-to-end security property of the certificate
   fingerprint this is not necessary and is omitted in this description.

   Step 3:

   The SIP request traverses the domain S1, in which the SDP body or SIP
   headers may be modified.  An intermediate domain MUST NOT change the
   Date, Original-Identity, Fingerprint-Identity and Fingerprint-
   Identity-Cert header fields or the SDP fingerprint attribute.

   Step 4:

   Same as step 3 but for domain S2.

   Step 5:

   The verifier MUST verify the Fingerprint-Identity signature.  If the
   verifier does not have the domain certificate with which the
   signature was created, he acquires the certificate for the signing
   domain using information in the 'Fingerprint-Identity-Cert' header
   field.  A hash is calculated over the information listed in step 2
   and compared with the signed hash in the Fingerprint-Identity header
   decrypted using the public key from the certificate of the
   originating domain.  If the hashes match, the terminating domain B
   can be sure that the fingerprint originates from the domain included
   in the Original-Identity header field.

   Note, that the authentication of the certificate fingerprint in the
   reverse direction from domain B to A works in a similar way applying
   the mechanisms specified in [RFC4916].  In this case the Fingerprint-
   Identity mechanism apply to the UPDATE request.

4.3.  Syntax

   This section defines the syntax of the new header fields according to
   [RFC4234].










Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


        fingerprint-identity      = "Fingerprint-Identity" HCOLON
                                    signature
        signature                 = DQUOTE 32HEXDIG DQUOTE

        fingerprint-identity-cert = "Fingerprint-Identity-Cert" HCOLON
                                    cert-info *( SEMI cert-info-params )
        cert-info                 = LAQUOT absoluteURI RAQUOT
        cert-info-params          = cert-info-alg / cert-info-extension
        cert-info-alg             = "alg" EQUAL token
        cert-info-extension       = generic-param

        original-identity         = "Original-Identity" HCOLON addr-spec


5.  IANA Considerations

   To be done in a later version.


6.  Security Considerations

   Fingerprint-Identity protects the authenticity of the certificate
   fingerprint between the originating and terminating domain.  It binds
   the fingerprint to an identity information described in the Original-
   Identity header field (copied from the From header field) by a domain
   signature.  The associated domain certificate is signed by a trusted
   PKI provider, so that the targeting domain is able to verify and
   trust the Fingerprint-Identity signature.  The targeting domain MUST
   assure that the authentication service of the originating domain is
   authorized to create a Fingerprint-Identity signature for the
   identity described in the Original-Identity header field, i.e. that
   the domain information of the domain certificate matches the domain
   in the Original-Identity header field.

   In contrast to SIP-Identity the Fingerprint-Identity signature is not
   bound to a specific SIP request, because header fields like Cseq or
   Call-Id are omitted from the signature.  However, a binding to a
   specific SIP request is not necessary to guarantee the authenticity
   of the certificate fingerprint and therewith the end-to-end security
   of DTLS-SRTP.  Generally, the missing binding introduces
   possibilities for cut-and-paste attacks, i.e. the Fingerprint-
   Identity signature and the associated information are cut from a SIP
   request and pasted in another one.  The inclusion of the Date header
   in the calculation of the hash and signature limits this possibility
   to a specific window size only.  As specified in [RFC4474]
   implementations of this specification MUST NOT deem valid a request
   with an outdated Date header field (the RECOMMENDED interval is that
   the Date header must indicate a time within 3600 seconds of the



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   receipt of a message).  But even a cut-and paste attack is performed
   within this window size, the attacker cannot benefit from it and
   intercept a media call.  He is able to retrieve the Fingerprint-
   Identity signature and associated information (Fingerprint-Identity-
   Cert, Date and Original-Identity header fields as well as the
   fingerprint attribute) of a valid SIP request and insert them into a
   another SIP request within the windows size.  But since the attacker
   does not own the private key belonging to the certificate represented
   by the fingerprint, the receiving party will recognize this by
   comparing the certificate fingerprint got during the DTLS-handshake
   and the one received in the SIP request.

   The authentication service is a trusted entity within the originating
   domain.  The authenticity of the certificate fingerprint is protected
   after creation of the signature only, i.e. the SIP request or more
   specific identity information or the SDP fingerprint attribute within
   the SIP request can be modified on the way between the UA and the
   authentication service.  Therefore, the authentication service MUST
   authenticate the UA as described in step 2 of Section 4 and the
   connection between both parties MUST be integrity protected, e.g.
   using TLS.

   The Fingerprint-Identity and Fingerprint-Identity-Cert header fields
   are not protected themselves, i.e. an attacker is able to remove
   these header fields during traversal.  In this case the fingerprint
   is not protected anymore.  This may lead in a Denial-of-Service
   attack if it is expected that the calling and called party want to
   have an encrypted call end-to-end.  This may lead also in a bid-down
   attack falling back to RTP since the DTLS-SRTP handshake cannot be
   authenticated.


7.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank John Elwell for the discussions and
   comments in the early phase of this document.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-avt-dtls-srtp]
              McGrew, D. and E. Rescorla, "Datagram Transport Layer
              Security (DTLS) Extension to Establish Keys for  Secure
              Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              draft-ietf-avt-dtls-srtp-01 (work in progress),
              November 2007.



Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


   [I-D.ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework]
              Fischl, J., Tschofenig, H., and E. Rescorla, "Framework
              for Establishing an SRTP Security Context using DTLS",
              draft-ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework-00 (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [RFC4572]  Lennox, J., "Connection-Oriented Media Transport over the
              Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in the Session
              Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4572, July 2006.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-sbc-funcs]
              Hautakorpi, J., Camarillo, G., Penfield, B., Hawrylyshen,
              A., and M. Bhatia, "Requirements from SIP (Session
              Initiation Protocol) Session Border Control  Deployments",
              draft-ietf-sipping-sbc-funcs-04 (work in progress),
              December 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-wing-sip-identity-media]
              Wing, D. and K. Kaplan, "SIP Identity using Media Path",
              November 2007.

   [RFC3711]  Baugher, M., McGrew, D., Naslund, M., Carrara, E., and K.
              Norrman, "The Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              RFC 3711, March 2004.

   [RFC3830]  Arkko, J., Carrara, E., Lindholm, F., Naslund, M., and K.
              Norrman, "MIKEY: Multimedia Internet KEYing", RFC 3830,
              August 2004.

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006.

   [RFC4568]  Andreasen, F., Baugher, M., and D. Wing, "Session
              Description Protocol (SDP) Security Descriptions for Media
              Streams", RFC 4568, July 2006.




Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


Author's Address

   Kai Fischer
   Siemens Enterprise Communications GmbH & Co. KG
   Schertlinstr. 8
   Munich, Bavaria  80200
   Germany

   Email: kai.fischer@siemens.com










































Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      End-to-End Security for DTLS-SRTP       January 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Fischer                   Expires July 25, 2008                [Page 14]


