


6LoWPAN Working Group                                             E. Kim
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Expires: September 9, 2009                                N. Chevrollier
                                                                     TNO
                                                               D. Kaspar
                                              Simula Research Laboratory
                                                             JP. Vasseur
                                                      Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                           March 8, 2009


               Design and Application Spaces for 6LoWPANs
                     draft-ietf-6lowpan-usecases-02

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.




Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


Abstract

   This document investigates potential application scenarios and use
   cases for low-power wireless personal area networks (LoWPANs).  After
   describing the characteristics of a LoWPAN, this document provides a
   list of use cases and market domains that may benefit and motivate
   the work currently done in the 6LoWPAN WG.  A complete list of
   practical use cases is not the goal of this document.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Design Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Application Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Industrial Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.2.  Structural Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.2.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.2.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.3.  Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       4.3.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       4.3.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     4.4.  Connected Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
       4.4.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 22
       4.4.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     4.5.  Vehicle Telematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       4.5.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       4.5.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     4.6.  Agricultural Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
       4.6.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 26
       4.6.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32











Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


1.  Introduction

   LoWPANs are inexpensive, low-performance, wireless communication
   networks, and are formed by devices complying with the IEEE 802.15.4
   standard [5].  Their typical characteristics can be summarized as
   follows:

   o  Low power: depending on country regulations and used frequency
      band, the maximum transmit power levels can be up to 1000 mW [5].
      However, typical wireless radios for LoWPANs are battery-operated
      and consume between 10 mW and 20 mW [6].

   o  Short range: the Personal Operating Space (POS) defined by IEEE
      802.15.4 implies a range of 10 meters.  For real implementations,
      the range of LoWPAN radios is typically measured in tens of
      meters, but can go far beyond that in line-of-sight situations
      [6].

   o  Low bit rate: the IEEE 802.15.4 standard defines a maximum over-
      the-air rate of 250 kb/s, as well as lower data rates of 40 kb/s
      and 20 kb/s for each of the currently defined physical layers (2.4
      GHz, 915 MHz and 868 MHz, respectively).

   o  Small memory capacity: common RAM sizes for LoWPAN devices consist
      of a few kilobytes, such as 4 KB.

   o  Limited processing capability: current LoWPAN nodes usually have
      8-bit processors with clock rates around 10 MHz.

   LoWPANs do not necessarily comprise of sensor nodes only, but may
   also consist of actuators.  For instance, in an agricultural
   environment, sensor nodes might detect low soil humidity and then
   send commands to activate the sprinkler system.

   A LoWPAN network can be seen as a network of small star-networks,
   each consisting of a single LoWPAN node connected to zero or more
   nodes, or a network with mesh topology as shown in Figure 1.  It is
   noted that it is out of scope of this document to define how mesh
   topologies could be obtained and maintained.

      Note: The IEEE 802.15.4 standard distinguishes between two types
      of nodes, reduced-function devices (RFDs) and full-function
      devices (FFDs).  This document uses the term LoWPAN node which
      includes both type of devices.  However, the two device types have
      different capabilities, so that the capability requirements of a
      LoWPAN node must be considered to choose the type of devices.
      Through their inability to transmit MAC layer beacons, RFDs can
      only communicate with FFDs in a resulting "master/slave" star



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      topology.  FFDs are able to communicate with peer FFDs and with
      RFDs in the aforementioned relation.  FFDs can therefore assume
      arbitrary network topologies, such as multi-hop meshes.


   A simple star topology                        A mesh topology

        n  n  n                                       n---n   n  n
         \ | /                                        |   |   | /
    ER --- n ---n     ER: LoWPAN Edge Router     ER---n---n---n---n
         / | \         n: LoWPAN Node                /|   |   |   |
        n  n  n                                     n n   n   n---n

                  Figure 1: Examples of LoWPAN topologies

   Communication to corresponding nodes outside of the LoWPAN is
   becoming increasingly important.  The intermediate LoWPAN nodes act
   as packet forwarders or routers and connect the entire LoWPAN in a
   multi-hop fashion.  Edge Routers are used to interconnect a LoWPAN to
   other networks, or to form an Extended LoWPAN by connecting multiple
   LoWPANs.  Before LoWPAN nodes obtain their IPv6 addresses and the
   network is configured, each LoWPAN executes a link-layer
   configuration using a single coordinator (named as PAN coordinator in
   the link layer) who is responsible for link-layer short address
   allocation.  However, this link-layer coordinator function is out of
   the scope of this document.  The term coordinator in this document
   does not refer to the PAN coordinator, but is used for a node with
   special roles to coordinate neighboring nodes or relay traffic.

   A LoWPAN can be configured as Mesh Under or Route Over.  In a Mesh
   Under configuration, the link-local scope reaches to the boundaries
   of the LoWPAN and all nodes in a LoWPAN are included in the scope.
   Multihop transmission is achieved by Mesh Under forwarding or routing
   mechanisms at the link layer or in an adapatation layer (see
   Figure 1).  In a Route Over configuration, the link-local scope is
   only one radio hop range and includes those nodes which are reachable
   over a single radio transmission.  Multihop transmission is achieved
   using IP routing (see Figure 1).













Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


            h     h
            |     |           ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
     ER --- m --- m --- h      m: LoWPAN Node running Mesh Under
           / \     \              forwarding/routing
          h   h     h

              Figure 2: Example of a small Mesh Under LoWPAN


            h     h
            |     |             ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
     ER --- r --- r --- h        r: LoWPAN Router
           / \     \             h: LoWPAN Host
          h   h     h

              Figure 3: Example of a small Route Over LoWPAN

   After defining common terminology in Section 2 and describing the
   characteristics of LoWPANs in Section 3, this document provides a
   list of use cases and market domains that may benefit and motivate
   the work currently done in the 6LoWPAN WG.






























Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [1].

   Readers are expected to be familiar with all the terms and concepts
   that are discussed in "IPv6 over Low-Power  Wireless Personal Area
   Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview, Assumptions,  Problem Statement, and
   Goals" [3], and " Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4
   Networks" [4].

   This document defines additional terms:

   LoWPAN Coordinator Node

      A logical functional entity that performs the special role of
      coordinating its child nodes for local data aggregation, status
      management of local nodes, etc.  Thus, the Coordinator Node does
      not need to coincide with a link-layer PAN coordinator and there
      may be multiple instance in a LoWPAN.

   LoWPAN Mesh Node

      A LoWPAN node that forwards data between arbitrary source-
      destination pairs in 6LoWPAN adaptation layer using link address
      (and thus only exist in Mesh Under LoWPANs).  A Mesh Node may also
      serve as a LoWPAN Host.

   Additionally, in alignment with all other 6LoWPAN drafts, this
   document uses the same terms and definitions as provided by the
   6LoWPAN ND draft [9]:

   LoWPAN Host

      A node that only sources or sinks IPv6 datagrams.  Referred to as
      a host in this document.  The term node (see LoWPAN Node) is used
      when the differentiation between host and router is not important.

   LoWPAN Edge Router

      An IPv6 router that interconnects the LoWPAN to another network.
      Referred to as an edge router in this document.

   LoWPAN Router






Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      A node that forwards datagrams between arbitrary source-
      destination pairs using a single 6LoWPAN interface performing IP
      routing (and thus only exist in route over LoWPANs).  A LoWPAN
      Router may also serve as a LoWPAN Host - both sourcing and sinking
      IPv6 datagrams.  Referred to as a router in 6LoWPAN documents.
      All LoWPAN Routers perform ND message relay on behalf of other
      nodes.

   LoWPAN Node

      A node that composes a LoWPAN.  In mesh under, each intermediate
      node performs multi-hop forwarding at L2.  In route over, each
      intermediate node serves as a LoWPAN router performing IP routing.

   Mesh Under

      A LoWPAN configuration where the link-local scope is defined by
      the boundaries of the LoWPAN and includes all nodes within.
      Forwarding and multihop routing functions are achieved at L2
      between mesh nodes.

   Route Over

      A LoWPAN configuration where the link-local scope is defined by
      those nodes reachable over a single radio transmission.  Due to
      the time-varying characteristics of wireless communication, the
      neighbor set may change over time even when nodes maintain the
      same physical locations.  Multihop is achieved using IP routing.

   Backbone Link

      This is an IPv6 link that interconnects two or more edge routers.
      It is expected to be deployed as a high speed backbone in order to
      federate a potentially large set of LoWPANs.

   Extended LoWPAN

      This is the aggregation of multiple LoWPANs as defined in [3]
      interconnected by a backbone link via Edge Routers and forming a
      single subnet.

   LoWPAN Link

      A low-power wireless link which is shared by a link-local scope in
      a LoWPAN.  In a LoWPAN, a link can be a very instable set of
      nodes, for instance the set of nodes that can receive a packet
      that is broadcast over the air in a route over LoWPAN, or the set
      of nodes currently reachable in an L2 mesh in a mesh under LoWPAN.



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      Such a set may vary from one packet to the next as the nodes move
      or as the radio propagation conditions change.

   LoWPAN Subnet

      A subnet including a LoWPAN or an Extended LoWPAN, together with
      the backbone link with the same subnet prefix and prefix length.












































Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


3.  Design Space

   Inspired by [7], this section describes the potential dimensions that
   could be used to describe the design space of wireless sensor
   networks in the context of the 6LoWPAN WG.  The design space is
   already limited by the unique characteristics of a LoWPAN (e.g., low-
   power, short range, low-bit rate) as described in [3].  The possible
   dimensions for scenario categorization used in this document are
   described as follows:

   o  Deployment: In a LoWPAN, sensor nodes can be scattered randomly or
      they may be deployed in an organized manner.  The deployment can
      occur at once, or as an iterative process.  The selected type of
      deployment has an impact on node density and location.  This
      feature affects how to organize (manually or automatically) the
      sensor network and how to allocate addresses in the network.

   o  Network Size: The network size takes into account nodes that
      provide the intended network capability.  The number of nodes
      involved in a LoWPAN could be small (10 nodes), moderate (several
      100s), or large (over a 1000).

   o  Power Source: The power source of nodes, whether the sensor nodes
      are battery-powered or mains-powered, influences the network
      design.  A hybrid solution is also possible where only part of the
      network is mains-powered.

   o  Connectivity: Nodes within a LoWPAN are considered "always
      connected" when there is a network connection between any two
      given nodes.  However, due to external factors (e.g., extreme
      environment, mobility) or programmed disconnections (e.g.,
      sleeping mode), the network connectivity can be from
      "intermittent" (i.e., regular disconnection) to "sporadic" (i.e.,
      almost always disconnected network).

   o  Routing: The routing factor highlights the number of hops that has
      to be traversed to reach the edge of the network or a destination
      node within it.  A single hop may be needed for simple star-
      topologies or a multi-hop communication scheme for more elaborate
      topologies, such as meshes or trees.  From previous work by
      academia and industry on LoWPANs, various routing mechanisms have
      been introduced, such as data-centric, event-driven, address-
      centric, localization-based, geographical routing, etc.  This
      document does not make use of such a fine granularity but rather
      uses topologies and single/multi-hop communication when referring
      to the routing categorization.





Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   o  Traffic Pattern: several traffic patterns may be used in sensor
      networks.  To name a few, Point-to-Multi-Point (P2MP), Multi-
      Point-to-Point (MP2P) and Point-to-Point (P2P).

   o  Security Level: sensor networks may carry sensitive information
      and require high-level security support where the availability,
      integrity, and confidentiality of the information are primordial.
      This high level of security may be needed in case of structural
      monitoring of key infrastructure or health monitoring of patients.

   o  Mobility: Inherent to the wireless characteristics of LoWPANs,
      sensor nodes could move or be moved around.  Mobility can be an
      induced factor (e.g., sensors in an automobile), hence not
      predictable, or a controlled characteristic (e.g., pre-planned
      movement in a supply chain).

   o  Quality of Service (QoS): for mission-critical applications,
      support of QoS is mandatory in resource-constrained LoWPANs.

































Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


4.  Application Scenarios

   This section lists a fundamental set of LoWPAN application scenarios
   in terms of system design.  A complete list of practical use cases is
   not the goal of this document.  The characteristics of the scenarios
   described in this section do not reflect the characteristics that
   every LoWPAN must have in a particular environment (e.g.,
   healthcare).

4.1.  Industrial Monitoring

   Sensor network applications for industrial monitoring can be
   associated with a broad range of methods to increase productivity,
   energy efficiency, and safety of industrial operations in engineering
   facilities and manufacturing plants.  Many companies currently use
   time-consuming and expensive manual monitoring to predict failures
   and to schedule maintenance or replacements in order to avoid costly
   manufacturing downtime.  Wireless sensor networks can be
   inexpensively installed and provide more frequent and more reliable
   data.  The deployment of wireless sensor networks can reduce
   equipment downtime and eliminate manual equipment monitoring that is
   costly to be carried out.  Additionally, data analysis functionality
   can be placed into the network, eliminating the need for manual data
   transfer and analysis.

   Industrial monitoring can be largely split into the following
   application fields:

   o  Process Monitoring and Control: combining advanced energy metering
      and sub-metering technologies with wireless sensor networking in
      order to optimize factory operations, reduce peak demand, and
      ultimately lower costs for energy.

      Manufacturing plants and engineering facilities, such as product
      assembly lines and engine rooms, can be drastically optimized
      using wireless sensor technology in order to ensure product
      quality, control energy consumption, avoid machine downtimes, and
      increase operation safety.  In industrial settings, sensors such
      as vibration detectors can be used to continuously monitor
      equipment and predict equipment failure and to detect the need for
      maintenance, with far greater precision.  This allows companies to
      avoid costly equipment failures or shutdowns of production lines
      and therefore increase their productivity.

      Greater access to process parameters gives engineers better
      visibility and ultimately better decision making power.  Various
      sensor measurements, such as gas pressure, the flow of liquids and
      gases, room temperature and humidity, or tank charging levels may



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      be used together with controllers and actuators to improve a
      plant's productivity in a continuous self-controlling loop, in
      which instruments can be upgraded, calibrated, and reconfigured as
      needed via the wireless channel.

      A plant's monitoring boundary often does not cover the entire
      facility but only those areas considered critical to the process.
      Easy to install wireless connectivity extends this line to include
      peripheral areas and process measurements that were previously
      infeasible or impractical to reach with wired connections.

   o  Machine Surveillance: ensuring product quality and efficient and
      safe equipment operation.  Critical equipment parameters such as
      vibration, temperature, and electrical signature are analyzed for
      abnormalities that are suggestive of impending equipment failure
      (see Section 4.2).

   o  Supply Chain Management and Asset Tracking: with the retail
      industry being legally responsible for the quality of sold goods,
      early detection of inadequate storage conditions with respect to
      temperature will reduce risk and cost to remove products from the
      sales channel.  Examples include container shipping, product
      identification, cargo monitoring, distribution and logistics.

      Global supply chain and transportation applications increasingly
      require real-time sensor and location information about their
      supplies and assets.  Wireless sensor networks meet these
      requirements efficiently with low installation and management
      costs, providing benefits such as reduced inventory, increased
      asset utilization, and precise location tracking of containers,
      goods, and mobile equipment.  Clients can be provided with an
      early warning of possible chain ruptures, for example by using
      call centers or conveniently accessing comprehensive on-line
      reports and data management systems.  Such reports could include
      monitoring of current states, the history of goods with critical
      conservation conditions, and in critical areas the monitoring
      status of oil containers, or verification of chemical gas
      substance concentration.

      For instance, thousands of cargo ships loaded with millions of
      containers are sailing the oceans today.  However, supply and
      demand are not equally distributed around the world, which results
      in high costs for shipping empty containers.  Sophisticated IT
      systems try to circumnavigate this problem and precision planning
      is critical in any case: the customer always expects containers to
      arrive just in time.  Wireless sensor networks have a great
      potential of making this growing market even more efficient by
      allowing more reliable tracking and identification of containers,



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      and cargo monitoring for hazardous freight detection or
      identification of illegal shipment.

      Also, the process of loading and unloading can be implemented more
      efficiently.  For example, after a crane operator has lifted a
      container from the deck, its content is identified and taken to
      the corresponding warehouse -- on a driverless truck whose
      movements are controlled at centimeter precision by transponders
      under the asphalt.

   o  Storage Monitoring: sensory systems designed to prevent releases
      of regulated substances to ground water, surface water and soil.
      This application field may also include theft/tampering prevention
      systems for storage facilities or other infrastructure, such as
      pipelines.

4.1.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Storage Monitoring (Hospital Storage Rooms)

   In a hospital, maintenance of the right temperature in storage rooms
   is very critical.  Red blood cells need to be stored at 2 to 6
   degrees Celsius, blood platelets at 20 to 24 C, and blood plasma
   below -18 C. For anti-cancer medicine, maintaining a humidity of 45%
   to 55% is required.  Storage rooms have temperature sensors and
   humidity sensors every 25m to 100m, based on the floor plan and the
   location of shelves, as indoor obstacles distort the radio signals.
   At each blood pack a sensor tag can be installed to track the
   temperature during delivery.  A LoWPAN node is installed in each
   container of a set of blood packs.  In this case, highly dense
   networks must be managed.

   All nodes are statically deployed and manually configured with either
   a single- or multi-hop connection.  Different types of LoWPAN nodes
   are configured based on the service and network requirements.

   All LoWPAN nodes do not move unless the blood packs or a container of
   blood packs is moved.  Moving nodes get connected by logical
   attachment to a new LoWPAN.  The network configuration and routing
   tables are not changed in the storage room unless node failure
   occurs.

   This type of application works based on both periodic and event-
   driven notifications.  Periodic data is used for monitoring the right
   temperature and humidity in the storage rooms.  The data over or
   under a pre-defined threshold is meaningful to report.  Blood cannot
   be used if it is exposed to the wrong environment for about 30
   minutes.  Thus, event-driven data sensed on abnormal occurrences is



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   time-critical and requires secure and reliable transmission.  Due to
   the time-critical sensing data, reliable and secure data transmission
   is highly important.

   Dominant parameters in industrial monitoring scenarios:

   o  Deployment: pre-planned, manually attached

   o  Mobility: no (except for the asset tracking case)

   o  Network Size: medium to large size, high node density

   o  Power Source: all battery-operated

   o  Security Level: business-critical.  Secure and reliable
      transmission must be guaranteed.  An extra key mechanism can be
      used.

   o  Routing: single- to multi-hop.  Routing tables are merely changed
      after configuration, except in the asset tracking case.  Node
      failure or indoor obstacles will cause the changes.

   o  Connectivity: always on for crucial processes, otherwise
      intermittent

   o  QoS: important for time-critical event-driven data

   o  Traffic Pattern: P2P (actuator control), MP2P (data collection)

   o  Other Issues: Sensor network management

4.1.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   The network configuration of the above use-case can differ
   substantially by system design.  As illustrated in Figure 4, the
   simplest way is to build up a star topology inside of one storage
   room, and connect the storage rooms with one link.  Each LoWPAN node
   reaches the Edge Router (ER) by pre-defined routing/forwarding
   mechanism. the LoWPAN Coordinator Nodes (CNs) play role in
   aggregation of the sensed data at each storage room and transmit the
   data.  It is noted that the LoWPAN CN is a logical entity so that it
   can be implemented together with an LoWPAN Edge Router or a LoWPAN
   Node.  In case data from an individual node is important, such as
   urgent event-driven data, it will not be accumulated (and further
   delayed) by the LoWPAN CN but immediately relayed.  In Mesh under,
   link-layer addresses in mesh-header defined in RFC 4944[4] are used
   for transmission, and in Route Over, IP forwarding is used.




Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   Based on the layout and size of the storage room, the LoWPAN can be
   configured in mesh topology as shown in Figure 5.  More than one
   LoWPAN CNs can be installed in a storage room, and CNs collect data
   and become relay points to send it to the LoWPAN ERs.  LoWPAN Nodes
   need to build a multi-hop connection to reach the CNs and ER by ether
   Mesh Under or Route Over.  In Mesh Under, more than one CNs can be
   installed in the LoWPAN and the nodes play role in transmission
   multi-point traffic (multicast) to unicast method, not only role in
   data collection.  In Route Over, LoWPAN Routers will handle multicast
   traffic to their LoWPAN Link.

   Each LoWPAN node configures its link-local address and may get a
   prefix from its default router by an 6LoWPAN ND procedure (ND
   optimization is on-going work in the WG [9]).  Inside of the storage
   room, each node does not need to get a globally unique IPv6 address.
   However, containers can be moved inside or outside of the hospital,
   so that globally unique addresses may be needed depending on the
   purpose of the system and service.  Address auto-configuration is
   explained in Chapter 6 of RFC 4944 [4].  When the system is only used
   within a link-local scope, 16-bit addresses can be utilized, but 64-
   bit addresses are recommended for globally unique addressing.

   The data volume is usually not so big in this case, but it is
   sensitive for delay.  Data aggregators can be installed for each
   storage room, or just one data aggregator can collect all data.  To
   make a light transmission, UDP (encapsulated in 6LoWPAN header or as
   it is) will be chosen, but secure transmission and security mechanism
   should be added.  To increase security, MAC layer mechanisms or
   additional security mechanisms can be used.

   Because a failure of a LoWPAN node can critically affect the storage
   of the blood packs, network management is important in this use-case.
   SNMP-lite or other mechanism SHOULD be provided for the management.

   When a container is moved out from the storage room, and connected to
   the hospital system (if the hospital buildings are fully or partly
   covered with 6LoWPANs), it should rebind to a new parent and a new
   LoWPAN. 6LoWPAN ND[9] will support this procedure.  In case that it
   is moved by an ambulance, it will be connected to an edge router in
   vehicle.











Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


                         ER
                         |                     ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
             CN----------CN----------CN        CN: Coordinator Node
            / | \       / | \       / | \       n: LoWPAN Node
           n  n  n     n  n  n     n  n  n

             Figure 4: Storage rooms with simple star topology


                          GW
             +------------+-----------+         GW: Gateway
             |            |           |         ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
            ER           ER         ER(CN)      CN: Coordinator Node
             |            |           |             (Data Aggregator)
       n -- CN -- n      CN -- n      n         n: LoWPAN Node
           / | \          |          /|\
          n CN  n    n -- n --CN    n n n
           / | \              /|\
          n  n  n -- n       n n n

                Figure 5: Storage rooms with mesh topology


4.2.  Structural Monitoring

   Intelligent monitoring in facility management can make safety checks
   and periodic monitoring of the architecture status highly efficient.
   Mains-powered nodes can be included in the design phase of a
   construction or battery-equipped nodes can be added afterwards.  All
   nodes are static and manually deployed.  Some data is not critical
   for security protection (such as normal room temperature), but event-
   driven emergency data MUST be handled in very critical manner.

4.2.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Bridge Safety Monitoring

   A 1000m long bridge with 10 pillars is described.  Each pillar and
   the bridge body contain 5 sensors to measure the water level, and 5
   vibration sensors are used to monitor its structural health.  The
   sensor nodes are deployed to have 100m line-of-sight distance from
   each other.  All nodes are placed statically and manually configured
   with a single-hop connection to the coordinator.  All sensor nodes do
   not move while the service is provided.  The network configuration
   and routing tables are changed only in case of node failure.  Except
   from the pillars, there are no special obstacles of attenuation to
   the sensor signals, but careful configuration is needed to prevent
   signal interference between sensors.



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   The network configuration and routing tables are changed only in case
   of node failure.  On the top part of each pillar, an "infrastructure"
   sink node is placed to collect the sensed data.  The sink nodes of
   each pillar become data gathering point of the sensor nodes at the
   pillar.

   This use case can be extended to medium or large size sensor networks
   to monitor a building or for instance the safety status of highways
   and tunnels.  Larger networks of the same kind still have similar
   characteristics such as static nodes, manual deployment, and mostly
   star (or multi-level of star) topologies (see Figure 6), but
   dependent on the blue print of the structure, mesh topologies will be
   built with mains-powered relay points.  Periodic and event-driven
   real-time data gathering is performed and the emergency event-driven
   data MUST be delivered without delay.

   Dominant parameters in structural monitoring applications:

   o  Deployment: static, organized, pre-planned

   o  Mobility: none

   o  Network Size: small (dozens of nodes) to large

   o  Power Source: mains-powered nodes are mixed with battery powered
      (mains-power nodes will be used for coordinators or relays)

   o  Security Level: safety-critical.  Secure transmission must be
      guaranteed.  Only authenticated users should be able to access and
      handle the data.  Lightweight key mechanisms can be used.

   o  Routing: star-topology (potentially hierarchical) In case of
      hierarchical case, reorganization of routing tree may be the
      issue.  However, routing table may merely be changed after
      configuration.  Node failure or indoor obstacles will cause the
      changes.

   o  Connectivity: always connected or intermittent by sleeping mode
      scheduling.

   o  QoS: Emergency notification (fire, over-threshold vibrations,
      water level, etc) is required to have priority of delivery and
      must be transmitted in a highly reliable manner.

   o  Traffic Pattern: MP2P (data collection), P2P (localized querying)

   o  Other Issues: accurate sensing and reliable transmission are
      important.  In addition, sensor status reports may be needed to



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      maintain a reliable monitoring system.

4.2.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   The network configuration of this use case can be very simple, but
   there are many extended use-cases for more complex structures.  The
   example bridge monitoring case may be the simplest case.  Dependent
   on the bridge size, the network will be configured by multiple stars
   or a mesh topology.

   Each LoWPAN node configures its link-local address and may get a
   prefix from its default router by an 6LoWPAN ND procedure [9]).  Each
   pillar may have one LoWPAN Coordinator Node(CN) for data collection
   from each pillar.  Each node does not need to get a globally unique
   IPv6 address, as the main communication is from/to the LoWPAN CN of
   each pillar.  In this manner, this system is likely to be built as a
   stub network, so that 16-bit addresses can be utilized, but 64-bit
   addresses are recommended for the new header format [10].  Globally
   unique addresses MAY be allocated depending on the purpose of the
   system.

   The LoWPAN Nodes are installed on the place after manual optimization
   of their location.  Static data paths to the data gathering point can
   be set in the commissioning phase.  If the network does not use a
   Route Over mechanism, the 6LoWPAN mesh-header described in RFC 4944
   [4] is used for static data forwarding.  In Mesh Under, a IPv6 link
   is shared by all nodes in the LoWPAN, but for Route Over, an IPv6
   link is only shared by nodes that lie in radio transmission range.

   A logical entity of data gathering can be implemented in each LoWPAN
   CN.  Communication schedules must be set up between leaf nodes and
   their CN to efficiently gather the different types of sensed data.
   Each data packet may include meta-information about its data, or the
   type of sensors could be encoded in its address during the address
   allocation.  The data gathering entity can be programmed to trigger
   actuators installed in the infrastructure, when a certain threshold
   value has been reached.  This type of application works based on both
   periodic and event-driven notifications.  The data over or under a
   pre-defined threshold is meaningful to report.  Event-driven data
   sensed on abnormal occurrences is time-critical and requires secure
   and reliable transmission.  For energy conservation, all nodes may
   have periodic and long sleep modes but wake up on certain events.

   Due to the safety-critical data of the structure, authentication and
   security are important issues here.  Only authenticated users should
   be allowed to access the data.  Additional security should be
   provided at the LoWPAN ER for restricting the access from outside of
   the LoWPAN.  The LoWPAN ER may take charge of authentication of



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   LoWPAN nodes.  Reliable and secure data transmission SHOULD be
   guaranteed.


              n  n  n
               \ | /                ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
           n ---CN --- ER --- n     CN: LoWPAN Coordinator Node
               / | \                    and Data Aggregator
              n  n  n                n: LoWPAN Node

              Figure 6: A LoWPAN with a simple star topology.


   ER ---CN ------CN -------CN           ER: Edge Router
         /|      / | \       |           C: LoWPAN Coordinator Node
        h r(m)  h r(m) h   r(m)-r(m)-h    r: LoWPAN Router (Route Over)
          /\       |         |            m: Mesh Node (Mesh Under)
         h  h      h       r(m) -- h      h: LoWPAN Host

                  Figure 7: A LoWPAN with a mesh topology


4.3.  Healthcare

   LoWPANs are envisioned to be heavily used in healthcare environments.
   They have a big potential to ease the deployment of new services by
   getting rid of cumbersome wires and simplify patient care in
   hospitals and for home care.  In healthcare environments, delayed or
   lost information may be a matter of life or death.

   Various systems, ranging from simple wearable remote controls for
   tele-assistance or intermediate systems with wearable sensor nodes
   monitoring various metrics to more complex systems for studying life
   dynamics, can be supported by LoWPANs.  In the latter category, a
   large amount of data from various LoWPAN Nodes can be collected:
   movement pattern observation, checks that medicaments have been
   taken, object tracking, and more.  An example of such a deployment is
   described in [8] using the concept of Personal Networks.

4.3.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Healthcare at Home by Tele-Assistance

   An old citizen who lives alone wears one to few wearable LoWPAN Nodes
   to measure heartbeat, pulse rate, etc.  Dozens of LoWPAN Nodes are
   densely installed at home for movement detection.  A LoWPAN Edge
   Router at home will send the sensed information to a connected
   healthcare center.  Portable base stations with LCDs may be used to



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   check the data at home, as well.  The different roles of devices have
   different duty-cycles, which affect node management.

   Multipath interference may often occur due to the patients' mobility
   at home, where there are many walls and obstacles.  Even during
   sleeping, the change of the body position may affect the radio
   propagation.

   Data is gathered both periodically and event-driven.  In this
   application, event-driven data can be very time-critical.  Thus,
   real-time and reliable transmission must be guaranteed.

   Privacy also becomes an issue in this case, as the sensing data is
   very personal.  In addition, different data will be provided to the
   hospital system than what is given to a patient's family members.
   Role-based access control is needed to support such services, thus
   support of authorization and authentication is important.

   Dominant parameters in healthcare applications:

   o  Deployment: pre-planned

   o  Mobility: moderate (patient's mobility)

   o  Network Size: small, high node density

   o  Power Source: hybrid

   o  Security Level: Data privacy and security must be provided.
      Encryption is required.  Role based access control is required to
      be support by proper authentication mechanism

   o  Routing: multihop for homecare devices, star topology on patients
      body.  Multipath interference due to walls and obstacles at home
      must be considered.

   o  Connectivity: always on

   o  QoS: high level of support (life and death implication), role-
      based

   o  Traffic Pattern: MP2P/P2MP (data collection), P2P (local
      diagnostic)

   o  Other issues: Plug-and-play configuration is required for mainly
      non-technical end-users.  Real-time data acquisition and analysis
      are important.  Efficient data management is needed for various
      devices which have different duty-cycles, and for role-based data



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


      control.  Reliability and robustness of the network are also
      essential.

4.3.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   In this use case, the local network size is rather small (less than
   10s of nodes).  The home care system is statically configured with
   multi-hop paths and the patient's body network can be built as a star
   topology.  The LoWPAN Edge Router(ER) at home is the sink node in the
   routing path from sources on the patient's body.  A plug-and-play
   configuration is required.  Each home system node will get a link-
   local IPv6 address according to the auto-configuration described in
   RFC 4944 [4].  As the communication of the system is limited to a
   home environment, both 16-bit and 64-bit can be used for IPv6 link-
   local addresses.  However, 64-bit address is recommended to perform
   the 6LoWPAN ND [9] and new header format in [10].  An example
   topology is provided in Figure 8.

   Multi-hop communication can be achieved by either Mesh Under or Route
   Over routing mechanisms.  In case the Mesh Under mechanism is
   implemented, the LoWPAN ER becomes the only router of the home
   network, and ND is done as [9] describes.  When Route Over routing
   mechanism is used, the routers deployed in the home environment will
   form a mesh of IPv6 links.  In Mesh Under, more than one CNs can be
   installed in the LoWPAN and the nodes play role in transmission
   multi-point traffic (multicast) to unicast method.  In Route Over,
   LoWPAN Routers will handle multicast traffic to their LoWPAN Link.

   The patient's body network can be simply configured as a star
   topology with a LoWPAN Coordinator Node(CN) dealing with data
   aggregation and dynamic network attachment when the patient moves
   around at home.  As multipath interference may often occur due to the
   patients' mobility at home, the deployment of LoWPAN nodes and
   transmission paths should be well considered.  At home, some nodes
   can be installed with power-affluence status, and those LoWPAN Nodes
   can be used for relaying points or data aggregation points.

   It should be maintained the sensed information with the
   identification of the patient wherever the patient visits the
   connected hospital or stays at home.  If the patient's LoWPAN uses
   globally unique IPv6 address, the address can be used for the
   identification, however, the home system itself does not require
   globally unique IPv6 address but could be run with link-local IPv6
   address.  In this case, the hospital LoWPAN needs to operate
   additional identification system.

   The connection with the LoWPAN Edge Router at home and the ER at
   Hospital must provide reliable and secure transmission, as the data



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   is privacy-critical.  To achieve this, additional policy for security
   is recommended between the two LoWPAN.


                          n --- n                I: Internet
                          |     |               ER: Edge Router
      ER --- I --- ER --- n --- n --- CN        CN: Coordinator Node
      /|\           |     |           /|\        n: LoWPAN Node
    .. . ..         n --- n          h h h       h: LoWPAN Host

   (hospital)       (home system)  (patient)

                  Figure 8: A mobile healthcare scenario.


4.4.  Connected Home

   The "Connected" Home or "Smart" home is with no doubt an area where
   LoWPANs can be used to support an increasing number of services:

   o  Home safety/security

   o  Home Automation and Control

   o  Healthcare (see above section)

   o  Smart appliances and home entertainment systems

   In home environments LoWPAN networks typically comprise a few dozen
   and probably in the near future a few hundreds of nodes of various
   nature: sensors, actuators and connected objects.

4.4.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Home Automation

   In terms of home safety and security, the LoWPAN is made of motion-
   and audio-sensors, sensors at doors and windows, and video cameras to
   which additional sensors can be added for security (gas, water, CO,
   Radon, smoke detection).  The LoWPAN typically comprises a few dozen
   of nodes forming an ad-hoc network with multi-hop routing since the
   nodes may not be in direct range.  In its most simple form, all nodes
   are static and communicate with a central control module but more
   sophisticated scenarios may also involve inter-device communication.
   For example, a motion/presence sensor may send a multicast message to
   a group of lights to be switched on, or a video camera will be
   activated sending a video stream to a gateway that can be received on
   a cell phone.



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   The home automation and control system LoWPAN offers a wide range of
   services: local or remote access from the Internet (via a secured
   edge router) to monitor the home (temperature, humidity, activation
   of remote video surveillance, status of the doors (locked or open),
   ...) but also for home control (activate the air conditioning/
   heating, door locks, sprinkler systems, ...).  Fairly sophisticated
   systems can also optimize the level of energy consumption thanks to a
   wide range of input from various sensors connected to the LoWPAN:
   light sensors, presence detection, temperature, ... in order to
   control electric window shades, chillers, air flow control, air
   conditioning and heating with the objective to optimize energy
   consumption.

   Ergonomics in Connected Homes is a key and the LoWPAN must be self-
   managed and easy to install.  Traffic patterns may greatly vary
   depending on the applicability and so does the level of reliability
   and QoS expected from the LoWPAN.  Humidity sensing is typically not
   critical and requires no immediate action whereas tele-assistance or
   gas leak detection is critical and requires a high degree of
   reliability.  Furthermore, although some actions may not involve
   critical data, still the response time and network delays must be on
   the order of a few hundreds of milliseconds to preserve the user
   experience (e.g. use a remote control to switch a light on).  A
   minority of nodes are mobile (with slow motion).  Connected Home
   LoWPAN usually do not require multi-topology or QoS routing and
   fairly simple QoS mechanisms must be supported by the LoWPAN (the
   number of Class of Services is usually limited).

   Dominant parameters for home automation applications:

   o  Deployment: multi-hop topologies

   o  Mobility: small degree of mobility

   o  Network Size: medium number of nodes, potentially high density

   o  Power Source: mix of battery and AC powered devices

   o  Security Level: authentication and encryption required

   o  Routing: no requirement for multi-topology or QoS routing

   o  Connectivity: intermittent (usage-dependent sleep modes)

   o  QoS: support of limited QoS (small number of Class of Service)

   o  Traffic Pattern: P2P (inter-device), P2MP and MP2P (polling)




Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


4.4.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   (TBD)


4.5.  Vehicle Telematics

   LoWPANs play an important role in intelligent transportation systems.
   Incorporated in roads, vehicles, and traffic signals, they contribute
   to the improvement of safety of transporting systems.  Through
   traffic or air-quality monitoring, they increase the possibilities in
   terms of traffic flow optimization and help reducing road congestion.

4.5.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Telematics

   As shown in Figure 9, scattered LoWPAN Nodes are included in roads
   during their construction for motion monitoring.  When a car passes
   over of these nodes, the possibility is then given to track the
   trajectory and velocity of cars for safety purposes.  The lifetime of
   the LoWPAN Nodes incorporated into roads is expected to be as long as
   the life time of the roads (10 years).  Multihop communication is
   possible between LoWPAN Nodes, and the network should be able to cope
   with the deterioration over time of the node density due to power
   failures.  Sinks placed at the road side are mains-powered, LoWPAN
   Nodes in the roads run on battery.  Power savings schemes might
   intermittently disconnect the LoWPAN Nodes.  A rough estimate of 4
   nodes per square meter is needed.  Other applications may involve
   car-to-car communication for increased road safety.

   Dominant parameters in vehicle telematics applications:

   o  Deployment: scattered, pre-planned

   o  Mobility: none (road infrastructure), high(vehicle)

   o  Network Size: large (road infrastructure), small (vehicle)

   o  Power Source: mostly battery powered

   o  Security Level: low

   o  Routing: multi-hop, especially ad-hoc

   o  Connectivity: intermittent





Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   o  QoS: support of limited QoS

   o  Traffic Pattern: mostly Point-to-Point (P2P), Point-to-Multi-Point
      (P2MP)

4.5.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   For this use case, the network topology includes fixed LoWPAN Edge
   Routers that are mains-powered and have a connection to a gateway in
   order to reach the transportation control center.  These LoWPAN ERs
   are logically combined with LoWPAN Coordinator Nodes (CNs) as data
   sinks for a number of LoWPAN Nodes inserted in the tarmac of the
   road.

   In contrast to the LoWPAN ERs, the LoWPAN Nodes can generally operate
   with link-local IPv6 addresses as no direct access from outside the
   LoWPAN is established to the LoWPAN Nodes.  Based on the purpose of
   the service, globally unique IPv6 address can be allocated during the
   network setup procedure described in RFC 4944[4] and 6LoWPAN ND [9].
   In Infrastructure LoWPANs, each ER is connected by a backbone link
   and additional registration procedures may be required for management
   of multiple LoWPANs.  Details of this registration is described in
   6LoWPAN ND .

   In this topology, a LoWPAN with one LoWPAN ER forms a fixed network
   and the LoWPAN Nodes are installed by manual optimization of their
   location.  Static data paths to the data gathering point can be set
   in the commissioning phase.  If the network does not use a Route Over
   mechanism, the 6LoWPAN mesh-header described in RFC 4944 [4] is used
   for static data forwarding.  Routing tables are not changed unless a
   node failure occurs.


           +----+
           | ER |----------------------------- ER ...
           +----+    (at the road side)
    -------|------------------------------
                   |
      n -- n --- n --- n   +---|---+       ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
          / \          |   | h-n-h |        n: LoWPAN Node
         n  n          n   +---|---+        h: LoWPAN Host
                             (cars)
    --------------------------------------

       Figure 9: Multi-hop LoWPAN combined with mobile star LoWPAN.






Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


4.6.  Agricultural Monitoring

   Accurate temporal and spatial monitoring can significantly increase
   agricultural productivity.  Due to natural limitations, such as a
   farmers' inability to check the crop at all times of day or
   inadequate measurement tools, luck often plays a too large role in
   the success of harvests.  Using a network of strategically placed
   sensors, indicators such as temperature, humidity, soil condition,
   can be automatically monitored without labor intensive field
   measurements.  For example, sensor networks could provide precise
   information about crops in real time, enabling businesses to reduce
   water, energy, and pesticide usage and enhancing environment
   protection.  The sensing data can be used to find optimal
   environments for the plants.  In addition, the data on the planting
   condition can be saved by sensor tags, which can be used in supply
   chain management.

4.6.1.  A Use Case and its Requirements

   Example: Automated Vineyard

   In a vineyard with medium to large geographical size, a number of 50
   to 100 LoWPAN Coordinator Nodes are manually deployed in order to
   provide full signal coverage over the study area.  An additional
   number of 100 to 1000 leaf nodes with (possibly heterogeneous)
   specialized sensors (i.e., humidity, temperature, soil condition,
   sunlight) are attached to the LoWPAN CNs in local wireless star
   topologies, periodically reporting measurements to the associated
   LoWPAN CNs.  For example, in a 20-acre vineyard with 8 parcels of
   land, 10 LoWPAN Nodes are placed within each parcel to provide
   readings on temperature and soil moisture.  The LoWPAN Nodes are able
   to support a multi-hop routing scheme to enable data forwarding to a
   sink node at the edge of the vineyard.  Each of the 8 parcels
   contains one data aggregator to collect the sensed data.  Ten
   intermediate nodes are used to connect the sinks to the main gateway.

   Sensor localization is important for geographical routing, for
   pinning down where an event occurred, and for combining gathered data
   with their actual position.  Using manual deployment, device
   addresses can be used.  For randomly deployed nodes, a localization
   algorithm needs to be applied.

   There might be various types of sensor devices deployed in a single
   LoWPAN, each providing raw data with different semantics.  Thus, an
   additional method is required to correctly interpret sensor readings.
   Each data packet may include meta-information about its data, or a
   type of a sensor could be encoded in its address during address
   allocation.



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   Dominant parameters in agricultural monitoring:

   o  Deployment: pre-planned

      The sensor nodes are installed outdoors or in a greenhouse with
      high exposure to water, soil, dust, in dynamic environments of
      moving people and machinery, with growing crop and foliage.
      Sensor nodes can be deployed in a pre-defined manner, considering
      the harsh environment.

   o  Mobility: all static

   o  Network Size: medium to large, low to medium density

   o  Power Source: all nodes are battery-powered, except the sink

   o  Security Level: business-critical.  Light-weight security or a
      global key management can be used depending on the business
      purpose.

   o  Routing: mesh topology with local star connections.  Routing table
      is merely changed after configuration.  Node failure or indoor
      obstacles will cause the changes.

   o  Connectivity: intermittent (many sleeping nodes)

   o  QoS: not critical

   o  Traffic Pattern: Mainly MP2P/P2MP.  P2P for Gateway communication
      or actuator triggering.

   o  Other issues: Time synchronization among sensors are required, but
      the traffic interval may not be frequent (e.g. once in 30 minutes
      to 1 hour).

4.6.2.  6LoWPAN Applicability

   The network configuration in this use case might, in the most simple
   case, look like illustrated in Figure 10.  This static scenario
   consists of one or more fixed edge routers that are mains-powered and
   have a high-bandwidth connection to a gateway via a backbone link,
   which might be placed in a control center, or connect to the
   Internet.  The LoWPAN Edge Routers are strategically located at the
   border of vineyard parcels, acting as data sinks.  A number LoWPAN
   Coordinator Nodes are placed along a row of plants with individual
   LoWPAN Hosts spread around them.

   While the LoWPAN ERs implement the IPv6 Neighbor Discovery protocol



Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


   (RFC 4861), the LoWPAN Nodes need a more energy-efficient mechanism.
   They instead follow LoWPAN Neighbor Discovery as described in [9],
   which includes basic bootstrapping and address assignment.  Link-
   local addresses are used for communication within the network.  Each
   LoWPAN ER can have predefined forward management information, if
   necessary.

   The intermediate nodes must implement a multi-hop routing protocol
   (Mesh Under or Route Over) and they are responsible for forwarding
   measurement data of the LoWPAN hosts towards the LoWPAN ERs.  In this
   simplest case, the LoWPAN Routers (not edge routers) or Mesh Nodes
   can build static routing (or forwarding) paths, and all end-nodes can
   be placed in one radio hop distance from its forwarder.  Packets can
   be forwarded to each router or mesh node and relayed to the LoWPAN ER
   by link-layer forwarding using the 6LoWPAN mesh-header or Route Over
   routing.

   LoWPAN nodes may send event-driven notifications when readings exceed
   certain thresholds, such as low soil humidity; which may
   automatically trigger a water sprinkler in the local environment.
   For increased energy efficiency, all LoWPAN Nodes are in periodic
   sleep state.  However, the LoWPAN CNs need to be aware of sudden
   events from the leaf nodes.  Their sleep periods should therefore be
   set to shorter intervals.  Communication schedules must be set up
   between master and leaf nodes, and global time synchronization is
   needed to account for clock drift.

   Also, the result of data collection may activate actuators.  Context-
   awareness, node identification and data collection on the application
   level are necessary.


     +----+
     | GW |                              GW: Gateway
     +----+                              ER: LoWPAN Edge Router
        |    h h h   h h h   h h h       CN: LoWPAN Coordinator Node
        |     \|/     \|/     \|/         r: Route Over (LoWPAN Router)
       ER----CN(r,m)--CN(r,m)--CN(r,m)    m: Mesh Under(forwarding node)
        |     /|\     /|\     /|\         h: LoWPAN Host
        |    h h h   h h h   h h h
       ER
       ...

                  Figure 10: An aligned multi-hop LoWPAN.







Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


5.  Security Considerations

   Security requirements are differ by use-cases.  For example, industry
   monitoring an structure monitoring applications are safety-critical.
   Secure transmission must be guaranteed, and only authenticated users
   should be able to access and handle the data.  Lightweight key
   mechanisms can be used.  In health care system, data privacy is an
   important issue.  Encryption is required, and role based access
   control is required to be support by proper authentication mechanism.










































Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


6.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to David Cypher for giving more insight on the IEEE 802.15.4
   standard and to Irene Fernandez for her review and valuable comments.















































Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
         "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
         September 2007.

   [3]   Kushalnagar, N., Montenegro, G., and C. Schumacher, "IPv6 over
         Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview,
         Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals", RFC 4919,
         August 2007.

   [4]   Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
         "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks",
         RFC 4944, September 2007.

   [5]   IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2006 (as amended)",
         2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [6]   Bulusu, N. and S. Jha, "Wireless Sensor Networks", July 2005.

   [7]   Roemer, K. and F. Mattern, "The Design Space of Wireless Sensor
         Networks", December 2004.

   [8]   den Hartog, F., Schmidt, J., and A. de Vries, "On the Potential
         of Personal Networks for Hospitals", May 2006.

   [9]   Shelby, Z., Thubert, P., Hui, C., Chakrabarti, S., and E.
         Nordmark, "Neighbor Discovery for 6LoWPAN,
         draft-shelby-6lowpan-nd-00 (work in progress)", October 2008.

   [10]  Hui, J. and P. Thubert, "Compression Format for IPv6 Datagrams
         in 6LoWPAN Networks, draft-ietf-6lowpan-hc-04 (work in
         progress)", December 2008.











Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       6LoWPAN Design and Applications          March 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Eunsook Kim
   ETRI
   161 Gajeong-dong
   Yuseong-gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82-42-860-6124
   Email: eunah.ietf@gmail.com


   Nicolas G. Chevrollier
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   P.O. Box 5050
   Delft  2600
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31-15-285-7354
   Email: nicolas.chevrollier@tno.nl


   Dominik Kaspar
   Simula Research Laboratory
   Martin Linges v 17
   Snaroya  1367
   Norway

   Phone: +47-4748-9307
   Email: dokaspar.ietf@gmail.com


   JP Vasseur
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough  MA 01719
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: jpv@cisco.com









Kim, et al.             Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 32]


