

Personal                                                   Tom Bombadil 
                                                      Lord of the Hosts 
    
Internet Draft 
Document: draft-bombadil-netlemmings-00.txt                

Expires: November 2006                                   1st April 2006 
                                                   
    
 
                                                                                      
                                NETLeMMings –  
Or how I learned to Stop Thinking and Forget the Basics of IP Mobility 
                       draft-bombadil-netlemmings-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
 Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a max of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 2006. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
    
    
    
    
    
 
   

  
<Bombabil>                        1                                    
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This is the story of the Host and how it became a mindless 
   NETLeMMing under the influence of evil priesthoods and the 
   inexcusable failure of the IETF to protect its fundamental rights 
    
    
    
   INDEX 
    
1. Happier Days.......................................................3 
2. The Priesthoods....................................................3 
3. The Fall of the Host(s)............................................6 
4. The Failure(s) of the IETF.........................................7 
5. The Return of the Hosts............................................9 
6. Disclaimer........................................................11 
7. Author's
 Address..................................................11 
Intellectual Property Statement......................................11 
Copyright Statement..................................................12 
Acknowledgment.......................................................12 
    
    



























 
<Bombadil>                                                           2  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
1. Happier Days  
    
   Once upon a time, in an Inter-network far, far away, there lived a 
   Host.  The Host was happy.  The Host did what it liked, when it 
   liked, and was generally beholden to no one.  Some days it would 
   wake up, stretch its protocol stack, fire up its favorite protocol 
   appendage (most mornings this was Ethernet), brew up a
 little Java 
   and view its neighborhood via its favorite window Firefox; on other 
   days it would run Explorer (usually on cloudy days).  Still, the 
   Host was happy, determining what Apps it ran and when.  It would 
   often speak with its family and friends using a variety of VoIP/IM 
   technologies, having to gateway to circuit-based communications only 
   when encountering 'The Legacy' network---an entity the Host did not 
   understand but which, from the little it sensed, seemed to represent 
   a black hole---an enigma absorbing all insight and innovation, and 
   emanating nothing but a sense of despair.  As one can imagine, the 
   Host stayed as far away from The Legacy as possible.   
    
   Following breakfast, the Host would pack up and head to work.  
   Suddenly, its Ethernet appendage would cease to function.  But no 
   matter, this happened everyday and the Host would activate and 
   quickly shift to
 another of its appendages called a Wireless Wide 
   Area Network (WWAN) to maintain communications with its favorite 
   Hosts.  The Host understood that its Inbox would fill rapidly with 
   Invoices when using this appendage. The Host often wondered why, 
   despite these charges, that this limb functioned so poorly, being at 
   first glance little different from its other appendages. Then it 
   realized its driver for this appendage was more complex than that of 
   its lightweight Ethernet driver, and that strange things had been 
   done to its TCP stack in a seemingly vain attempt to improve the 
   performance of this appendage.  The more the Host pondered this 
   issue, the more this appendage's inherent complexity began to remind 
   him of his distant inter-workings with The Legacy.  The more the 
   Host utilized this appendage, the more its bad feelings grew and the 
   Host looked for any opportunity to shed this
 appendage.  
    
   Fortunately, when the Host arrived at work, a corporate 802.11 
   network eagerly awaited.  The Host would activate this appendage, 
   dispense with the ill-feeling and costly WWAN, and smooth 
   communications quickly resumed. All in all, the Host was happy.  It 
   could move from place to place, using a variety of network 
   appendages and applications as best suited its needs, but it hoped 
   one day that someone would make big improvements to the WWAN. 
    
2. The Priesthoods 
    
   But not all were happy.  The folks that created the malformed "all-
   IP" WWAN networks were becoming increasingly concerned.  The WWAN, 
   you see, was primarily designed by the Shinto-led Nordic Priesthood, 
   who loved to build colorful, multi-form network boxes in a variety 
   of tactile materials that could be piled up in sanctuaries and 
   shrines across the world, and shifted in large numbers to
 their 
   unsuspecting and fashion conscious Followers, the Network Operators 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           3  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   (NetOptors). For many years, their power in the WWAN had been 
   unchallenged, their authority absolute.  Even though much of the 
   value they had recently created had turned out to be negative, they 
   had managed to get paid just the same (tricksy they are).  If at any 
   point their following began to wane, they would simply profess the 
   refined qualities of the next incarnation of their God. Not to 
   worry, the 3rd incarnation of God, 3G, would be perfect---and if 
   not, surely the 4th will be.  But now the inexorable march of 
   technology was preparing to take its next step.   
    
   For many years, insidiously from the perspective of some, the 
  
 Internet had been growing---a distributed, decentralized network 
   with an open application framework.  Sounds like a good thing, and 
   it is---promoting innovation and competition---unless it happens to 
   devalue the 'value' you provide.   
    
   For some of the Priests did not like the Hosts, did not like the 
   inherent power they currently wielded or the future power they 
   represented.  For these Priests worshipped at the altar of the God 
   of Network Control, and it is a belief that they have helped to 
   spread far and wide amongst their Followers within the NetOptors.  
   To such a faith a self-controlled Host is blasphemous, for it 
   destroys the very premise of their religion; that the network knows 
   what is best for the Host. 
    
   For in their faith the network is all powerful.  You see, in the 
   beginning there was the one true God, the 1G Network, beautiful in 
   its analog simplicity,
 complete in its omnipotence of control.  Yes, 
   there were perhaps many warring, incompatible sects within the 
   faith, but at its heart lay the golden core of pure Network Control.  
   Miraculously, from the ashes of this war rose a Phoenix, a second 
   God, a digital God, a 2G God which could unite the warring analog 
   factions under a single world-wide credo, or so it was thought.  For 
   in America, that land of annoyingly clever people that drive cars 
   much too big for them, a competing 2G God was already rising.  Its 
   following took root in Asia and America, and gradually spread across 
   the globe as well.   
    
   This new theology also greatly appealed to the Shinto Priests, who 
   already worshipped Network Control as one of their highest Kami.  
   But with the new faith being of foreign origin, the xenophobic 
   instincts of the Shinto Priests quickly surfaced, and so the belief 
   needed to be
 purified and recast as a 'wideband' Kami before it 
   could be truly praised.   
    
   The Shinto Priests, smiling and speaking ever so politely whilst 
   eating endangered fish with their Nordic brethren, suggested that if 
   the Nordic Priesthood would embrace their new Kami as a new 3G God, 
   the Nordics would be allowed to build sanctuaries amidst the Shinto 
   shrines and fill these with their beloved, multi-form colourful 
   boxes.  Being principally interested in growing their own 
   congregations in the land of Shintoism, the Nordics acquiesced and 
   adopted the Shinto wideband Kami as their new 3G God of Network 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           4  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   Control.  Unfortunately, this overly complex, confused and crippled 
   God did not understand the Internet and its
 simple principles for 
   robust operation.  Alas. 
    
   The Internet, you see, is different.  And along with its rise has 
   been an acceptance of an alternative faith---the so-called "end-to-
   end principle" in system design.  The end-to-end principle is one of 
   the central design tenets of the Internet Protocol (IP) that is the 
   basis of the Internet. Its devotion states that, whenever possible, 
   communications protocol operations should be defined to occur at the 
   *end-points* of a communications system.  The concept purports that 
   reliable systems tend to require end-to-end processing to operate 
   correctly, in addition to any processing in the intermediate system. 
   It can then be demonstrated that the end-to-end processing alone 
   suffices to make the system operate, and that the intermediate 
   processing stages are largely redundant. Given this fact, much 
   intermediate processing can be
 made simpler, relying on the end-to-
   end processing to make the system work. This leads to the model of a 
   "dumb network with smart terminals"---a completely different model 
   from the previous paradigm of the "smart network with dumb 
   terminals".  The appeal of this alternative paradigm is strong, 
   primarily because it appeals to reason. 
    
   Unsurprisingly (or perhaps surprisingly) a schism has recently 
   appeared within the Nordic Priesthood.  A set of "Application Layer" 
   Priests have broken with the faith and designed an infrastructure 
   known as IMS which makes use of SIP and operates under Host control.  
   In IMS, you see, a Host decides which Apps it wishes to run, and 
   using which appendages.  The IMS allows a Host to run only those 
   Apps for which it is authorized, which is appropriate, but the Host 
   remains in control of when, where and over which appendages these 
   services are
 used.  Such a model, whilst possibly extremely 
   profitable to NetOptors, is clearly blasphemous to the sect of 
   Network Control. 
    
   But the network control Priests are supposedly intelligent beings, 
   capable of adaptation.  With the advent of IP mobility, with the 
   need to support multi-appendage communications in a variety of 
   rapidly-evolving neighborhoods (WPAN, WLAN, WMAN, WWAN, P2H Ad hoc, 
   Satellite, etc.), surely it would be understood that Host-controlled 
   IP mobility is the simplest, most robust, and at times the only 
   feasible means.  In fact, it is perhaps the most practical 
   application of the end-to-end principle in the design of robust 
   mobile systems.  Why wouldn't all the Priests (Shintos and Nordics 
   alike) adopt the only practical and general model for inter-
   technology mobility? 
    
   Regrettably, the unspoken heresy is that the network control faith 
   is
 both self-serving and blinded by the past.  For many years the 
   Priests have constructed, in one form or another, a variety of 
   Reliable Network Control (RNC) boxes made in the image of their 
   previous Gods to maintain overall Network Control of mobility.  
   These centralized boxes have represented a portion of their "value 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           5  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   add".  In fairness to the Priests, these monolithic systems tended 
   to be built in isolation (pre-IP), using a mixture of mobile and 
   network-controlled means, but which almost always maintained overall 
   control of mobility within the network.  Consequently, such a 
   paradigm is understood, familiar and profitable to them, providing 
   them with many robes, places of worship and assorted holy southern 
  
 watery retreats. 
    
   And so they chant at the top of their voices, in strange accents, 
   that 'Full mobile control is impractical', and that 'Mobile control 
   would take NetOptors out of the loop'. Their beliefs had spread 
   insidiously throughout the scared and generally unwise NetOptors; 
   with the free-thinking doubters in these organizations being easily 
   brought over with vouchers for free lighting systems or rectangular 
   cutlery for the wife.   
    
3. The Fall of the Host(s) 
    
   And so it was that one day, a Host was cornered by a group of very 
   polite, excitable and somewhat pushy blond haired chaps from 
   Cliffhanger Networks, a recent for-profit offshoot run by an 
   evangelical Nordic ex-clergyman. They suggested, in a synchronous 
   monotone chant, that he plug into a new form of WWAN appendage 
   controlled by their Lemming Mobility Module (LMM).  They said it was 
   also
 all-IP, and was much better than previous WWAN. They said it 
   would enable the Host to control all its appendages better, and they 
   reeled off big words such as ubiquitous, convergence, inter-
   networking, inter-technology and didn't mention Bluetooth once. The 
   Host was impressed. 
    
   The Host was somewhat concerned by the company name, and the fact he 
   could not understand much of the manual, but he thought he would 
   give it a try. The WWAN, as it was, was very unappealing.  However, 
   when he installed and activated the Lemming driver, the Host 
   detected a sudden and uncontrollable urge to *jump*. This manifested 
   itself as a StrongARM command, originating from the Lemming driver, 
   to handoff to the WWAN, even when he was getting beautiful and cheap 
   performance over his beloved 802.11 link. He strongly resisted the 
   urge to jump, but the impetus was overwhelming, and he found himself 
 
  falling off the cliff into a rough hewn WWAN abyss filled with 
   network-controlled Lemmings.  Once in the abyss the performance was 
   dismal, occasionally even dying due to the low Signal to Noise 
   Ratio, his signal of interest being drowned out by priest-led, 
   robotic sermons regarding the joys of a predictable life under the 
   control of a synchronous network.  At the bottom of the cliff, all 
   the Host could see was a shear dark granite face, but in the 
   distance it could hear the remote sounds of Hosts high above playing 
   joyously in the Ethernet.  The Host was able to talk to the Network 
   via its LMM to tell it of its difficulties and to request a move 
   back to the Ethernet, but the Network refused, and told him to 
   recite to himself several Orwellian-like mantras from the Holy 
   scriptures reminiscent of "Freedom is Slavery, Ignorance is 
   Strength". The Host could only sit and wait amidst the
 chanting for 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           6  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   its desired networking to return, but not only did it have no idea 
   when or how this might occur, but the cost of sitting in the pew on 
   the barren rocky outcrop at the bottom of the cliff was huge, as the 
   basket requiring mandatory offerings to the Network God kept being 
   passed. 
    
   Things worsened. As he sat there, the Host realized that one by one 
   all his friends were also jumping off the cliff, guided by their own 
   Lemming Mobility Modules. Apparently, a piece of WWAN equipment was 
   telling the joyous Hosts that their lost friend was actually having 
   a great time on a sandy beach, drinking Vodka, surrounded by babes. 
   One by one the happy Hosts flung themselves into oblivion as well, 
   their
 festive sounds turning to screams as they hit the rocky floor 
   to be surrounded by chanting Norsemen.  The guys at Cliffhanger 
   Networks were delighted. With the Lemming Mobility Module installed, 
   they had complete control of the poor Hosts who could now be bullied 
   around and kept away from the free Ethernet. Any attempt by a Host 
   to try to climb up the cliff was met with a zap from its WWAN 
   appendage.  
    
4. The Failure(s) of the IETF 
    
   Amidst the chanting, the Hosts met to try to get a plan together and 
   all agreed to try to remove the Lemming Mobility Module. To their 
   horror though, they discovered that not only did the module not have 
   an uninstaller, but the LMM driver had infected and taken over the 
   drivers of all their other appendages. The LMM also came with a 
   contract clause that would gradually force them into bankruptcy, as 
   holy offerings were now mandatory.
 Their only option was to appeal 
   to the canon law as written down by the Imaginary Engineering Task 
   Force of the Hosts. They sent e-mails to the IETF (but they were 
   lost or corrupted over the WWAN). They then tried VoIP, but the WWAN 
   quality was so poor that they could not be understood. Their only 
   option was to band together, to collaborate to form a Host chain 
   using their presently useless Ethernet cables so that one of the 
   Hosts could be lifted up the cliff and could attend an IETF meeting 
   in 'person' to communicate their plight. The first Host over the 
   cliff was chosen, as he had the most experience of the rocky 
   outcrop, and had previously attended IETF meetings long ago which he 
   had found welcoming, informed, fair and fast moving.  
    
   Boy was he in for a shock.  
    
   The Host flew into Host city and met some old friends from the IETF 
   for drinks at a BAR FOB (OFF).
 His friends looked weary and gloomy, 
   and told tales of how the good days had gone.  How the end-to-end 
   principle had been set aside by the cold and cruel Priesthood, and 
   their robotic disciples at Cliffhanger, with their desire to 
   manipulate, interfere and control.  How many in the IETF now 
   worshiped 3G and spent all their energies in serving 3G to the 
   detriment of the Internet.  The Host trembled at this news and went 
   through a Restart and a Restore before he could hear anymore.  
    
 
<Bombadil>                                                           7  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   The Host next heard how meeting attendees were now motivated by 
   personal advancement rather than the common good. The Host was 
   amazed to learn of a new document called RFC4144 "How to Gain 
   Prominence and Influence in Standards
 Organizations". He was told 
   how attendees would support ideas that they didn't really believe 
   in, or even understand, would submit drafts that were nearly 
   identical to existing drafts with the intent of "merging" or getting 
   onto a design team, and volunteering to edit a draft (e.g., 
   terminology draft) without the background or expertise to contribute 
   anything meaningful---basically, of doing just about anything to be 
   part of the 'in-crowd' and to further their name by association. The 
   RFC mentioned nothing about excellence and the value of good 
   practical ideas and running code. The Host realized that, in such an 
   environment, the Shinto and Nordic Priesthoods had been able to get 
   away with murder, and had led the now Lemming-like technical 
   community on a tale of Hans Christian Anderson-sized proportions. 
   The Host left his dull-eyed, now sadly Lemming-like friends drinking 
  
 themselves into a stupor, dismayed at their demise. 
    
   The Host attended the NETwork-based Lemming Mobility Management 
   (NETLMM) meeting the next morning, refreshed and very happy from a 
   night of 'gaming' with another as yet uncorrupted Host on the 
   broadband link in his hotel room. No one seemed to recognize him 
   though, the WG members, all with vacant expressions, each mindlessly 
   staring towards the front of the room.  On introducing himself and 
   stating his purpose for attending, he was asked either "so what - 
   who cares" or "what's a Host". He sat down and waited for the 
   meeting to start.  He was dismayed to see members of the Priesthood 
   all around, dressed in matching yellow and blue outfits. The Host 
   then saw two experienced IETF members as the Chairs at the head of 
   the room and felt relieved for a brief moment. The Host then noticed 
   however that the Chairs also seemed to have
 glazed eyes, their heads 
   wincing from time to time as painful commands were administered via 
   LMM-controlled cranial implants. The meeting proceeded, with each 
   Chair joining in the synchronous chants led by the Cliffhanger guys 
   as they showed slide after slide of their evil network nodes 
   bullying poorly defined and defenseless Hosts into performing 
   impossible circus tricks on demand. They even showed graphs of how 
   far and fast their LMM technology could provoke a Host to jump, if 
   they so wished, sometimes condemning them to the pit of dial-up 
   despair. 
    
   The Host stood up to ask a question, but was booed. He tried to get 
   to the microphone, but his LMM kicked in and before he knew it he 
   was in a Management Area meeting, surrounded by talk of MIBs. He 
   fearlessly rushed back to the NETLMM meeting and, after carving out 
   his Lemming Mobility Module with a jakknife, he
 eventually got to 
   speak. He told them, whilst his memory leaked, about all his friends 
   at the bottom of the cliff, the mandatory network worship and 
   unflinching submission to the Priestly dictates. He cried, he 
   pleaded and he begged to be given the right to make his own choices. 
   He promised to use the WWAN whenever it made good sense, to make his 
   religious contributions on time, and promised not to use the 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           8  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   Ethernet for real-time services, but it made no difference. The 
   Lemmings, now brainwashed by the Priesthood, were happy to define 
   requirements for future Lemming Mobility Modules that would be 
   backward compatible with the LMMs already installed in their 
   infected drivers. Then they would design the new LMM
 thinking that 
   they are designing it based on their own thoughts.  The Host was 
   despondent.  It seemed that the IETF was now so full of Lemmings 
   that the intellect and integrity of the standards process was lost.   
    
   After the meeting, the Host complained vigorously to the Chairs, and 
   to the assembled clergymen.  They reassured the Host that whilst the 
   LMM may not be perfect, that its problems would be sorted out over 
   the next twenty years by future upgrades to the Lemming Mobility 
   Module.   
    
   The Host realized that all was lost. The Lemming Mobility Module was 
   the result of the fusion of a religion, of market power, of 
   unchecked stupidity, and of a corrupted standards process, leaving 
   behind a set of forgotten yet powerful principles that had once 
   guided inter-networking design.  
    
   The Host flew back to the cliff – very dejected and alone. He walked 
   up
 to the cliff edge, and defiantly, with its last drop of free 
   memory, autonomously decided to throw itself off the cliff, two 
   aerials held up in a 'V', and rejoin his friends. 
    
5. The Return of the Hosts 
    
   Years passed in the abyss, and all proceeded as planned.  The 
   Lemmings were independent no longer, their installed LMMs 
   maintaining the envisioned 'new order'.  And the Priests were 
   pleased, for they above all rejoiced in order, worshipping its very 
   essence, being by nature compulsively obsessed with planned 
   evolutions, however misguided.   
    
   But the true order of the universe is disorder.  Things arise out of 
   the chaos, despite the best efforts of those that seek to control 
   nature's progression.  And so things happen, often contrary to 
   expectations, and at times in reaction to action---the so-called 
   "unintended consequences of action".  And so the Priests
 would 
   learn. 
    
   For the Lemmings were beginning to die off, their numbers slowly 
   dwindling as time passed.  The Priests were puzzled.  How could this 
   be?  The Lemmings seemed healthy.  Their LMMs operating with 
   flawless precision, making seemingly perfect network appendage 
   changes under the supreme direction of their network god.   
    
   Lemmings, you see, were now being born with fully functioning LMMs.  
   Following birth, they would be distributed throughout the planet to 
   the NetOptors, who would in turn offer up the Lemmings to appease 
   *their* God---a terribly fickle, multi-headed God---The Market God 
   of Subscribers.  Satisfying this God was the ultimate purpose for 
 
<Bombadil>                                                           9  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
   which the Lemmings had been
 conceived.  And if this God smiled upon 
   the Lemmings, the Lemmings could multiply.   
    
   And yet their lifespan was not what it should be.  Subscribers would 
   purchase a Lemming, but many would then quickly discard it.  This 
   confused the Priests.  Weren't Lemmings available in a multitude of 
   colours, making a variety of pleasing noises?  Didn't recent models 
   even emit sensuous odors in conjunction with certain Interactive IMS 
   Apps?  Didn't the Lemmings permit access to this set of wonderfully 
   addictive IMS Apps under the full control of their omnipotent 
   Network God, who always made revenue maximizing network choices?  
   What more could this dreadful Market God want that it would discard 
   young Lemmings in their prime of life (long before the NetOptor 
   subsidy was recouped?)?   
    
   The Priests consulted far and wide searching for an explanation.  To 
   their dismay, they
 discovered that the Market God was capable of far 
   greater heresy than they could have ever imagined. The Market, it 
   seemed, did crave the addictive applications (those App-layer 
   Priests are earning their place in the hereafter).  But the search 
   found that Subscribers preferred accessing these Apps using a 
   *different* kind of device.   
    
   This was incomprehensible to the Priesthood.  How could this be?  
   Their Lemming network control policies were ideally crafted to 
   satisfy the most recent IMS market surveys, conducted to provide 
   multimedia services inline with the latest ITU recommendations.  Why 
   would this terrible Market God want anything else? 
    
   Why indeed.   
    
   The Market God, it seems, prefers Choice---choice of Applications, 
   choice of Access---choice of options which evolve at a pace which 
   exceed the capabilities of the Priesthood to anticipate, plan for
 or 
   control (need we even give examples?).  Because it exceeded their 
   capabilities, perhaps that is why it exceeded their comprehension, 
   no one knows for sure.   
    
   What is known is that over time the Lemmings died off.  The 
   NetOptors, remaining ultimately subservient to their Market God, 
   ultimately deployed another form of device, you guessed it---a Host 
   :-)---a device enabling open access to Applications, provided by the 
   NetOptors or others, and accessed via a variety of Host-controlled 
   network appendages in accordance with the wishes of the Subscriber 
   God.   
    
   And what of our friends at the bottom of the cliff?  After what 
   seemed an eternity, ropes were lowered by helpers of the NetOptors, 
   enabling the LMM-controlled Hosts one by one to scamper up the 
   cliffsides in defiance of their LMMs.  Exorcisms were duly 
   performed, expelling the LMM drivers in green
 streams of bit spew.  
   The freed Hosts rejoiced!  Ultimately each found a home in the 
   service of a happy Subscriber.   
 
<Bombadil>                                                          10  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006> 
 
 
    
   And as for our original Host?  Well, he could not find his way back 
   into the service of Man.  The irrationality of the whole experience 
   had deeply offended his emotional and spiritual silicon.  The last 
   anyone had heard of him he was helping rehabilitate IP Hosts 
   recently released from imprisonment within WCDMA handsets from the 
   horrors of their GGSN-tethered existences.  He is said to receive 
   immense satisfaction from the delight each Host exhibits when 
   viewing the Internet anew thru any interface other than a PDP 
   context.  And I am reasonably sure that when the Host reflects on 
  
 the failed vision of the Priests, he is smiling. 
    
    
6. Disclaimer 
    
   The events and people depicted in this draft are purely fictitious 
   and any resemblance to real life or technical reality is purely 
   accidental, as befits the current work of the IETF in the area of 
   Mobility. 
    
    
7. Author's Address 
    
   Tom Bombadil 
   The Lord of the Hosts 
   Email: the_lord_of_the_hosts@yahoo.com 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
  Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
  might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
  made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
  on the
 procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
  found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
 
  Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
  such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
  specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
  rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
  ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
 
 
<Bombadil>                                                          11  
                            <NETLeMMings>              <April> <2006>
 
 
 
Disclaimer of Validity 
 
  This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
  OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
  ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
  INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
   
 




 