



Network Working Group                                          R. Callon
Internet-Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Expires: April 17, 2006                                         G. Jones
                                                   The Mitre Corporation
                                                        October 14, 2005


        Miscellaneous Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure
                      draft-callon-misc-cap-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The Framework for Operational Security Capabilities [11] outlines the
   proposed effort of the IETF OPSEC working group.  This includes
   producing a series of drafts to codify knowledge gained through
   operational experience about feature sets that are needed to securely
   deploy and operate managed network elements providing transit
   services at the data link and IP layers.  Current plans include
   separate capabilities documents for Packet Filtering; Event Logging;



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 1]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


   In-Band and Out-of-Band Management; Configuration and Management
   Interfaces; AAA; and Documentation and Assurance.  This document
   describes some additional miscellaneous capabilities which do not fit
   into any of these specific catagories, and whose descriptions are
   brief enough that it does not seem appropriate to create a separate
   document for each.

   Operational Security Current Practices [12] lists current operator
   practices related to securing networks.  This document lists
   miscellaneous capabilities needed to support those practices.

   Capabilities are defined without reference to specific technologies.
   This is done to leave room for deployment of new technologies that
   implement the capability.  Each capability cites the practices it
   supports.  Current implementations that support the capability may be
   cited.  Special considerations are discussed as appropriate listing
   operational and resource constraints, limitations of current
   implementations, tradeoffs, etc.

































Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 2]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Threat model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Capabilities versus Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.4.  Terms Used in this Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.5.  RFC 2119 Keywords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Route Filtering Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  IP Stack Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Ability to Identify All Listening Services . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Ability to Disable Any and All Services  . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Ability to Control Service Bindings for Listening
           Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4.  Ability to Control Service Source Addresses  . . . . . . . 10
     3.5.  Support Automatic Anti-Spoofing for Single-Homed
           Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.6.  Support Automatic Discarding of Bogons and Martians  . . . 11
     3.7.  Support Counters for Dropped Packets . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Performance and Prioritization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.1.  Security Features Should Have Minimal Performance
           Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.2.  Prioritization of Management Functions . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.3.  Prioritization of Routing Functions  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.4.  Resources used by IP Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Security Features Must Not Cause Operational Problems  . . . . 16
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     8.2.  Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21


















Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 3]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


1.  Introduction

   This document is defined in the context of [11] and [12].

   The Framework for Operational Security Capabilities [11] outlines the
   proposed effort of the IETF OPSEC working group.  This includes
   producing a series of drafts to codify knowledge gained through
   operational experience about feature sets that are needed to securely
   deploy and operate managed network elements providing transit
   services at the data link and IP layers.  Current plans include
   separate capabilities documents for Packet Filtering; Event Logging;
   In-Band and Out-of-Band Management; Configuration and Management
   Interfaces; AAA; and Documentation and Assurance.  This document
   describes some additional miscellaneous capabilities which do not fit
   into any of these specific catagories, and whose descriptions are
   brief enough that it does not seem appropriate to create a separate
   document for each.

   Operational Security Current Practices [12] defines the goals,
   motivation, scope, definitions, intended audience, threat model,
   potential attacks and give justifications for each of the practices.

   Many of the capabilities listed here refine or add to capabilities
   listed in rfc3871 [14]

   EDITORS NOTE: This is a first draft.  Additional work will be needed
   to further refine the listed practices, to respond to comments, and
   to try to align the supported practices with the practices listed in
   [12].

1.1.  Threat model

   The capabities listed in this document are intended to aid in
   preventing or mitigating the threats outlined in [11] and [12].

1.2.  Capabilities versus Requirements

   Capabilities may or may not be requirements.  That is a local
   determination that must be made by each operator with reference to
   the policies that they must support.  It is hoped that this document,
   together with [12] will assist operators in identifying their
   security capability requirements and communicating them clearly to
   vendors.

1.3.  Format

   Each capability has the following subsections:




Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 4]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      o Capability (what)

      o Supported Practices (why)

      o Current Implementations (how)

      o Considerations (caveats, resource issues, protocol issues, etc.)

   The Capability section describes a feature to be supported by the
   device.  The Supported Practice section cites practices described in
   [CurPrc] that are supported by this capability.  The Current
   Implementation section is intended to give examples of
   implementations of the capability, citing technology and standards
   current at the time of writing.  See rfc3631 [13].  It is expected
   that the choice of features to implement the capabilities will change
   over time.  The Considerations section lists operational and resource
   constraints, limitations of current implementations, tradeoffs, etc.

1.4.  Terms Used in this Document

   The following terms are used in this document.  These definitions are
   taken from rfc3871 [14].

   Bogon

      A "Bogon" (plural: "bogons") is a packet with an IP source address
      in an address block not yet allocated by IANA or the Regional
      Internet Registries (ARIN, RIPE, APNIC...) as well as all
      addresses reserved for private or special use by RFCs.  See
      rfc3330 [9] and rfc1918 [3].

   Martian

      Per rfc1208 [1] "Martian: Humorous term applied to packets that
      turn up unexpectedly on the wrong network because of bogus routing
      entries.  Also used as a name for a packet which has an altogether
      bogus (non-registered or ill-formed) Internet address."  For the
      purposes of this document Martians are defined as "packets having
      a source address that, by application of the current forwarding
      tables, would not have its return traffic routed back to the
      sender."  "Spoofed packets" are a common source of martians.  Note
      that in some cases, the traffic may be asymmetric, and a simple
      forwarding table check might produce false positives.  See rfc3704
      [10].

   Service





Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 5]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      A number of requirements refer to "services".  For the purposes of
      this document a "service" is defined as "any process or protocol
      running in the control or management planes to which non-transit
      packets may be delivered".  Examples might include an SSH server,
      a BGP process or an NTP server.  It would also include the
      transport, network and link layer protocols since, for example, a
      TCP packet addressed to a port on which no service is listening
      will be "delivered" to the IP stack, and possibly result in an
      ICMP message being sent back.

   Single-Homed Network.

      A "single-homed network" is defined as one for which

      * There is only one upstream connection

      * Routing is symmetric.

      See rfc3704 [10] for a discussion of related issues and mechanisms
      for multihomed networks.

   Spoofed Packet.

      A "spoofed packet" is defined as a packet that has a source
      address that does not correspond to any address assigned to the
      system which sent the packet.  Spoofed packets are often "bogons"
      or "martians".

1.5.  RFC 2119 Keywords

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in rfc2119 [4].

   The use of the RFC 2119 keywords is an attempt, by the authors, to
   assign the correct requirement levels ("MUST", "SHOULD", "MAY"...).
   It must be noted that different organizations, operational
   environments, policies and legal environments will generate different
   requirement levels.

   NOTE: This document defines capabilities.  This document does not
   define requirements, and there is no requirement that any particular
   capability be implemented or deployed.  The use of the terms MUST,
   SHOULD, and so on are in the context of each capability in the sense
   that if you conform to any particular capability then you MUST or
   SHOULD do what is specified for that capability, but there is no
   requirement that you actually do conform to any particular
   capability.



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 6]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


2.  Route Filtering Capabilities

   EDITOR'S NOTE: This is taken from section 2.7.5 of RFC3871.

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means to filter routing updates for all
      protocols used to exchange external routing information.

   Supported Practices.

      See rfc3013 [7] and section 3.2 of rfc2196 [5].

   Current Implementations.

      Typically BGP implementations allow operators to apply a variety
      of filters to restrict which incoming updates are accepted from
      BGP peers, as well as to limit which updates are sent out to BGP
      peers.

   Considerations.

      Operators may wish to ignore advertisements for routes to
      addresses allocated for private internets.  See eBGP.


3.  IP Stack Capabilities

   EDITOR'S NOTE: This is taken from section 2.5 of RFC3871.

3.1.  Ability to Identify All Listening Services

   Capability.

      The vendor MUST:

      * Provide a means to display all services that are listening for
      network traffic directed at the device from any external source.

      * Display the addresses to which each service is bound.

      * Display the addresses assigned to each interface.

      * Display any and all port(s) on which the service is listing.

      * Include both open standard and vendor proprietary services.

   Supported Practices.



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 7]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      This information is necessary to enable a thorough assessment of
      the security risks associated with the operation of the device
      (e.g., "does this protocol allow complete management of the device
      without also requiring authentication, authorization, or
      accounting?").  The information also assists in determining what
      steps should be taken to mitigate risk (e.g., "should I turn this
      service off?")

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      If the device is listening for SNMP traffic from any source
      directed to the IP addresses of any of its local interfaces, then
      this requirement could be met by the provision of a command which
      displays that fact.

3.2.  Ability to Disable Any and All Services

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means to turn off any "services" (see
      section 1.4.1).

   Supported Practices.

      The ability to disable services for which there is no operational
      need will allow administrators to reduce the overall risk posed to
      the device.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      Processes that listen on TCP and UDP ports would be prime examples
      of services that it must be possible to disable.

3.3.  Ability to Control Service Bindings for Listening Services

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means for the user to specify the
      bindings used for all listening services.  It MUST support binding
      to any address or net-block associated with any interface local to



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 8]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      the device.  This must include addresses bound to physical or non-
      physical (e.g., loopback) interfaces.

   Supported Practices.

      It is a common practice among operators to configure "loopback"
      pseudo-interfaces to use as the source and destination of
      management traffic.  These are preferred to physical interfaces
      because they provide a stable, routable address.  Services bound
      to the addresses of physical interface addresses might become
      unreachable if the associated hardware goes down, is removed, etc.

      This requirement makes it possible to restrict access to
      management services using routing.  Management services may be
      bound only to the addresses of loopback interfaces.  The loopback
      interfaces may be addressed out of net-blocks that are only routed
      between the managed devices and the authorized management
      networks/hosts.  This has the effect of making it impossible for
      anyone to connect to (or attempt to DoS) management services from
      anywhere but the authorized management networks/hosts.

      It also greatly reduces the need for complex filters.  It reduces
      the number of ports listening, and thus the number of potential
      avenues of attack.  It ensures that only traffic arriving from
      legitimate addresses and/or on designated interfaces can access
      services on the device.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      If the device listens for inbound SSH connections, this
      requirement means that it should be possible to specify that the
      device will only listen to connections destined to specific
      addresses (e.g., the address of the loopback interface) or
      received on certain interfaces (e.g., an Ethernet interface
      designated as the "management" interface).  It should be possible
      in this example to configure the device such that the SSH is NOT
      listening to every address configured on the device.  Similar
      effects may be achieved with the use of global filters, sometimes
      called "receive" or "loopback" ACLs, that filter traffic destined
      for the device itself on all interfaces.







Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                 [Page 9]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


3.4.  Ability to Control Service Source Addresses

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means that allows the user to specify
      the source addresses used for all outbound connections or
      transmissions originating from the device.  It SHOULD be possible
      to specify source addresses independently for each type of
      outbound connection or transmission.  Source addresses MUST be
      limited to addresses that are assigned to interfaces (including
      loopbacks) local to the device.

   Supported Practices.

      This allows remote devices receiving connections or transmissions
      to use source filtering as one means of authentication.  For
      example, if SNMP traps were configured to use a known loopback
      address as their source, the SNMP workstation receiving the traps
      (or a firewall in front of it) could be configured to receive SNMP
      packets only from that address.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      The operator may allocate a distinct block of addresses from which
      all loopbacks are numbered.  NTP and syslog can be configured to
      use those loopback addresses as source, while SNMP and BGP may be
      configured to use specific physical interface addresses.  This
      would facilitate filtering based on source address as one way of
      rejecting unauthorized attempts to connect to peers/servers.

      Care should be taken to assure that the addresses chosen are
      routable between the sending and receiving devices, (e.g., setting
      SSH to use a loopback address of 10.1.1.1 which is not routed
      between a router and all intended destinations could cause
      problems).

      Note that some protocols, such as SCTP [8], can use more than one
      IP address as the endpoint of a single connection.

      Also note that rfc3631 [13] lists address-based authentication as
      an "insecurity mechanism".  Address based authentication should be
      replaced or augmented by other mechanisms wherever possible.





Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 10]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


3.5.  Support Automatic Anti-Spoofing for Single-Homed Networks

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means to designate particular interfaces
      as servicing "single-homed networks" (see Section 1.4.1) and MUST
      provide an option to automatically drop "spoofed packets" (Section
      1.4.1) received on such interfaces where application of the
      current forwarding table would not route return traffic back
      through the same interface.  This option MUST work in the presence
      of dynamic routing and dynamically assigned addresses.

   Supported Practices.

      See section 3 of rfc1918 [3], sections 5.3.7 and 5.3.8 of rfc1812
      [2], and rfc2827 [6].

   Current Implementations.

      This requirement could be satisfied in several ways.  It could be
      satisfied by the provision of a single command that automatically
      generates and applies filters to an interface that implements
      anti-spoofing.  It could be satisfied by the provision of a
      command that causes the return path for packets received to be
      checked against the current forwarding tables and dropped if they
      would not be forwarded back through the interface on which they
      were received.

   Considerations.

      See rfc3704 [10].

      This requirement only holds for single-homed networks.  Note that
      a simple forwarding table check is not sufficient in the more
      complex scenarios of multi-homed or multi-attached networks, i.e.,
      where the traffic may be asymmetric.  In these cases, a more
      extensive check such as Feasible Path RPF could be very useful.

3.6.  Support Automatic Discarding of Bogons and Martians

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide a means to automatically drop all "bogons"
      (Section 1.4.1) and "martians" (Section 1.4.1).  This option MUST
      work in the presence of dynamic routing and dynamically assigned
      addresses.

   Supported Practices.



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 11]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      These sorts of packets have little (no?) legitimate use and are
      used primarily to allow individuals and organization to avoid
      identification (and thus accountability) and appear to be most
      often used for DoS attacks, email abuse, hacking, etc.  In
      addition, transiting these packets needlessly consumes resources
      and may lead to capacity and performance problems for customers.

      See section 3 of rfc1918 [3], sections 5.3.7 and 5.3.8 of rfc1812
      [2], and rfc2827 [6].

   Current Implementations.

      This requirement could be satisfied by the provision of a command
      that causes the return path for packets received to be checked
      against the current forwarding tables and dropped if no viable
      return path exists.  This assumes that steps are taken to assure
      that no bogon entries are present in the forwarding tables.

   Considerations.

      See rfc3704 [10].

      This requirement only holds for single-homed networks.  Note that
      a simple forwarding table check is not sufficient in the more
      complex scenarios of multi-homed or multi-attached networks, i.e.,
      where the traffic may be asymmetric.  In these cases, a more
      extensive check such as Feasible Path RPF could be very useful.

3.7.  Support Counters for Dropped Packets

   Capability.

      The device MUST provide accurate, per-interface counts of spoofed
      packets dropped in accordance with Section 3.5 and Section 3.6.

   Supported Practices.

      Counters can help in identifying the source of spoofed traffic.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      An edge router may have several single-homed customers attached.
      When an attack using spoofed packets is detected, a quick check of
      counters may be able to identify which customer is attempting to



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 12]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      send spoofed traffic.


4.  Performance and Prioritization

   EDITOR'S NOTE: This section is taken from section 2.15 and a slightly
   expanded section 2.2.5 of RFC3871.

4.1.  Security Features Should Have Minimal Performance Impact

   Capability.

      Security features specified by the requirements in this document
      SHOULD be implemented with minimal impact on performance.  Other
      sections of this document or other OPSEC capabilities documents
      may specify different performance requirements (e.g., "MUST"s).

   Supported Practices.

      Security features which significantly impact performance may leave
      the operator with no mechanism for enforcing appropriate policy.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      If the application of filters is known to have the potential to
      significantly reduce throughput for non-filtered traffic, there
      will be a tendency, or in some cases a policy, not to use filters.

      Assume, for example, that a new worm is released that scans random
      IP addresses looking for services listening on TCP port 1433.  An
      operator might want to investigate to see if any of the hosts on
      their networks were infected and trying to spread the worm.  One
      way to do this would be to put up non-blocking filters counting
      and logging the number of outbound connection 1433, and then to
      block the requests that are determined to be from infected hosts.
      If any of these capabilities (filtering, counting, logging) have
      the potential to impose severe performance penalties, then this
      otherwise rational course of action might not be possible.

      Requirements for which performance is a particular concern
      include: filtering, rate-limiting, counters, logging and anti-
      spoofing.





Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 13]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


4.2.  Prioritization of Management Functions

   Capability.

      Management functions SHOULD be processed at higher priority than
      non-management traffic.  This SHOULD include ingress, egress,
      internal transmission, and processing.  This SHOULD include at
      least protocols used for configuration, monitoring, configuration
      backup, logging, time synchronization, and authentication.

   Supported Practices.

      Certain attacks (and normal operation) can cause resource
      saturation such as link congestion, memory exhaustion or CPU
      overload.  In these cases it is important that management
      functions be prioritized to ensure that operators have the tools
      needed to recover from the attack.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      Imagine a service provider with 1,000,000 DSL subscribers, most of
      whom have no firewall protection.  Imagine that a large portion of
      these subscribers machines were infected with a new worm that
      enabled them to be used in coordinated fashion as part of large
      denial of service attack that involved flooding.  It is entirely
      possible that without prioritization such an attack would cause
      processor saturation or other internal resource saturation on
      routers causing the routers to become unmanageable.  A DoS attack
      against hosts could therefore become a DoS attack against the
      network.

      Prioritization is not a panacea.  Control packets may not make it
      across a saturated link.  This requirement simply says that the
      device should prioritize management functions within its scope of
      control (e.g., ingress, egress, internal transit, processing).  To
      the extent that this is done across an entire network, the overall
      effect will be to ensure that the network remains manageable.

4.3.  Prioritization of Routing Functions

   Capability.

      Routing functions SHOULD be processed at higher priority than user
      data traffic.  This SHOULD include ingress, egress, internal



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 14]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      transmission, and processing.  This SHOULD include all packets
      necessary for routing protocol operation, and specifically MUST
      include priority processing of routing HELLO packets for BGP,
      IS-IS, and OSPF.

   Supported Practices.

      Certain attacks (and normal operation) can cause resource
      saturation such as link congestion, memory exhaustion or CPU
      overload.  In these cases it is important that routing functions
      be prioritized to ensure that the network continues to operate
      (for example, that routes can be computed in order to allow
      management traffic to be delivered).  For many routing protocols
      the loss of HELLO packets can cause the protocol to drop
      adjacencies and/or to send out additional routing packets,
      potentially adding to whatever congestion may be causing the
      problem.

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      If routing HELLO packets are not prioritized, then it is possible
      during DoS attacks or during severe network congestion for routing
      protocols to drop HELLO packets, causing routing adjacencies to be
      lost.  This in turn can cause overall failure of a network.  A DoS
      attack against hosts can therefore become a DoS attack against the
      network.

      Prioritization within routers is not a panacea.  Routing update
      packets may not make it across a saturated link (thus for example
      it may also be desirable to prioritize routing packets for
      transmission across link layer devices such as Ethernet switches).
      This requirement simply says that the device should prioritize
      routing functions within its scope of control (e.g., ingress,
      egress, internal transit, processing).  To the extent that this is
      done across an entire network, the overall effect will be to
      ensure that the network continues to operate.

4.4.  Resources used by IP Multicast

   Capability.

      Routers SHOULD provide some mechanism(s) to allow the control
      plane resources used by IP multicast, including processing and
      memory, to be limited to some level which is less than 100% of the



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 15]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      total available processing and memory.  The maximum limit of
      resources used by multicast MAY be configurable.  Routers SHOULD
      also provide a mechanism(s) to allow the amount of link bandwidth
      consumed by IP multicast on any particular link to be limited to
      some level which is less than 100% of total available bandwidth on
      that link.

   Supported Practices.

      IP multicast has characteristics which may potentially impact the
      availability of IP networks.  In particular, IP multicast requires
      that routers perform control plane processing and maintain state
      in response to data plane traffic.  Also, the use of multicast
      implies that a single packet input into the network can result in
      a large number of packets being delivered throughout the network.
      Also, it is possible in some situations for a multicast traffic to
      *both* enter a loop, and also be delivered to some destinations
      (implying that many copies of the same packet could be delivered).

   Current Implementations.

      tbd.

   Considerations.

      If the amount of resources used by multicast are not limited, then
      it is possible during an attack for multicast to consume
      potentially as much as 100% of available memory, processing, or
      bandwidth resources, thereby causing network problems.


5.  Security Features Must Not Cause Operational Problems

   EDITOR'S NOTE: This is taken from section 2.14 of RFC3871.

   Capability.

      The use of security features specified by the requirements in this
      document SHOULD NOT cause severe operational problems.

   Supported Practices.

      Security features which cause operational problems are not useful
      and may leave the operator with no mechanism for enforcing
      appropriate policy.

   Current Implementations.




Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 16]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      tbd.

   Considerations.

      Some examples of severe operational problems include:

      * The device crashes.

      * The device becomes unmanageable.

      * Data is lost.

      * Use of the security feature consumes excessive resources (CPU,
      memory, bandwidth).

      Determination of compliance with this requirement involves a level
      of judgement.  What is "severe"?  Certainly crashing is severe,
      but what about a %5 loss in throughput when logging is enabled?
      It should also be noted that there may be unavoidable physical
      limitations such as the total capacity of a link.


6.  Security Considerations

   General

      Security is the subject matter of this entire document.  This
      document lists device capabilities intended to improve the ability
      of the network to withstand security threats.  Operational
      Security Current Practices [12] defines the threat model and
      practices, and lists justifications for each practice.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of:

      o xxx, yyy, ...

      o The MITRE Corporation for supporting development of this
      document.  NOTE: An author's affiliation with The MITRE
      Corporation is provided for identification purposes only, and is
      not intended to convey or imply MITRE's concurrence with, or
      support for, the positions, opinions or viewpoints expressed by
      the authors.

      o This listing is intended to acknowledge contributions, not to
      imply that the individual or organizations approve the content of



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 17]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


      this document.

      o Apologies to those who commented on/contributed to the document
      and were not listed.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Jacobsen, O. and D. Lynch, "Glossary of networking terms",
         RFC 1208, March 1991.

   [2]   Baker, F., "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers", RFC 1812,
         June 1995.

   [3]   Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and E.
         Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP 5,
         RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [4]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [5]   Fraser, B., "Site Security Handbook", RFC 2196, September 1997.

   [6]   Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
         Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
         Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.

   [7]   Killalea, T., "Recommended Internet Service Provider Security
         Services and Procedures", BCP 46, RFC 3013, November 2000.

   [8]   Stone, J., Stewart, R., and D. Otis, "Stream Control
         Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Checksum Change", RFC 3309,
         September 2002.

   [9]   IANA, "Special-Use IPv4 Addresses", RFC 3330, September 2002.

   [10]  Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
         Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004.

8.2.  Informational References

   [11]  Jones, G., "Framework for Operational Security Capabilities for
         IP Network  Infrastructure", draft-ietf-opsec-framework-00
         (work in progress), June 2005.

   [12]  Kaeo, M., "Operational Security Current Practices",



Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 18]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


         draft-ietf-opsec-current-practices-01 (work in progress),
         July 2005.

   [13]  Bellovin, S., Schiller, J., and C. Kaufman, "Security
         Mechanisms for the Internet", RFC 3631, December 2003.

   [14]  Jones, G., "Operational Security Requirements for Large
         Internet Service Provider (ISP) IP Network Infrastructure",
         RFC 3871, September 2004.










































Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 19]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Ross W. Callon
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: rcallon@juniper.net


   George Jones
   The Mitre Corporation
   7515 Colshire Drive
   McLean, Virginia, VA  22102-7508
   USA

   Email: gmjones@mitre.org

































Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 20]


Internet-Draft         Miscellaneous Capabilities           October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Callon & Jones           Expires April 17, 2006                [Page 21]




