
Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                             July 13, 2004
Expires: January 11, 2005


            Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivity
                 draft-klensin-ip-service-terms-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   As the Internet has evolved, many types of arrangements have been
   advertised and sold as "Internet connectivity".  Because these may
   differ significantly in the capabilities they offer, the range of
   options, and the lack of any standard terminology, the effort to
   distinguish between these services has caused considerable consumer
   confusion.  This document provides a list of terms and definitions
   that may be helpful to providers, consumers, and, potentially,
   regulators in clarifying the type and character of services being



Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


   offered.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   The Problem and the Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2   Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology  . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3   Definitional Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  General Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Filtering or Security Issues and Terminology . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Additional Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Disclaimers and Lawyers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 11


































Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


1.  Introduction

1.1  The Problem and the Requirement

   Different ISPs and other providers offer a wide variety of products
   that are identified as "Internet" or "Internet access".  These
   products offer different types of functionality and, as a result,
   some may be appropriate for certain users and uses and not others.
   For example, a service that offers only access to the Web, but that
   does not support any other type of Internet services, may be entirely
   appropriate for someone who is exclusively interested in browsing and
   in web-based email services, but not for someone who requires access
   to download files or make more intense use of email.  And it is
   likely to be even less appropriate for someone who requires the
   ability to operate servers for other users, who needs virtual private
   network (VPN) capabilities or other secured access to a remote
   office, or who needs to synchronize mail for offline use.

   Recent, and rapidly evolving, changes to the Internet's email
   environment have led to additional restrictions on sending and
   retrieving email.  These restrictions, most of them developed as part
   of well-intentioned attempts to prevent or fight unsolicited mail of
   various types, may be imposed independently of the service types
   described below and are discussed separately in Section 3.

   Of course, the document describes only the functions provided or
   permitted by the service provider.  It does not, and cannot, specify
   the functions that pass through and are supported by various
   user-provided equipment.

   [[Note in Draft: This paragraph to be removed by the RFC Editor if
   the document progresses that far.]] This document is a first attempt
   at establishing some definitions for these various services.  It is
   hoped that the definitions will evolve into ones that can be
   standardized and adopted widely enough to be useful to users and
   consumers.

1.2  Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology

   The definitions proposed here are clearly of little value if service
   providers and vendors are not willing to adopt them.  Consequently,
   the terms proposed are intended to not be pejorative, despite the
   belief of some members of the IETF community that some of these
   connectively models are simply "broken" or "not really an Internet
   service".  The mention of a particular service or model in this
   document does not imply any endorsement of it, only recognition of
   something that exists, or might exist, in the marketplace.




Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


1.3  Definitional Terminology

   When the terms SHOULD, MUST, or MAY are used, and capitalized, in
   this document, they are used as defined in [1].

2.  General Terminology

   The terms listed in this section are the primary "IP Service Terms"
   and it is hoped that service providers will adopt them in describing
   offerings to potential users or customers.

   Terms are listed below more or less in order of ascending (to "full
   Internet") capability.  In each case, the terminology refers to the
   intent of the provider (ISP) as expressed in either technical
   measures or terms and conditions of service.  It may be possible to
   work around particular implementations of these characteristic
   connectivity types, but those flexibilities are generally not the
   intent of the provider and are unlikely to be supported if the
   workarounds stop working.

   Web connectivity.  This service provides connectivity to the web
      only.  Other services are generally not supported.  In particular,
      there may be no access to POP3 or IMAP email, encrypted tunnels or
      other VPN mechanisms.  The addresses used may be private and/or
      not globally reachable.  They are generally dynamic and relatively
      short-lived (hours or days rather than months or years).  These
      addresses are often announced as "dynamic" to those who keep lists
      of dial-up or dynamic addresses (see Section 3).  The provider may
      impose a filtering web proxy on the connections; that proxy may
      change and redirect URLs to other sites than the one originally
      specified by the user or embedded link.

   Client connectivity only, without a public address.  This service
      provides access to the Internet without support for server or most
      peer to peer functions.  The IP address assigned to the customer
      is dynamic and, as a distinguishing feature of this class, is
      assigned from non-public address space.  Servers and peer-to-peer
      functions are generally not supported by the network address
      translation (NAT) systems that are required by the use of private
      addresses (the more precise categorization of types of NATs given
      in [2] are somewhat orthogonal to this document but might be
      provided as additional terms as described in Section 4).
      Filtering web proxies are common with this type of service, and
      the provider SHOULD indicate whether or not one is present.







Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


   Client only, public address.  This service provides access to the
      Internet without support for server or most peer to peer
      functions.  The IP address assigned to the customer is in public
      address space.  It is usually nominally dynamic or otherwise
      subject to change, but may not change for months at a time.  Most
      VPN and similar connections will work with this service.  The
      provider may prohibit the use of server functions by either legal
      (contractual) restrictions or by filtering of incoming connection
      attempts.  Filtering web proxies are uncommon with this type of
      service, and the provider SHOULD indicate if one is present.

   Firewalled Internet Connectivity.  This service provides access to
      the Internet and supports most server and most peer to peer
      functions with one or more (usually more) static public addresses.
      It is similar in most respects to "Full Internet Connectivity",
      below, and all of the qualifications and restrictions on
      limitations described there apply.  However, a managed "firewall"
      is in place between the customer and the public Internet.  This
      may result in blocking of some services, and others may be
      intercepted by proxies, content-filtering arrangements, or
      applications gateways (although the latter three are less common).
      The provider SHOULD specify which services are blocked and which
      are intercepted or altered in other ways.

      In most areas, this service arrangement is offered as an add-on,
      extra-cost, option with what would otherwise be Full Internet
      Connectivity.

   Full Internet Connectivity.  This service provides the user full
      Internet connectivity, with one or more static public addresses.
      Dynamic addresses that are long-lived enough to make operating
      servers practical without highly dynamic DNS entries are possible,
      provided that they are not characterized as "dynamic" to third
      parties.  Filtering web proxies, interception proxies, NAT, and
      other provider-imposed restrictions on inbound or outbound ports
      and traffic are incompatible with this type of service and servers
      on a connected customer LAN are typically considered normal.  The
      only compatible restrictions are bandwidth limitations and
      prohibitions against network abuse or illegal activities.

3.  Filtering or Security Issues and Terminology

   As mentioned in the Introduction, the effort to control or limit
   objectionable network traffic including unsolicited mail of various
   types (including "spam"); worms, viruses, and their impact; and in
   some cases, specific content has led to additional restrictions on
   the behavior and capabilities of internet services.  In general,
   significant restrictions are more likely to be encountered with web



Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


   connectivity and non-public-address services, but some current
   recommendations would apply them at all levels.  Some of these mail
   restrictions may prevent sending outgoing mail except through servers
   operated by the ISP for that purpose, may prevent use of return
   addresses of the user's choice, and may even prevent access to mail
   depositories (other than those supplied by the provider) by
   remote-access protocols such as POP3 or IMAP4.  Because users may
   have legitimate reasons to access remote file services, remote mail
   submission servers (or at least to use their preferred email
   addresses from multiple locations), and to access remote mail
   depositories (again, a near-requirement if a single address is to be
   used), it is important that providers disclose the services, filters,
   and conditions they are making available or imposing.

   Several key issues in email filtering are of particular importance:

   Dynamic Addresses.  A number of systems, including several
      "blacklists", are based on the assumption that most undesired
      email originated from systems with dynamic addresses, especially
      dialup and home broadband systems.  Consequently, they attempt to
      prevent the addresses from being used to send mail, or perform
      some other services, except through provider systems designated
      for that purpose.  Different techniques are used to identify
      systems with dynamic addresses, including provider advertising of
      such addresses to blacklist operators, heuristics that utilize
      certain address ranges, and inspection of reverse-mapping domain
      names to see if they contain telltale strings such as "dsl" or
      "dial".  In some cases, the absence of a reverse-mapping DNS
      address is taken as an indication that the address is "dynamic"
      (prohibition on connections based on the absence of a
      reverse-mapping DNS record was a technique developed for FTP
      servers many years ago; it was found to have fairly high rates
      both of prohibiting legitimate connection attempts and failing to
      prevent illegitimate ones).  Service providers SHOULD describe
      what they are doing in this area for both incoming and outgoing
      message traffic, and users should be aware that, if an address is
      advertised as "dynamic", it may be impossible to use it to send
      mail to an arbitrary system even if Full Internet Connectivity is
      otherwise provided.
   Non-public addresses and NATs.  The NAT systems that are used to map
      between private and public address spaces may support connections
      to distant mail systems for outbound and inbound mail, but terms
      of service often prohibit the use of systems not supplied by the
      connectivity provider as well as prohibiting the operation of
      "servers" (typically not precisely defined) on the client
      connection.





Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


   Outbound port filtering from the provider.  Another common technique
      involves blocking connections to servers outside the provider's
      control by blocking TCP "ports" that are commonly used for
      messaging functions.  Different providers have different theories
      about this.  Some prohibit their customers from accessing external
      SMTP servers for message submission, but permit the use of the
      mail submission protocol ([3]) with sender authentication.  Others
      try to block all outgoing messaging-related protocols, including
      the use of remote mail retrieval protocols (less common with
      public-address services than those that are dependent on private
      addresses and NATs).  If this type of filtering is present,
      especially with "Client only, public address" and "Full Internet
      Connectivity" services, the provider MUST indicate that fact (see
      also Section 4).  Still others may divert (reroute) outbound email
      traffic to their own servers, on the theory that this eliminates
      the need for users of portable machines to reconfigure them as
      they connect from different network locations.  Again, this MUST
      be disclosed, especially since it can have signficant security and
      privacy implications.

      More generally, filters that block some or all mail being sent to
      (or submitted to) remote systems (other than via
      provider-supported servers), or that attempt to divert that
      traffic to their own servers, are, as discussed above, becoming
      common and SHOULD be disclosed.

4.  Additional Terminology

   These additional terms, while not as basic to understanding a service
   offering as the ones identified above, as listed as additional
   information that a service provider might choose to provide to
   complement those general definitions.  Or a potential customer might
   use those that are relevant by, for example, constructing a list of
   specific questions to ask.

   Version support.  Does the service include IPv4 support only, both
      IPv4 and IPv6 support, or IPv6 support only?
   Authentication support.  Which technical mechanism(s) are used by the
      service to establish and possibly authenticate connections?
      Examples might include unauthenticated DHCP, PPP, RADIUS, or HTTP
      interception.
   VPNs and Tunnels.  Is IPSec blocked or permitted?  Are other
      tunneling techniques at the IP layer or below, such as L2TP,
      permitted?  Is there any attempt to block applications-layer
      tunnel mechanisms such as SSH?






Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


   DNS support.  Are users required to utilize DNS servers provided by
      the service provider, or are DNS queries permitted to reach
      arbitrary servers?
   IP-related services.  Are ICMP messages to and from end user sites
      generally blocked or permitted?  Are specific functions such as
      ping and traceroute blocked and, if so, at what point in the
      network?
   Roaming support.  Does the service intentionally include support for
      IP roaming and, if so, how is this defined?
      For "broadband" connections, is some dialup arrangement provided
      for either backup or customer travel?  If present, does that
      arrangement have full access to mailboxes, etc.
   Applications services provided.  Are email services and/or web
      hosting provided as part of the service, and on what basis? An
      email services listing should identify whether POP3, IMAP, or web
      access are provided and in what combinations and what types of
      authentication and privacy services are supported or required for
      each.
   Use and Blocking of Outbound Applications Services.  Does the service
      block use of SMTP or mail submission to other than its own servers
      or intercept such submissions and route them to its servers?  Do
      its servers restrict the user to use of its domain names on
      outbound email?  (For email specifically, also see Section 3
      above.) Is FTP PASV supported or blocked?  Are blocks or
      intercepts imposed on other file sharing or file transfer
      mechanisms, on conferencing applications, or on private
      applications services? More generally, the provider should
      identify any actions of the service to block, restrict, or alter
      the destination of, the outbound use (i.e., the use of services
      not supplied by the provider or on the provider's network) of
      applications services.
   Use and Blocking of Inbound Applications Services.  In addition to
      any issues raised by dynamic or private address space (when
      present), does the service take any other measures to specifically
      restrict the connections that can be made to equipment operated by
      the customer?  Specifically, are inbound SMTP, HTTP or HTTPS, FTP,
      or various peer-to-peer or other connections (possibly including
      applications not specifically recognized by the provider)
      prohibited and, if so, which ones?
   Application Content Filtering.  The service should declare whether it
      provides filtering or protection against worms or denial of
      service attacks against its customers, virus and UCE filtering for
      its mail services (if any), non-discretionary or "parental
      control" filtering of content, and so on.
   Wiretapping and interception.  The service should indicate whether
      traffic passing through it is subject to lawful intercept with or
      without notice?  Is traffic data stored for possible use by law
      enforcement with or without notice?



Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


5.  Security Considerations

   This document is about terminology, not protocols, and does not raise
   any particular security issues.  However, if the type of terminology
   that is proposed is widely adopted, it may become easier to identify
   security-related expectations of particular hosts, LANs, and types of
   connections.

6.  Acknowledgements

   This document was inspired by an email conversation with Vernon
   Schryver, Paul Vixie, and Nathaniel Bornstein.  While there have been
   proposals to produce definitions like the ones above for many years,
   that conversation convinced the author that it was finally time to
   get a strawman on the table to see if the IETF could actually carry
   it forward.  Harald Alvestrand, Brian Carpenter, George Michaelson,
   Vernon Schryver, and others made several suggestions on the initial
   draft that resulted in clarifications to the second one and Stephane
   Bortzmeyer, Brian Carpenter, Tony Finch, Susan Harris, Pekka Savola,
   and Vernon Schryver made very useful suggestions that were
   incorporated into subsequent versions.  Susan Harris also gave the
   penultimate version an exceptional careful reading, which is greatly
   appreciated.

7.  Disclaimers and Lawyers

   [[Note to the IESG and in Draft: several of the people who have
   contributed to, or commented on, this document have observed that, if
   it is considered successful, sections of it could well end up in
   national or local regulations, other types of consumer protection
   provisions, or contractual terms and conditions.  Given that concern,
   the IESG is requested, to consult legal counsel as to whether the
   normal disclaimers, which were designed somewhat more for protocol
   specifications, are adequate to prevent creating (quoting from one
   contributor), "the smallest atom of liability for the author, the
   IETF, the RFC Editor, ISOC, or anyone else within 10000 km" from
   liability.  This section should then be removed and, if needed,
   replaced by text here or elsewhere in the document as appropriate.]]

8  Informative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address Translator
        (NAT) Terminology and Considerations", RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [3]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission", RFC 2476,



Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


        December 1998.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com







































Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   July 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                 Expires January 11, 2005               [Page 11]


