
INTERNET DRAFT		EXPIRES JUNE 1999		INTERNET DRAFT


      GUIDE TO ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES OF THE INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE
		<draft-rfced-info-iana-00.txt>


Status of This Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
"work in progress."

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
(Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
(Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
(US West Coast).


Distribution of this document is unlimited.


Summary	2
Who Should Read This Document	2
Checklist	2
Prerequisites	2
I.	Preparation of Systems and Network Planning	3
A.  What do I need to connect to the Internet?	3
B.  What connectivity medium should I choose?	3
C.  What else do I need to do?	3
D.  How do I get the documents referred to in this guide?	4
E.  References	4
II.	Address Space Allocation	4
A.  Who is my upstream provider?	5
B.  How much address space should I ask for?	5
C.  What is CIDR?	6
D.  How do I request and register address space?	6
E.  References	9
III.	Autonomous Systems (AS)	9
A.  What is an ASN and do I need one?	9
B.  How do I register an ASN?	9
C.  References	10
IV.	Routing and Exchange Points	10
A.  Do I need to register with a routing database?	10
B.  What about CIDR and routing?	10
C.  How do I choose a routing database?	11
D.  How do I register in the RADB (The Americas)?	11
E.  References	11
V.	Domain Name Registration	12
A.  What is a country domain?	12
B.  How do I register as a country domain?	12
C.  What if my country is already registered?	12
D.  How do I resolve a country domain name dispute?	12
E.  References	14
VI.	IN-ADDR.ARPA Domain Delegation	14
A.  What is an IN-ADDR.ARPA domain and do I need one?	14
B.  How do I register an IN-ADDR.ARPA domain?	14
VII.	Security	15
A.	Is there a way to prevent unauthorized changes to my objects?	15
VIII.	Network Optimization and Management	15
A.	How do I optimize traffic on my network?	15
Acknowledgements	15
References	15
Authors' Addresses	16
Appendix A:  The Internet Agencies	17
Appendix B:  Documentation	18
Appendix C:  Country Codes	20
Appendix D:  Acronyms	20


Summary

This document describes the administrative procedures for countries (or
networks) seeking to connect to the global Internet.  This includes the
steps and operations necessary for address space allocation and
registration, routing database registration, and domain name
registration.  Where to find the required forms and instructions on how
to complete them are included.

Who Should Read This Document 

This document is intended for system engineers and technical managers of
countries (or networks) that want to make a connection to the Internet. 
It assumes a basic knowledge of the Internet and networking.

This information is intended to help new or expanding networks
understand and follow the Internet administrative procedures, and to
provide assistance in filling out the various templates and registration
forms.  Please note that Appendix D is a glossary of acronyms.

Checklist

This document will explain the following procedures:

q Determine your organization type and current status.
q Determine your administrative and technical contacts.
q Determine your budget (and chargeback system) and choice of carriers.
q Determine to whom you will connect.
q Predict your current and projected address space needs.
q Set-up your system to connect.
q Request and register your address space allocation.
q Request and register an autonomous system number, if needed.
q Register with a routing database, if needed.
q Register your country's domain name, if needed.
q Request and register your IN-ADDR.ARPA domain name, if needed.

Prerequisites
 
This document assumes that you have examined different alternatives for
physical connectivity and will assist you in navigating the Internet
infrastructure so that you can use that connectivity.  In choosing your
upstream provider, you should consider their ability to deal with the
Internet infrastructure.

What will you be doing and what role will you play?

§ If you are interested in connecting yourself (or a small
organization), you are an Internet end-user.  You will probably want to
contact an Internet Service Provider (ISP) for most of your needs.  Read
section I and the first part of section II.

§ If you are interested in connecting your organization and in having
address space to distribute within your network, you are an Internet
high volume end-user.  You will need more address space, but still may
chose to work with an Internet Service Provider (ISP) for most of your
needs.  Read sections I and II.

§ If you are interested in connecting your organization, and in
distributing addresses to your clients (who are end-users), you are an
Internet Service Provider (ISP).  You will need to contact a Local
Internet Registry (if one is available, or your upstream provider). 
Read section I and continue reading the rest of this document.

§ If you are interested in distributing addresses to your clients and
your clients are in turn distributing addresses, you are a Local
Internet Registry or large ISP.  You will probably need to contact the
Regional Internet Registry in your geographical area.  Read section I
and continue reading the rest of this document.

I.	Preparation of Systems and Network Planning

STEP ONE: PREPARE INFORMATION, ORGANIZE HARDWARE, FIGURE OUT 
TO WHOM YOU WILL CONNECT, AND TEST IN-COUNTRY SYSTEMS.

A.  What do I need to connect to the Internet?

You can connect using dial-up or dedicated lines, and you can choose
UUCP or IP.  It is preferable to be running the UNIX operating system
with TCP/IP over a dedicated line, although you can begin by using UUCP
over a dial-up line.  Although there are alternatives to UNIX, for
historical reasons and robustness UNIX is more prepared to handle
Internet connectivity.  It is best to use TCP/IP internally even if you
use another method for your external connectivity. 

You will need to obtain an Internet Protocol (IP) address, or block of
addresses, and a domain name.  You may also need an Autonomous System
Number (ASN) and an IN-ADDR.ARPA (reverse addressing) domain name. 
However, you may begin by having dial-up connectivity to another
organization that has a mail exchange (MX) record for your site.

B.  What connectivity medium should I choose?

You may be constrained by telecommunications regulations in your country
as to your choice of dial-up, digital phone lines, fiber optic cable, or
satellite suppliers (such as Intelsat, Savvis, PanAmSat, PeaceSat,
ComStream, Cable and Wireless, Inc., NSN Network Services, Inc).  If
not, cost, bandwidth, and reliability will determine your choice.

C.  What else do I need to do?

Before you do anything else:

1.	Designate an administrative contact person and a technical contact
person.

Choose one person to be the administrative contact and another person to
be the technical contact.  Write down their full names, email and postal
addresses, and telephone and fax numbers (with country prefixes in the
form + country code, city code, and local telephone number).  The
administrative contact should be a member of your organization and must
reside in the country.  The technical contact should be the key network
support person and may be represented initially by someone outside of
the country.  Note that the technical contact must become a network
support person residing in the country.  The Internet Registries will
request this information in the form of database entries called
objects.  For example, on the RIPE template, the administrative contact
should be listed in the admin-c field in the database objects, and the
technical contact in the tech-c field in the database objects (more
information on database objects follows in section II D below).

2.	Determine your cost-recovery charging scheme, if needed, so that you
can sustain operations.

3. Diagram your organization chart and network topology.

Draw your organization chart.  Determine the number of groups and
end-users.  Describe the size and shape of your current network.  Design
your addressing plan based on this information.

If you are restricted to using the local telecommunications company's
telephone circuit, choose your circuit carrier based on capacity and
where it lands geographically.  Consider an asymmetric circuit, e.g.
128kbps in and 64kbps out, if you expect to have more incoming traffic
than outgoing (e.g., if most of the traffic is expected to originate
from web servers outside your network).

4.  	Determine to whom you will connect. 

5.	Predict your address space and bandwidth requirements from end-user
needs.

Since address space is finite and must be conserved, end-users are not
permitted to reserve address space.  Address space is based on what your
needs are and how you justify those needs.  Evaluation of IP address
space requests is usually based on the documentation you provide for the
following 12 months, as specified in the address space usage template
and in the addressing plan you submit.  Once you have used your assigned
address space, you can request additional space based on an updated
estimate of growth in your network. 

You will need to justify your needs for address space by communicating
your network design and should be prepared to clearly present your plan
for effective use of the request.  Determine your current and future
user needs.  Remember that if you are setting up a virtual web server
designed to provide each customer with a domain name and a web server,
then each customer will need a separate address.  Allocations for points
of presence (POP) throughout your region should also be determined. 
Predictions of user behavior can be based on analysis of published
rates, interviews with individual and institutional subscribers, and
case histories of other countries (see "History of the Internet in
Thailand").  For example, 

   Area1
     10 dialup modems
     10 leased lines to organization's LANs (size of the LANs)
   Area2
       5 dialup modems
   Main POP
      5 servers: mail, WWW, DNS,  FTP, etc.
   100 virtual domains

When you design your plan, you should do it for what you need now, what
you believe you will need six months from now, and then one year from
now.

6.	Set up, connect, and test your hardware and software.

It is important to have your hardware and connectivity set up before
contacting the appropriate agency for address space. 

D.  How do I get the documents referred to in this guide?

See Appendix B for details on obtaining the documents referred to in
this guide.

E.  References

For more information on TCP/IP, see RFC 2151, "A Primer on Internet and
TCP/IP Tools and Utilities."

II.	Address Space Allocation

STEP TWO: OBTAIN ADDRESS SPACE ALLOCATION AND REGISTRATION FROM THE ISP
YOU ARE CONNECTING TO, OR (AS A LAST RESORT) YOUR REGIONAL REGISTRY.

Internet Protocol (IP) addresses (under the current version 4) are
32-bit numbers usually expressed as 4 octets in dotted decimal notation
(for example, 128.223.162.27, which is the IP address for the Network
Startup Resource Center (NSRC) web server).  Public IP addresses make up
the Internet address space.  Addresses are allocated in a hierarchical
manner and are designed to be unique.

The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) allocates large address
blocks to the three Regional Internet Registries (IRs): ARIN, APNIC, and
RIPE NCC who, in turn, allocate smaller blocks to Local Internet
Registries or large ISPs.  Local Internet Registries process the vast
majority of address space assignments to ISPs and end-users

Contact the Internet service provider from whom you are getting your
connectivity services (your upstream provider) with an address
allocation request.  It is important and required that you contact the
first upstream provider, and not the Regional IR automatically.  The
first question the Regional Registry will ask you is why you cannot get
address space from your upstream provider.

A.  Who is my upstream provider?

If there is an ISP already functioning in your country, contact them
directly.  If you are to be the first connection, you may need to
contact the Local or Regional IR for your geographical location, but you
should contact your upstream provider first.  Since address allocation
is hierarchical, the administrative organizations and procedures
represent this hierarchical structure, too.  It is important not to skip
a step in the hierarchy.  Current Regional Registries include ARIN (the
Americas, Caribbean, and sub-Saharan Africa), RIPE (Europe, North
Africa, and the Middle East), and APNIC (the Pacific Rim and Asia). 
Contact information for these organizations is listed in Appendix A.

You should contact your Regional Internet Registry if 1) the ISP you are
connecting to is unable or unwilling to provide address space, or 2)
your particular connectivity requirements will result in non-local data
to your customers possibly taking a different route over the Internet
than data destined for your upstream provider's customers.

B.  How much address space should I ask for?

Regional IRs typically assign address blocks on the basis of an
immediate need and projected utilization rate within one year.  (If you
are in the ARIN region, it is one year for end-user organizations and
three months for ISPs.)  Calculate your address space request
accordingly.  It is recommended to include the organization chart and
network topology diagram referred to in section I, number 2 (above).
Note that address space is allocated based on CIDR bit boundaries (see
next section).  The registries will need to understand your network
engineering and deployment plans in significant detail before they can
allocate address space.  Therefore, the more detailed information you
can provide, the more likely your request will be processed quickly.

If you obtain address space from your ISP, it is very likely that you
will need to renumber should you decide to change upstream providers
and/or if you grow considerably.  As this renumbering may affect your
customers (and their customers, etc.) if they are using dedicated lines,
you should carefully weigh the cost/benefit involved in obtaining
address space from your upstream provider.

The minimum routable block is often a /19, so if you plan on enlarging,
it is better to pay the fees to the regional IR now and obtain a /19
block so that you will not have to renumber later.  Note that if you are
an ISP in the ARIN region, the current policy is that you must have used
a /19 previously from your upstream ISP before going to ARIN.  Or you
must be multi-homed and show you have used a /21 and be willing to
renumber and ARIN will issue a /21 from a reserved /19.

Remember that your upstream provider should route you if you ask them. 
You are a customer of the ISP, so if the service is not what you need
you should change ISPs. 

IF YOU ARE CONNECTED TO ONLY ONE PROVIDER, AND ARE NOT VERY LARGE YET,
GET AN ADDRESS RANGE FROM YOUR PROVIDER.  SKIP THE REST OF THIS SECTION
AND ALL OF SECTION V.

C.  What is CIDR?

CIDR stands for Classless Inter-Domain Routing.  Historically, IP
addresses were assigned within classes: Class A (8 bits of network
address, 24 bits of host address), Class B (16 bits of network address,
16 bits of host address), or Class C (24 bits of network address, 8 bits
of host address).  With the advent of CIDR, address space is now
allocated and assigned on bit boundaries.  Using CIDR means you are able
to assign addresses corresponding with the number of hosts on the
network, thereby conserving address space.

The following table illustrates this:          
     
Addrs	Bits	Pref	Class	Mask
				
1	0	/32		255.255.255.255 
2	1	/31		255.255.255.254 
4	2	/30		255.255.255.252 
8	3	/29		255.255.255.248 
16	4	/28		255.255.255.240 
32	5	/27		255.255.255.224 
64	6	/26		255.255.255.192 
128	7	/25		255.255.255.128 
256	8	/24	1C	255.255.255.0        
512	9	/23	2C	255.255.254.0       
1K	10	/22	4C	255.255.252.0        
2K	11	/21	8C	255.255.248.0        
4K	12	/20	16C	255.255.240.0        
8K	13	/19	32C	255.255.224.0        

Addrs
Number of addresses available; note that the number of addressable hosts
normally is 2 less than this number because the host parts with all
equal bits (all 0s, all 1s) are reserved. 
Bits
          	Size of the allocation/assignment in bits of address space. 
Pref
Length of the prefix covering this address space. This is sometimes used
to indicate the size of an allocation/assignment. 
Class
        	Size of the address space in terms of class C network numbers. 
Mask
        	The network mask defining the routing prefix in dotted quad
notation.

(From http://www.ibm.net.il/~hank/cidr.html)

D.  How do I request and register address space?

You will need to send a database object to the appropriate registry. 
The registration databases are composed of records that are a series of
fields separated by one or more blank lines; each field consists of two
parts, the tag and the value.  Do not modify the tags in the templates
or errors will occur.  Values for particular fields are specified in the
templates; be careful to enter appropriate information.

The first line of a template denotes the record type.  For example, an
IP address template's first line is inetnum, therefore the record is
known as an inetnum object.  This first line is also used as the primary
key for the record, therefore if you want to modify the first field of
the record, the only way to do so is to delete the record entirely and
add a new record with the corrected information.

For illustration, here is the RIPE inetnum object.

     inetnum: [IP address range that will be assigned]
     netname: Network-Name 
     descr: Network-Name Communications Company, Town  
     admin-c: NIC-handle of administrative contact
     tech-c: NIC-handle of technical contact
     country: ISO 3166-country-code
     rev-srv: ns.someserver.net 
     rev-srv: ns.otherserver.net 
     status: assigned pa (provider aggregatable) or assigned pi
(provider independent)
     changed: email@address.net 960731 
     source: RIPE 

For Countries in the APNIC Region

In order to obtain services from APNIC, you will need to become a
member.  APNIC-054 is the APNIC Membership Application.  It is located
at:

ftp://ftp.apnic.net/apnic/docs/member-apply

Send the completed  form via email to APNIC at:

member-apply@postoffice.apnic.net

APNIC Address Allocation Requests:

Once you have become a member, you can request IP address space using
one of the three IP address request forms.  If you are an organization
that will use address space internally only (e.g., large enterprises
such as universities, government ministries, large corporations, etc.,
choose #1 (End User Address Request).  If  you are an organization that
plans to sub-delegate address space to customers (e.g., ISPs), choose #2
(ISP Address Request).  If you are a confederation of ISPs (e.g.,
national NICs, etc.), choose #3 (Confederation Address Request).

1.	APNIC-062 is the APNIC End User Internet Address Request Form.  It is
located at:

ftp://ftp.apnic.net/apnic/docs/end-user-address-request

Send the completed form via email to APNIC at:

 end-user-request@rs.apnic.net

2.	APNIC-061 is the APNIC Internet Services Provider Internet Address
Request Form.  It is located at:

ftp://ftp.anic.net/apnic/docs/isp-address-request

Send the completed form via email to APNIC at:

isp-address@rs.apnic.net

3.	Confederations are a means by which service providers can group
together to provide resource allocation and registration services
tailored to their specific local language and cultural requirements. 
For details on how to become an APNIC recognized confederation, please
see APNIC Confederation Concepts and Requirements located at:

ftp://ftp.apnic.net/apnic/docs/confed-requirements

APNIC-063 is the APNIC Confederation Internet Address Request Form.  It
is located at:

	ftp://ftp.anic.net/apnic/docs/confed-request

Send the completed form via email to APNIC at:

 confed-request@rs.apnic.net

For Countries in the ARIN Region 

Membership in ARIN is optional and not a requirement for receiving IP
address space from the registry or from your Internet service provider. 
If you are a small end-user organization, choose #1.  If you are an ISP,
choose #2.  

1.  The form for network number assignments is located at:

ftp://rs.arin.net/templates/networktemplate.txt

2.  The form for ISPs to obtain a CIDR block of IP network numbers is
located at:  

ftp://rs.arin.net/templates/isptemplate.txt	

Send the completed form via email to ARIN at:	

hostmaster@arin.net

with ip request (if you chose #1) or isp cidr request (if you chose #2)
in the subject field, as appropriate.

For Countries in the RIPE Region

RIPE NCC provides IP address space allocation only to contributing local
Internet registries.  For a description of the European Internet
Registry policies and procedures, see RIPE-159, "European Internet
Registry Policies and Procedures."  It is located at:

	ftp://ftp.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ripe-159.txt

RIPE-160 is Guidelines for Setting up a Local Internet Registry.  It is
located at:

	ftp://ftp.ripe.net/docs/ripe-160.txt

If you have questions regarding setting up a new local IR, please
contact the RIPE NCC at:

	new-lir@ripe.net

Once your local IR is established, you will get detailed information on
how to submit requests to the RIPE NCC hostmasters.

Send the completed form via email to RIPE NCC at:	

ncc@ripe.net
 
If you have general queries, please contact RIPE NCC at:

	ncc@ripe.net

E.  References

For more information on IP addresses, see RFC 1518, "An Architecture for
IP Address Allocation with CIDR" and RFC 2050, "Internet Registry IP
Allocation Guidelines."

III.	Autonomous Systems (AS)

STEP THREE:  IF NEEDED, OBTAIN AN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM NUMBER.

A.  What is an ASN and do I need one?

Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) are used to facilitate routing in
multi-homed environments.  They are allocated when your routing policy
is different from your provider's.  This generally means your site is
multi-homed.  In nearly all cases, unless you are multi-homed to more
than one ISP, you will not need an ASN.  If your routing policy does not
differ from your service provider's, you should use the service
provider's ASN.  If there is constant traffic between you and a point in
another country, you may want to connect to a second ISP in that
country.  Note that the resultant multi-homing generally makes the
system more robust and may also change registry (and therefore request)
relationships.  It also increases costs greatly. 

You may have to reduce traffic on your international lines by choosing
to connect to a local exchange point.  This allows traffic to stay
within your country and off of expensive international links.  If you
implement this plan, you will be multi-homed and will need to read the
autonomous systems and routing sections of this document.

B.  How do I register an ASN?

Since the ASN space is quite limited, request only what you really need
when you need it.

For Countries in the APNIC Region

APNIC-058 is the ASN Request Form. The form is located at:

ftp://ftp.apnic.net/apnic/docs/asn-request

Send the completed form via email to APNIC at:

as-request@rs.apnic.net

For Countries in the ARIN Region

A complete listing of assigned ASNs is located at:

 ftp://rs.arin.net/netinfo/asn.txt

The ASN registration form is located at:

ftp://rs.arin.net/templates/asntemplate.txt

Send the completed  form via email to ARIN at:

hostmaster@arin.net

with asn request in the subject field.

For Countries in the RIPE Region

The European Autonomous System Number Application Form and Supporting
Notes form (RIPE-147) is located at:

ftp://ftp.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ripe-147.txt

Local IRs can send the completed form via email to RIPE at:

hostmaster@ripe.net

C.  References

For more information on ASNs, see  RFC 1930, "Autonomous Systems (AS)."

IV.	Routing and Exchange Points

STEP FOUR: IF NEEDED, REGISTER WITH A ROUTING DATABASE.

A.  Do I need to register with a routing database?

You do not need to register with a routing database if you are simply
carrying default routes to your (single) ISP.  If you get your address
space from an ISP, the ISP will register you.  If you are connected to
more than one ISP, then you should register with a routing database.

The more multi-homed you are, the larger your routing tables need to
be.  If you are connected to public exchange points (see examples
below), or to more than one backbone ISP, you need to carry full routing
tables and run without a default route.

Example European Exchange Points:

LINX		London Internet Exchange
M9-IX		Moscow Internet Exchange
NIX.CZ  	Neutral Internet Exchange, Czech Republic

Example Asia/Pacific Exchange Points:

AUIX		Australia Internet Exchange 
HKIX 		Hong Kong Internet Exchange 
JPIX		Japan Internet Exchange 

Example Americas Exchange Points:

	MAE-EAST	Metropolitan Area Ethernet - East
	MAE-WEST	Metropolitan Area Ethernet - West
	PAIX		Palo Alto Internet Exchange

Depending on the requirements of your international ISP, you may be able
to have only a default route to them and specific routes to other
suppliers if you have an in-country exchange point.  Or they may require
that you carry a full set of routes, treating your connection to the
in-country exchange point as if it were a multi-homed connection.

B.  What about CIDR and routing?

All registries use CIDR. All major router vendors (Cisco, 3com, Bay,
Proteon, IBM, etc) support CIDR.  CIDR Internet routers use only the
prefix of the destination address to route traffic to a subnetted
environment. 

C.  How do I choose a routing database?

The Internet Routing Registry (IRR) describes registries maintained by
several national and international networking organizations.  These
currently include the RIPE Network Coordination Centre (NCC), ANS
(Advanced Network Solutions, Inc.), internetMCI, Bell Canada (formerly
CA*net), and the Routing Arbiter Database (RADB).  The IRR is a way for
ASNs to publicize their own intended routing policies without having to
request a change from a go-between.  The precedence of routing databases
is as follows: IRR, ANS, CANET, MCI, RIPE, RADB. 

With the exception of the Routing Arbiter Database, each registry serves
a limited customer base.  ANS, InternetMCI, and Bell Canada accept
routing registrations for their customers alone, and the RIPE NCC
oversees European registrations. The Routing Arbiter Database is unique
in that it handles registrations for networking organizations not
covered by the other routing registries. The Routing Arbiter also
provides coordination among all the registries to ensure consistent
representation of routing policies.

All Regional IRs need to register with one (only one) of the routing
databases in the IRR.  However, note that some ISPs do not use the
regional registries or RADB.

D.  How do I register in the RADB (The Americas)?

You need to submit three types of database records to the RADB: one or
more maintainer objects, an AS object, and one or more route objects.

To specify the individuals who are allowed to update your records in the
RADB, fill out one or more maintainer objects and send them via email
to:

db-admin@ra.net

You need to submit a maintainer object before you can register any AS or
route objects.

To describe the autonomous system that announces your routes, fill out
an AS object and submit it via email to:

auto-dbm@ra.net

AS objects are also called aut-num objects.

To register your routes, fill out one or more route objects, and send
them to RADB via email to:
 
auto-dbm@ra.net

E.  References

For more information on routers, see RFC 1812, "Requirements for IP
Version 4 Routers."
See also Representation of IP Routing Policies in a Routing Registry
(ripe-81++), RIPE-181.  It is located at:

	ftp://ftp.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ripe-181.txt

For more information on CIDR and routing, see RFC 1817, "CIDR and
Classful Routing."

V.	Domain Name Registration

STEP FIVE:  REGISTER YOUR DOMAIN NAME.

A.  What is a country domain?

The Domain Name System (DNS) specifies the naming of computers within a
hierarchy.  Top-Level 
Domain names (TLD) include generic TLDs (gTLDs) and two-letter country
codes (ccTLDs).  Examples of 
gTLDs  include .edu (education), .com (commercial), .int
(international), .org (organization), and .net 
(network).  Examples of two-letter country codes are .id for Indonesia,
.ca for Canada, and .fr for France.  ISO 3166 is used as a basis for
country code top-level domain names.  Country codes are determined by
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in cooperation
with the United Nations.  The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
directly registers all country-code top-level domains, however it is not
involved in the determination of country status.  See ISO 3166 for more
information and a listing of country codes (Appendix C). 

A hierarchy of names may, and normally should be, created under each
TLD.  There is a wide variation in the structure of country domains.  In
some countries the structure is very flat, while in others there is
substantial organization.  In some country domains the second levels are
generic categories, while in others they are based on political
geography, and in still others, organization names are listed directly
under the country code.  Examples of second level generic categories are
.ac (academic), .co (corporate), .go 
(government), and .re (research).

B.  How do I register as a country domain?

First check that: (1) the domain is still available, (2) you have
someone in your country as the administrative contact, and (3) your name
servers are prepared (see RFC 1912 for information on common errors in
preparing name servers).

The whois database maintained by InterNIC Registration Services (Network
Solutions, Inc.) is currently the authoritative source for .com, .net,
.org and .edu domain name information.

To apply to manage a country code top-level domain you should:

1.	First, use the whois command to see if the domain is already
registered.

whois domain 

2.	Request a Domain Name Agreement template from IANA by sending email
to:

iana@iana.org

C.  What if my country is already registered?

If your country is already registered, contact the country-code
administrator to register a new second-level domain name.  

Please note that ARIN, RIPE, and APNIC do not handle domain names (other
than IN-ADDR.ARPA).  If you want to register a domain name directly
under a top-level domain (TLD), please contact the appropriate TLD
administrator. 

D.  How do I resolve a country domain name dispute?
 
See RFC 1591 for domain name dispute information.  Note that you will
need to resolve the dispute internally before you contact IANA.

E.  References

For more information on domain names, see RFC 1591, "Domain Name System
Structure and 
Delegation", RFC 1713, "Tools for DNS Debugging", and RFC 1912, "Common
DNS Operational and Configuration Errors."

VI.	IN-ADDR.ARPA Domain Delegation 

STEP SIX:  IF NEEDED, REGISTER YOUR IN-ADDR.ARPA DOMAIN.
 
A.  What is an IN-ADDR.ARPA domain and do I need one?

An IN-ADDR.ARPA domain allows for mapping of IP addresses into domain
names.  This provides address to hostname reverse resolution.  IN-ADDR
domains are represented using the network number in reverse.  For
example, the IN-ADDR domain for network 123.45.67.0 is represented as
67.45.123.in-addr.arpa.

You almost always need reverse resolution.

B.  How do I register an IN-ADDR.ARPA domain?

You should ask your upstream provider about registering your
IN-ADDR.ARPA domains.  If you are working directly with a regional
registry, see below.

For Countries in the APNIC Region

The IN-ADDR.ARPA Delegation Form is APNIC-059 and is located at:

	ftp://ftp.apnic.net/apnic/docs/in-addr

CAUTION: You must set-up your name server to accept the delegation prior
to submission of this form.

Send the completed form via email to APNIC at:

        	domreg@rs.apnic.net

For Countries in the ARIN Region

IN-ADDR.ARPA domains are registered using an IN-ADDR.ARPA template.  The
form is located at:

	ftp://rs.arin.net/templates/inaddrtemplate.txt

CAUTION: Do not list your network number in reverse on the template.

Send the completed form via email to ARIN at:

	hostmaster@arin.net

with new in-addr, modify in-addr, or remove in-addr in the subject
field, as appropriate.

For Countries in the RIPE Region

The domain object needs to be entered in the RIPE database before
requesting reverse delegation. 
domain: 0.194.in-addr.arpa 
descr: Our organization allocation 
admin-c: NIC-handle of administrative contact (e.g., JLC-2RIPE)
tech-c: NIC-handle of technical contact
zone-c: NIC-handle of zone contact
nserver: Name server (e.g., ns.someserver.net)
nserver: ns.otherserver.net 
nserver: ns.ripe.net 
changed: email@address.net 960731 
source: RIPE 

NOTE:  One of the name servers has to be ns.ripe.net

The domain object described above should be included in the request, as
well as zone file 
entries for the zone above the one requested.  For example, if a reverse
delegation is requested 
for 1.193.in-addr.arpa, the relevant zone file entries should be
included for 193.in-addr.arpa, 
whereas if a reverse delegation is requested for 2.2.193.in-addr.arpa,
the zone file entries 
should be included for 2.193.in-addr.arpa.

Send the completed object(s) via email to RIPE at:

		auto-inaddr@ripe.net

VII.	Security

A.	Is there a way to prevent unauthorized changes to my objects?

Registries provide various security measures to prevent unauthorized
changes to your database entries.  Contact your regional IR for more
information.

VIII.	Network Optimization and Management

A.	How do I optimize traffic on my network?

Contact the Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA). 
CAIDA is a collaborative undertaking to promote greater cooperation in
the engineering and maintenance of a robust, scalable global Internet
infrastructure.  CAIDA provides a neutral framework to support these
cooperative endeavors.

Or visit their web-site at:

	http://www.caida.org/

Send email with questions or comments to:

	info@caida.org

Acknowledgements
 
Thanks to Brian Candler, David Conrad, Kim Hubbard, Daniel Karrenberg,
Charles Musisi, and Jon Postel for reviewing this document; and to Hank
Nussbacher for permission to reprint his table on CIDR. 
 
References

[1]	Malkin, G., LaQuey Parker, T., "Internet Users' Glossary", RFC 1392,
Xylogics, Inc.
and U. Texas, January 1993.

[2]	Hinden, R., Editor, "Applicability Statement for the Implementation
of
Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR)", RFC 1517, Internet Engineering
Steering Group, September 1993.

[3]	Rekhter, Y. and Li, T.  "An Architecture for IP Address Allocation
with CIDR", RFC 1518, T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corp, Cisco
Systems, September 1993.

[4]	Fuller, V., Li, T., Yu, J., and Varadhan, K.  "Classless
Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and Aggregation
Strategy", RFC 1519, BARRNet, Cisco Systems, MERIT, OARnet, September
1993.

[5]	Rekhter, Y. and Topolcic, C.  "Exchanging Routing Information Across
Provider Boundaries in the CIDR Environment", RFC 1520, T.J. Watson
Research Center, IBM Corp., CNRI, September 1993.

[6]	Postel, J.  "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation", RFC 1591,
USC/Information Systems Institute, March 1994.

[7]	Wijnen, B., Carpenter, G., Curran, K., Sehgal, A. & Waters, G.,
"Simple Network Management Protocol Distributed Protocol Interface
Version 2.0.", RFC 1592, T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corp. and Bell
Northern Research, Ltd., March 1994. 

[8]	Ramao, A.  "Tools for DNS debugging", RFC 1713, FCCN, November 1994.

[9]	Baker, F.  "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers", RFC 1812, Cisco
Systems, June 1995.

[10]	Rekhter, Y.  "CIDR and Classful Routing", RFC 1817, Cisco Systems,
August 1995.

[11]	Barr, D.  "Common DNS Operational and Configuration Errors", RFC
1912, The Pennsylvania State University, February 1996.

[12]	Hawkinson, J. and Bates, T.  "Guidelines for Creation, Selection,
and Registration of an Autonomous System", RFC 1930, BBN Planet
Corporation, MCI, March 1996.

[13]	Freed, N. and Borenstein, N.  "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC
2045, Innosoft and First Virtual, November 1996.

[14]	Hubbard, K., Kosters, M., Conrad, D., Karrenberg, D., and Postel,
J.  "Internet Registry IP Allocation Guidelines", RFC 2050, InterNIC,
APNIC, RIPE, ISI, November 1996.

[15]	Kessler, G. and Shepard, S. "A Primer On Internet and TCP/IP Tools
and Utilities", RFC 2151, June 1997.

[16]	ISO 3166:  Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries.

[17]	Palasri, S., Huter, S., and Wenzel, Z.  "The History of the
Internet in Thailand", to be published by the National Electronics and
Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) of Thailand and the Network Startup
Resource Center (NSRC).
 
Authors' Addresses

Zita Wenzel, Ph.D.
Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC)
c/o University Computing
1212-University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1212 USA
zita@nsrc.org

John Klensin, Ph.D.
Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC)
c/o University Computing
1212-University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1212 USA
klensin@nsrc.org

Randy Bush
Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC)
C/o University Computing
1212-University of Oregon
Eugene, OR  97403-1212 USA
randy@nsrc.org

Steven Huter
Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC)
c/o University Computing
1212-University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1212 USA
sghuter@nsrc.org

Appendix A:	The Internet Agencies

·   The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) 

IANA is the central coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter
values for Internet protocols and for all address space and name space
used in the Internet.  IANA allocates parts of the Internet address
space to Regional Internet Registries (IRs) for distribution to Local
IRs and ISPs.  IANA is also responsible for the coordination and
management of the Domain Name System (DNS).

Email:		iana@iana.org
Postal:		P. O. Box 12607
		Marina del Rey, CA  90295-3607
Telephone:	+1-310-822-1511
Fax:		+1-310-823-6714
Internet:		http://www.iana.org/

· InterNIC	

The InterNIC was a cooperative activity between the National Science
Foundation, General Atomics, AT&T, and Network Solutions, Inc.  Network
Solutions provided IP address allocation before ARIN was founded. 
Currently, InterNIC registers second-level domain names under the
generic top-level domains.

	Email:		hostmaster@internic.net
	Postal:		Network Solutions, Inc.  
                                     	ATTN: InterNIC Registration
Services  
                                     	505 Huntmar Park Dr.  
                                     	 Herndon, VA 20170 US
	Telephone:	+1-703-742-4777
	Fax:		+1-703-742-9552
Internet:		http://www.internic.net/

Regional Internet Registries (IRs)

Regional IRs operate in large geopolitical regions such as continents. 
Currently, there are three Regional IRs: ARIN for the Americas, the
Caribbean, and sub-Saharan Africa; RIPE NCC for Europe, North Africa,
and the Middle East; and APNIC for the Asia Pacific region.  The
specific duties of the Regional IRs include coordination and
representation of all local Internet Registries in their respective
region.

· APNIC 

Asia Pacific Network Information Center (APNIC) is a non-profit Internet
registry for the Asia Pacific region.  APNIC provides IP address
allocation, Autonomous System Number (ASN) assignment, and IN-ADDR.ARPA
registration. 

	Email:		hostmaster@apnic.net
	Postal:		APNIC
			Tokyo Central P.O. Box 351
			Tokyo, 100-91, Japan
	Telephone:	+81-3-5500-0480
Fax:		+81-3-5500-0481
Internet: 	 http://www.apnic.net/

· ARIN

The American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) is a non-profit
Internet registry that was established for the purpose of administration
and registration of Internet Protocol (IP) numbers to the geographical
areas that were managed by Network Solutions, Inc. (InterNIC).  These
areas include, but are not limited to, North America, South America,
sub-Saharan Africa and the Caribbean region.  ARIN provides IP address
allocation, Autonomous System Number (ASN) assignment, and 
IN-ADDR.ARPA registration.

	Email:		hostmaster@arin.net
	Postal:		4506 Daly Drive
Suite 200
Chantilly, VA  20151
	Telephone:	+1-703-227-0660
	Fax		+1-703-227-0676
Internet: 	 http://www.arin.net/

· RIPE NCC 

Reseaux IP Européens Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) is a
non-profit Internet registry for the European, North African, and Middle
East regions.  RIPE NCC provides IP address allocation, Autonomous
System Number (ASN) assignment, and IN-ADDR.ARPA registration.

Email:   		ncc@ripe.net
Postal:		Singel 258 
		1016 AB Amsterdam 
		The Netherlands 
Phone:		+31-20-535-4444 
Fax:		+31-20-535-4445 
Internet:		http://www.ripe.net/

Appendix B:	Documentation

Internet Documentation

For general Internet documentation, ftp to rfc-editor.org and cd to the
/rfc subdirectory for Request for Comments documents.

Details on obtaining these documents via ftp or email may be obtained by
sending an email message to:

rfc-info@rfc-editor.org

with the message body  help: ways_to_get_rfcs (or fyis or stds).  For
example:

 	To: rfc-info@isi.edu
Subject: getting rfcs

help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Documents, Templates, and Forms

The documents, templates, and forms referenced in this guide are
available from the document stores in the directories listed in the URLs
(Uniform Resource Locators).  Organizations without connectivity wishing
to obtain copies of the referenced documents should contact their Local
IR to arrange postal delivery of one or more of the documents.  Note
that fees may be associated with the delivery of hardcopy versions of
documents.

The document stores can be accessed in two ways:

1.  Via anonymous FTP (File Transfer Protocol).

Using your ftp application, connect to the appropriate host computer
shown below using your email address as the password.  Use the cd
(change directory) command to connect to the appropriate subdirectory,
then use the get command to retrieve the specific file.  For example:

ftp rs.apnic.net (for countries in the Asia/Pacific region)
ftp rs.arin.net (for countries in the Americas)
ftp rs.ripe.net (for countries in Europe or North Africa)

	login:  anonymous
	password:  your_email_address

	cd netinfo

	get domain_info.txt

2.  Via electronic mail.

Send email to the appropriate address shown below with the message body
as specified.

APNIC Documentation

For APNIC documents and templates, connect to ftp.apnic.net and cd to
/apnic/docs.  

Or send email to:

 ftpmail@postoffice.apnic.net 

with UNIX commands (open, dir, cd, get, quit, etc.) as the body of the
message.  For more help, send an email message to APNIC at the same
address with a message body consisting of help.

ARIN Documentation

For ARIN templates and documents, connect to rs.arin.net and cd to
/templates. 

Or send email to:
	
mailserv@rs.arin.net

A users' guide is available by sending the message containing only the
word help in the subject field of the message.  In the subject field,
request the type of service you wish followed by any needed arguments. 
The message body is normally ignored.  Large files will be divided into
smaller separate messages.

     The following services are currently available:

netinfo xxx
                         xxx is a file name or the word index
templates xxx
                         xxx is the template required (e.g.,
asntemplate.txt)
 policy xxx
                         xxx is a file name or the word index

RIPE Documentation

For RIPE documents and forms, connect to ftp.ripe.net/ripe and cd to
/docs or cd to /forms.

Or send email to:

 mail-server@ripe.net 

with send help in the body of the message. 

Appendix C:	Country Codes

The ISO 3166 list of two-letter country codes is available at:

http://www.iana.org/country-codes.txt

The web-site for the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) is:

	http://www.iso.ch/

The list is also available at:

	ftp://apnic.net/apnic/docs/iso-3166.txt

and

	ftp://ftp.ripe.net/iso3166-countrycodes

Appendix D:	Acronyms

ANS		Advanced Network Services, Inc. 
ASN		Autonomous System Number
APNIC		Asia Pacific Network Information Center
ARIN		American Registry for Internet Numbers
AS		Autonomous System
CANET		Canada Net
CIDR		Classless Inter-Domain Routing
CIX		Commercial Internet Exchange
CWIX		Cable and Wireless Internet Exchange
DNS		Domain Name System
DSU		Data Service Unit
FYI		Internet For Your Information document
gTLD		Generic Top-Level Domain 
IANA		Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
IPMA		Internet Performance Measurement and Analysis 
InterNIC	Internet Network Information Center
IP		Internet Protocol
IR		Internet Registry
IRR		Internet Routing Registry
ISO		International Organization for Standardization
ISP		Internet Service Provider
LINX		London Internet Exchange
MIME		Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
NAP		Network Access Point
NCC		Network Coordination Centre
NIC		Network Information Center
NSF		National Science Foundation
NSRC		Network Startup Resource Center
POP		Post Office Protocol
POP		Point of Presence
RADB		Routing Arbiter Data Base
RFC		Request for Comments
RIPE		Reseaux IP Européens
SMTP		Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
STD		Internet Standards document
STIX		Singapore Telecom Internet Exchange
TCP/IP		Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TLD		Top-Level Domain
VLSM		Variable Length Subnet Mask


INTERNET DRAFT		EXPIRES JUNE 1999		INTERNET DRAFT
