




Internet Draft         Search Address Patent Use                May 1996


    Conditional Grant of Rights to Specific Hewlett-Packard Patents
       In Conjunction With the Internet Engineering Task Force's
             Internet-Standard Network Management Framework

                              May 23, 1996

                             Gary McAnally
                            Douglas Gilbert
                               John Flick

                        Hewlett Packard Company
                     8000 Foothills Blvd M.S. 5556
                        Roseville, CA 95747-5556

                        johnf@hprnd.rose.hp.com

              <draft-mcanally-netmgt-frmwk-rights-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Note:

   This document is NOT a standard.  It is an announcement to interested
   parties of a conditional grant by the Hewlett-Packard Company (HP) of
   certain rights to use autotopology network management technology
   covered by specific HP patents in conjunction with the Internet
   Engineering Task Force's (IETF's) Internet-standard network
   management framework.



McAnally/Gilbert/Flick   Expires November 1996                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft         Search Address Patent Use                May 1996


Purpose

   This grant is made to help facilitate inclusion of certain patented
   search address technology covering network device mapping in IETF
   standards-track Management Information Base (MIB) modules.  HP is
   offering this search address technology to the IETF as a technique
   for mapping network devices.  It should be noted that the
   confirmatory license mentioned is optional, since the grant of rights
   is automatic.

A Grant of Rights to Hewlett-Packard US Patents 5,293,635 and 5,421,024

   HP hereby covenants that it will not assert any claims in US Patents
   5,293,635, 5,421,024, any continuations, divisions, or
   continuations-in-part of either, or any non-US counterparts of any of
   the foregoing against any party that makes, uses, sells, imports, or
   offers for sale, an implementation of an IETF standards-track MIB
   module that includes HP's contributed search address technology, or
   any derivative of that contribution, provided that the MIB module is
   employed to implement the Internet-standard network management
   framework.  Such grant of rights is limited in that it does not
   include a right to incorporate such HP search address technology into
   proprietary MIB modules.

   This grant of rights will permanently terminate with respect to any
   party (and to any subsidiary of a party) that asserts a patent it
   owns or controls, either directly or indirectly, against HP or any of
   its subsidiaries for implementation of, or operation of any system
   utilizing, search address technology.  The termination of rights will
   occur as of the date the patent is asserted against HP.

   A written confirmation of this grant, and/or a license under any
   other HP patent under HP's then-current terms, conditions, and
   royalty rates, can be obtained by sending a request to:

           Patent Counsel
           Hewlett-Packard Company
           3000 Hanover Street
           Palo Alto, CA 94304
           USA

Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

Authors' Addresses

   Gary McAnally



McAnally/Gilbert/Flick   Expires November 1996                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft         Search Address Patent Use                May 1996


   Hewlett-Packard Company
   8000 Foothills Blvd.
   Roseville, CA 95747
   USA


   Douglas Gilbert
   Hewlett-Packard Company
   3000 Hanover Street
   Palo Alto, CA 94304
   USA


   John Flick
   Hewlett-Packard Company
   8000 Foothills Blvd. M.S. 5556
   Roseville, CA 95747-5556
   USA

   Phone: (916) 785-4018
   EMail: johnf@hprnd.rose.hp.com






























McAnally/Gilbert/Flick   Expires November 1996                  [Page 3]

