Network Working Group                             M. Vigoureux (Editor)
Internet Draft                                           Alcatel-Lucent
Updates: 2418 (if approved)                            D. King (Editor)
Intended status: Best Current Practice               Old Dog Consulting
Expires: August 2014
                                                      February 14, 2014




                 Working Group Secretaries Good Practices
                    draft-secretaries-good-practices-02


Abstract

   The role of Working Group Secretaries has greatly evolved and
   increased in value since the writing of RFC 2418 ("IETF Working Group
   Guidelines and Procedures"). This document further refines and
   enriches the description of the Working Group Secretarial role, and
   consequently updates RFC 2418. This document complements the succinct
   description of the role of Working Group Secretaries by providing a
   compilation of good practices and some general guidelines regarding
   the fulfilment of the role.

   This document may also be useful for Working Group Chairs to help
   develop and better appreciate the value of Working Group Secretaries.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt





WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. WG Secretary's Functions and Responsibilities..................3
      2.1. An IETF Meeting...........................................3
         2.1.1. Preparation Phase....................................3
         2.1.2. A Working Group Session..............................5
         2.1.3. Conclusion of an IETF Meeting........................6
      2.2. Between IETF Meetings.....................................7
   3. Conclusions and Perspectives...................................8
   4. Security Considerations........................................9
   5. IANA Considerations...........................................10
   6. References....................................................10
      6.1. Normative References.....................................10
      6.2. Informative References...................................10
   7. Acknowledgments...............................................10
   Contributors' Addresses..........................................10
   Authors' Addresses...............................................11

1. Introduction

   The Working Group (WG) Secretarial role was defined as a minute taker
   and to record WG discussion points and decisions (see Section 6.2 of
   RFC 2418). Over time, the WG Secretarial role has evolved to include
   a number of additional functions and responsibilities which are
   critical to the smooth operation of IETF WGs. This document describes
   these additional functions and responsibilities. However, the
   framework and perimeter of action associated to the WG Secretarial


WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   role, depends on the WG Secretary and the WG Chairs, as well as on
   the professional relationship they establish. Therefore this document
   does not prescribe what must be performed, but what might be
   performed by a WG Secretary. Also, this list shall not be considered
   as exhaustive. This document is therefore not a rigid job
   description.

   It shall be noted that a certain number of tools and means exist in
   support of WG operation (e.g., Session Request Tool, Meeting Material
   Manager, the Datatracker, Trac Tool, Wiki). Most, if not all, of
   these are accessible from the WG Chairs' page
   (http://www.ietf.org/wg/chairs-page.html). However, it is out of the
   scope of this document to describe the use of these tools and means.
   It shall also be noted that no specific tool exists in support of
   certain actions and tasks that can fall under the responsibility of
   WG Secretaries.

   Finally, certain tasks described herein require the use of
   credentials and some rights associated to these. The WG Chairs should
   make sure the WG Secretary has the necessary access and privileges to
   perform the various tasks.

2. WG Secretary's Functions and Responsibilities

   We classify the functions and responsibilities of a WG Secretary
   according two distinct phases: an IETF meeting, and the period
   between two consecutive IETF meetings. The following sub-sections
   reflect that classification.

2.1. An IETF Meeting

   This phase in fact covers the period of an IETF meeting per se, as
   well as the preparation phase and conclusion phase of a WG session.

2.1.1. Preparation Phase

   In a (non absolute) chronological order, the tasks of a WG Secretary
   could consist of:

   o  Submitting a session request for the WG.







WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   Using the means available, the WG Secretary could submit a request
   for a WG session at the upcoming IETF meeting. The WG Secretary
   should coordinate with the Chairs in order to correctly formulate the
   request, especially with regards to the number of sessions to request
   for, and their respective duration. It shall be noted that holding a
   WG session is typically driven by the need for the WG to discuss some
   topics or documents, and that the identification of this need may
   imply having interactions with the WG before requesting a session.

   o  Calling for presentation slots.

   Working Group Chairs may organise WG sessions in different ways. As
   part of this organisation, they may allocate all or part of the
   session to people wishing to present and discuss their work. In that
   context, and as soon as the IETF agenda for a given meeting is
   published, the WG Secretary could send an e-mail to the WG mailing
   list asking the WG participants to submit requests for presentation
   slots at the upcoming WG session(s). Note that WG Chairs may wish to
   set policies for accepting presentation slots requests. The call for
   presentation slots should remind these policies as well as how should
   the requests be formulated, together with a deadline for sending
   them.

   o  Collecting the presentations slots requests.

   As a preliminary step to building the agenda, the WG Secretary could
   collect all the requests for presentations slots. In order to be able
   to do so, the WG Secretary should make sure that he/she is aware of
   all the formulated requests by 1) clearly indicating in the call for
   presentations slots that he/she must be (one of) the recipients of
   the requests, and 2) checking with the Chairs that they wouldn't have
   received requests sent to them only.

   o  Proposing a WG session agenda.

   Depending on the known preferences of the WG Chairs for the typical
   structure of their WG sessions, on the objectives WG Chairs have for
   a particular WG session, and/or on his/her personal view, the
   Secretary could propose a structured agenda for the upcoming WG
   session(s). Following that, the WG Secretary could work with the
   Chairs to finalise the agenda in view of publishing a first draft
   agenda.

   o  Submitting the WG session agenda.



WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   At the deadline, or even earlier, the WG Secretary could publish the
   draft and then final agenda for the WG session(s). The WG Secretary
   could then inform the WG that the agenda has been published. Also,
   the WG Secretary could inform the participants having requested but
   not assigned a presentation slot, of the reason why they were not
   allocated a slot in the final WG session's agenda.

   o  Requesting presentations materials.

   In combination with the notification of the publication of the WG
   session's agenda, or separately, the WG Secretary could ask the
   presenters to send the material in support of their upcoming
   presentation. This request should come with a deadline to give
   sufficient time to upload the materials before the WG session(s).

   o  Preparing the WG Status material.

   Working Groups' sessions typically start with a slot allocated to the
   WG Chairs during which is presented a status of the WG. The WG
   Secretary could produce part, or the totality, of the WG status
   slides by compiling the appropriate information. As part of this
   step, the WG Secretary could query the authors of WG documents to
   know the status of and plans for their document (e.g., envisaged date
   of readiness for WG Last Call). This, mostly if not only, applies to
   WG documents the state of which is not evident. For example there is
   no apparent need to poll authors of a WG document which is in IESG
   processing.

   o  Uploading the materials.

   The WG Secretary could, sufficiently ahead of time, upload the
   presentations materials. This is useful both to the WG participants
   wanting to have access to the materials and to the person responsible
   for displaying the materials during the session.

2.1.2. A Working Group Session

   The role of the WG Secretary could also cover the phase of a WG
   session.

   o  Before the WG session.






WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   For the WG Chairs to enjoy their lunch, coffee or cookie until the
   last minute, the Secretary could sacrifice his/her time and enter the
   meeting room well in advance to prepare the session. This might
   include: checking if blue sheets are available, preparing the
   session's material to be displayed, launching collaborative software
   environments (e.g., WebEx), preparing minute taking, and so on. The
   usefulness of such preparation depends of course on the WG and on the
   session. A WG session with a light agenda might not require all this.
   On the other hand, a WG with an extremely packed agenda and for which
   every minute counts, might benefit from such preparation.

   o  During the WG session.

   The WG Secretary could be responsible for displaying the material and
   running through the slides as speakers advance through their
   presentation.

   The WG Secretary would typically also act as the minute taker. It is
   recommended that, in the event a WG Secretary is unable to attend a
   WG session or take minutes, a suitable replacement be identified
   before the WG session.

   In addition, the WG Secretary might also identify a Jabber scribe to
   aid remote participants to follow discussions, and proxy questions
   from remote participants.

   Performing multiple tasks during WG sessions might pose certain
   challenges but nothing insurmountable.

   o  After the WG session.

   After the end of a WG session, the WG Secretary could bring the blue
   sheets to the Secretariat, and socialize with the very supportive and
   welcoming people composing the Secretariat.

2.1.3. Conclusion of an IETF Meeting

   o  Publishing the WG session's minutes.

   While it is highly recommended that the minutes of WG session(s) be
   published as quickly as possible, this might only be feasible after
   the end of the week of an IETF meeting. In any case, if the WG
   Secretary was the minute taker he/she could polish the notes taken
   (correcting typos, or even complementing missing parts with audio
   recordings) and send these to the Chairs for validation.


WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   Once the WG Chairs agree on the written minutes, the Secretary could
   publish these using the means available.

   Once published, the WG Secretary could communicate the link to the
   WG, asking at the same time for the WG participants to review and
   inform him/her of changes that would need to be performed before
   final publication.

2.2. Between IETF Meetings

   Tracking is the word dominating the tasks a WG Secretary could be
   expected to perform between two IETF meetings.

   o  Recording and tracking authors' inputs.

   At least on two occasions, the WG Secretary is in position to receive
   inputs from authors of Internet-Drafts concerning the status and
   plans they have for their document(s). This is during the preparation
   phase (when building the WG status material) and during the WG
   session when authors sometime express such plans at the end of their
   presentation. The WG Secretary should record and track this
   information as it is valuable for sketching a plan and a schedule of
   the actions the WG Chairs will possibly have to take (e.g., poll for
   adoption by the WG, WG Last Call).

   o  Recording and tracking WG Chairs' decisions.

   Decisions are sometimes taken by WG Chairs during WG sessions. These
   decisions often imply some follow-up actions that the WG Chairs need
   to take. The WG Secretary could record and track the action-points
   for the WG Chairs.

   o  Tracking events.

   Between IETF meetings, a number of WG events including WG adoption
   polls, WG Last Calls, and acknowledging and managing Liaisons and
   Communications from/to external Standards organizations, will occur.
   The WG Secretary could track these events and report progress, or
   deadlines to the Chairs. For the WG adoption polls and WG Last Calls,
   the WG Secretary could remind the Chairs of the end of the poll/call
   together with an evaluation of the positions expressed on the WG
   mailing list in response to these polls/calls.

   o  Monitoring compliance with IETF IPR rules.



WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   As per [2] it is important for document authors and contributors to
   disclose IPR in a timely manner. Verification that authors are in
   compliance with IETF IPR rules may for example be conducted prior to
   a WG adoption poll or WG Last Call. The WG Secretary could monitor
   and track responses to such verifications, and chase authors and
   contributors where necessary. Where responses are not forthcoming,
   the WG Secretary could notify the Chairs.

   o  Tracking of documents issues.

   Working Groups have issue trackers to facilitate the tracking of
   documents issues. The WG Secretary could identify the issues raised
   in a review of a WG document or during WG discussions and record the
   information in the issue tracker. The WG Secretary could liaise with
   the document editor to find one which issues were resolved and how
   they were resolved and record that information.

   o  Maintaining the Datatracker and ensuring it is up to date.

   An important tool in support of WG operations is the Datatracker. The
   WG Secretary could have the responsibility of keeping the Datatracker
   up to date so that it reflects the exact state each document is
   effectively in. This could also include marking milestones as done or
   updating the target date of a milestone.

   The WG Secretary could also make sure that the replacement status of
   documents is correct, and request for the application of the proper
   status in case it is incorrect or not indicated and necessary.

   o  Doing "Chair-like" work.

   Depending on the established working relationship between the WG
   Chairs and Secretary, the latter could take actions such as launch or
   close polls for adoption or WG Last Calls, verify compliance with
   IETF IPR rules, be the Shepherd as per [3] for a given document.

   o  Attending WG Chairs' training.

   WG Secretaries are invited to the IETF WG chairs' lunch tutorials.

3. Conclusions and Perspectives

   The previous section listed the possible functions and
   responsibilities of WG Secretaries. The role of a WG Secretary can



WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   range from a few of these to the full spectrum of them, and even
   beyond.

   It is essential that over time the WG Secretary and Chairs build
   trust to facilitate an effective and productive working relationship.
   No secret recipe is however given here on how to achieve such
   relationship. Nevertheless, making clear expectations from both
   perspectives and clear communication, the higher the probability of a
   more efficient and productive relationship and as such, will directly
   facilitate to the success of the WG. Finally, while the WG Secretary
   function can be viewed as being a support function to the WG Chairs,
   it is crucial that the Chairs also provide support to the Secretary
   as needed.

   While the apparent value of a good WG Secretary might be in the
   delegation of tasks that the Chairs are expected to manage and in the
   smoothed operation of WGs, this role carries a second important
   value. As the WG Secretary develops the knowledge to fulfil the above
   functions and responsibilities he/she will be in a position to both
   extend the scope of his/her actions, and to be more and more involved
   in WG operation and decision-making. The WG Secretarial role is
   therefore an excellent means for training individuals in the art of
   WG operation, and possibly towards the role of WG Chair.

   The Secretarial role is not mandatory in WGs, hence, no formal
   selection process exists and it is also difficult to identify a best
   current practice for that purpose. Reality is that WG chairs select
   their secretaries in different ways. Nevertheless, to become a WG
   Secretary the first step is to be active and involved in the WG of
   interest as well as show willingness and have time to dedicate to
   that function.

4. Security Considerations

   Delegation based on trust is not expected to introduce security
   issues. Nevertheless, while WG Chairs may delegate a number of tasks
   to the Secretary, they maintain the overall responsibility over the
   WG and the decisions and actions that are taken. As such, it is
   recommended that the WG Secretary does not operate without the
   agreement of the Chairs, or at least without the confidence that
   his/her choices and actions are in line with the Chairs views on any
   given matter.

   Also, the WG Secretary might have access to sensitive information,
   usually only destined to the Chairs. Therefore, it is very important


WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   that a WG Secretary acts with ethics, respecting the privacy of these
   data.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from the IANA.

6. References

6.1. Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
         BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

6.2. Informative References

   [2]   Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
         BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [3]   Levkowetz, H., Meyer, D., Eggert, L., and Mankin, A., "Document
         Shepherding from Working Group Last Call to Publication", RFC
         4858, May 2007.

7. Acknowledgments

   The authors thank a number of Working Group Secretaries (in
   alphabetical order) who have contributed to the development of this
   document: Daniele Ceccarelli, Luigi Iannone, Subramanian Moonesamy,
   Ines Robles, and Sam Weiler. The authors also thank Carlos Pignataro
   for his review and contributions.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

Contributors' Addresses

   Daniele Ceccarelli
   Ericsson
   Via Melen 77, Genova, Italy

   Email: daniele.ceccarelli@ericsson.com







WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         February 2014


   Luigi Iannone
   Telecom ParisTech
   23, Avenue d'Italie, 75013 Paris, France

   Email: ggx@gigix.net


   Subramanian Moonesamy
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatre Bornes
   Mauritius

   Email: sm+ietf@elandsys.com


   Carlos Pignataro
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   7200-12 Kit Creek Road
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA

   Email: cpignata@cisco.com


   Ines Robles
   Universidad Tecnologica Nacional - FRM
   Rodriguez 273, Mendoza, Argentina

   Email: ines.robles@gridtics.frm.utn.edu.ar


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Vigoureux (Editor)
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel-lucent.com


   Daniel King (Editor)
   Old Dog Consulting

   Email: daniel@olddog.co.uk





WG Secretaries         Expires August 14, 2014                [Page 11]

