


Network Working Group                                          P. Eronen
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: August 31, 2006                                        J. Arkko
                                                            H. Levkowetz
                                                                Ericsson
                                                       February 27, 2006


               Selective Copy-Editing Experiment for RFCs
              draft-eronen-rfc-selective-experiment-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 31, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document proposes an RFC 3933 [RFC3933] experiment for the IETF
   RFC publication process.  The experiment is limited in scope and
   duration.  The specific experiment has been chosen because (a) it has
   potential to provide a significant process improvement, (b) it can be
   executed at a low cost, (c) it addresses a widely recognized problem
   in the IETF process, and (d) tool support can be (and has been) built



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   for it.  The experiment relates to the copyediting and other manual
   tasks in the publication process.  Specifically, the amount of work
   these manual tasks require differs widely between drafts, and for a
   certain subset of drafts there are either very minor editorial
   changes or no changes needed at all, if we discount the different
   formatting requirements between RFCs and drafts.  The experiment
   involves identification of this subset of drafts and processing them
   separately with a "fast path" process that uses almost entirely
   automated processes.  For the drafts that belong to this subset, it
   is expected that the RFC Editor queuing time is reduced from months
   or years to weeks or less.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Proposed Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Process Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Incentives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Document Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  IESG Workload  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Appeals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13






















Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


1.  Introduction

   When a document is approved by the IESG, it is sent to the RFC Editor
   for publishing.  The publication process includes processing at IANA,
   copyediting for grammar and spelling purposes, waiting for references
   to be published, formatting of the document in the RFC style, final
   checks by authors in so called "Author's 48 Hours", and the storage
   of the draft and meta-information related to it in the RFC Editor's
   information systems.

   Unfortunately, the entire process can take a long time, from months
   to over a year.  There are multiple reasons behind such long
   processing delays:

   o  RFC Editor or IANA workload.  This includes the workload of their
      subcontractors, such as the professional copyediting services
      sometimes employed by the RFC Editor.

   o  Waiting for normative references to progress through the IETF and
      RFC publication processes.

   o  Busy, unresponsive or hard-to-reach authors that do not respond in
      AUTH48 or do not participate in discussions with IANA.

   o  Events happening in parallel elsewhere that cause changes to be
      considered for the documents in question.  This leads to longer
      AUTH48 periods, going back to the WG or ADs to confirm changes,
      and sometimes even pulling the documents back from the queue.

   o  Imperfect administrative processes, tool support, or lack of input
      materials.  Documents have been known to fall between the cracks.
      The publication process itself is not fully automatic, and
      sometimes there RFC Editor has to do extra work when input
      material such as XML source is missing.

   o  Bad document quality which results in more copyediting and
      sometimes leads to a need to make even technical modifications.

   Overall, the current delays are problematic for the IETF.  The
   contributors expect to be able to ship products based on RFCs as soon
   as the specifications are approved by the IESG.  The long wait after
   the approval delays the deployment of Internet technology, is not
   motivating for the participants, and brings uncertainty that can be
   harmful.  Long processing times increase the likelihood of events
   that prompt people to request "bis" level changes in AUTH48, due to
   implementation experience, for instance.

   If the entire process for creating new specifications is lengthy, it



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   can become a barrier to standardizing new technology.  An efficient
   IETF process serves the needs of the Internet community best.  At a
   high level, the process consists of various parts, such as chartering
   and processing at WG, IESG, and RFC Editor.  All of these parts take
   a significant amount of time, and need to be addressed separately if
   a more efficient process is desired.

   This document proposes a limited experiment to be conducted for the
   RFC publication process part, with an expectation of providing a
   significant improvement in the processing time for a subset of
   drafts.  It is expected that the experiment will not cause
   significant extra work load either in the IETF or for the RFC Editor;
   tool support for this experiment is released simultaneously with the
   publication of this proposal.

   The experiment relates to the copyediting and other manual tasks in
   the RFC publication process.  Specifically, it has been observed that
   the amount of work these manual tasks require differs widely between
   drafts, and that for a certain subset of drafts, there are either
   very minor editorial changes or no changes at all, excepting only the
   different formatting requirements between RFCs and drafts.  The
   experiment involves identification of this subset of drafts under
   IETF control, and processing them separately with a "fast track"
   process that uses almost entirely automated processes.

   Under the proposed experimental process the published text is
   produced directly from the XML source of the draft that was approved
   for publication by the IESG, as supplied by the authors.  Under these
   conditions, the AUTH48 is also eliminated as being superfluous.

   The rest of this document is structured as follows.  Section 2
   describes the proposed process, Section 3 describes the experiment to
   employ it, and Section 4 discusses the some of the implications of
   this experiment as well as some potential future enhancements, should
   the experiment prove successful.


2.  Proposed Process

   Under the proposed process, in certain cases the IETF (not the RFC
   Editor) makes the decision of how much copyediting the document
   should get.  The goal of this change is to focus the limited
   copyediting resources on those documents which would benefit most
   from it, and to allow documents with "good enough" language to
   proceed directly to publication.

   In order for these documents to benefit from undergoing less
   copyediting, the process focuses only on a very restricted subset of



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   documents, namely those that do not require any special manual
   operations other than copyediting.  A document is eligible for the
   new process if it fulfills the following conditions when it is
   approved for publication by the IESG:

   1.  It is an IETF document that has gone through normal IETF last
       call and undergoes normal IESG evaluation.

   2.  It has an IANA section indicating there are no IANA actions.

   3.  It has no Internet Drafts as normative references.

   4.  It receives no IESG or RFC Editor notes during the IESG process.

   5.  It has been generated using XML2RFC so that automatic processing
       (including re-formatting in RFC style) becomes possible.

   The fulfillment of these conditions is either already checked during
   the existing process or it can be determined programmatically.  Our
   preliminary analysis suggests that more than 20% of all current
   Working Group drafts meet these criteria.

   An eligible document is included in this experiment if the IESG
   decides that copyediting would not significantly improve the quality
   of the document.  This determination of having "good enough" language
   is a human decision, made by the IESG during the course of their
   technical review.  Since the area directors often read the drafts for
   the first time during IESG evaluation, they will get a fairly good
   impression of how difficult the document is to read for someone who
   has not seen it before.  Thus, we believe the IESG is a good place to
   make this decision.  Furthermore, given that the IESG has to read the
   document in any case, this check does not represent a major increase
   of workload for the IESG.  Note that the IESG will only record their
   impression of the language quality.  It would not be a good use of
   the IESG's time to ask them to write down the observed problems or
   suggest improvements.

   Under the new process, IESG members voting "Yes" for a given document
   MUST provide and others MAY provide an indication of whether the
   document has sufficiently good language.  When providing this
   indication, the IESG members should consider the following aspects:

   o  Does the document contain more than a minor number of typos,
      grammar mistakes, or unnecessarily difficult-to-understand
      language?

   o  Would copyediting, done by a person who is not familiar with the
      technical content, significantly improve the document?  Or does



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


      the problems lie in aspects such as overall document organization,
      or bad protocol design, that cannot be realistically be improved
      by such copyediting?

   o  What is the purpose of the document?  For instance, fine-tuning
      the language would less important for a document documenting a
      design discussion for posterity, and more important for a protocol
      specification that will be read by a large number of people
      implementing and using the protocol.

   o  What is the intended status (proposed standard, informational,
      etc.) of the document?

   An eligible document that has received solely "good enough"
   indications from the IESG is chosen for the fast track process.  The
   RFC Editor determines eligibility according to items 1. to 5. of
   Section 2, using a tool, and inspects the IESG language quality
   decision.  The fast track process, if chosen, eliminates the IANA,
   copyediting, reference wait, manual format conversion, and AUTH48
   steps.  The following steps are followed:

   IESG note to the RFC Editor

      A special IESG Note to the RFC Editor is attached to the approval
      decision.  This note indicates to the RFC Editor what level of
      copyediting is believed to be necessary.

   Acquire XML source

      As is already done currently, the RFC Editor asks the authors of
      recently approved RFCs for the XML source of the draft.  If such
      source is not available, the regular process is followed.

   Verify XML source correctness

      The RFC Editor verifies that they have been given the correct XML
      source by running it through XML and verifying that there are no
      differences in the document text (for instance by running 'diff').
      If the source is incorrect, go back to the previous step.

   Determine eligibility

      The RFC Editor determines the eligibility of the draft, for
      instance by employing a new tool to check reference status and
      other requirements necessary for the new process.






Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   Format conversion

      There exists an option which can be given to a new version of the
      XML2RFC tool which enables it to generate output suitable for an
      RFC.  XML2RFC with this option set is used to generate the final
      RFC output.

   Storage

      The RFC Editor updates their information systems (such as the
      database of RFCs) with the new RFC and its metadata, and makes the
      new RFC publicly available from the RFC repository.

   This process is done at the document approval notice reception /
   author response reception time.  The RFC Editor often acts
   immediately after the approval notice is received, so the fast track
   process has the potential of resulting in a published RFC within days
   of the approval.

   The effect of possible appeals of the IESG's decision to publish a
   document on this process is covered in Section 4.4.


3.  Process Experiment

   We believe the crucial question to answer is "Does the publication
   process work better with the modification proposed in this document,
   or without it?"

   If the answer to this question is found to be "yes", then this change
   should be done, independently of other, more ambitious projects such
   as determining the overall requirements for technical publication
   services [TechPub].  However, an experiment is needed to better
   evaluate the effects of the proposed process.

   The experiment needs to have a limited scope and duration.  The scope
   of the experiment is naturally limited by the eligibility rules, so
   it is suggested that for a duration of one year, all drafts
   satisfying the eligibility and language quality rules will be run
   through the new process.  The experiment is set to begin at the time
   this document is approved for publication.

   Based on our initial analysis, we expect that roughly 100 documents
   could be eligible based on the checklist in Section 2; depending on
   the quality of the language in these documents, we expect somewhere
   between 25 and 50 documents to use the fast track process.  The
   figure depends highly on how strong incentives this experiment
   creates for the authors to improve the language before IESG approval.



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   During the experiment, the RFC Editor collects separate statistics of
   the processing and queuing times for the regular and fast track
   processes.  A person designated as the experiment supervisor collects
   feedback from document authors and WG chairs (using feedback forms)
   for documents going through the new process.  At the end of the
   experiment feedback is also solicited from the IESG.

   An evaluation is performed at the end of the experiment and the
   results are published as an Internet Draft.  The evaluation involves
   employing the collected statistics to determine the effect of the
   fast track process on document processing time and effort at the RFC
   Editor organization, and evaluating the summary of received feedback.


4.  Discussion

   This change allows the IESG to focus the limited copyediting
   resources to documents where the benefits are the largest.  It is
   expected that the reduced workload for the subset of documents that
   go through this process also will reduce the processing time of other
   documents, given the same level of resources devoted to the RFC
   Editor activities.

   In making the copyediting level decision, the IESG is in a better
   position than the RFC editor to consider all the factors involved
   (e.g., purpose of the document, its priority, etc.).  We believe it
   is in the interest of IETF community to make this decision
   transparently.  When this decision is recorded in the public records
   that the IESG makes available, this condition is fulfilled.

   A more fine-grained scheme that goes beyond on/off control of the
   copyediting can also be considered.  However, it is suggested that
   such a scheme be considered only if the process described in this
   document prove useful.

   We have not yet fully analyzed what other choices exist for making
   this decision than IESG evaluation.  Some other alternatives appear
   to be possible as well.  For instance, there are a number of review
   boards such as GEN-ART that could also provide input.

4.1.  Incentives

   We believe this arrangement would better align the incentives of
   various parties with the IETF's goals.

   Specifically, this process ensures that the IETF has control over the
   level of copy editing.  If the RFC Editor function is contracted to a
   for-profit entity, that entity has an incentive to increase the



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   amount of copyediting, and ask for more funding.  In a true open
   market situation, competition between service providers would control
   this, but we do not currently believe there will be significant price
   competition for the RFC Editor contract.

   The experiment also provides better incentives for document authors,
   WG chairs, and other reviewers.  If better-quality text means that
   the document progresses faster, people interested in the document
   have an incentive to fix the text earlier (e.g., provide more
   editorial comments during WG last call).  These people are also in
   good position to know which changes are purely editorial and which
   would actually change the meaning of the text.

4.2.  Document Quality

   One argument that could be made against this experiment is that less
   involvement by the RFC editor means that quality will suffer.

   We believe the experiment will have exactly the opposite effect.  The
   editing work done by the RFC editor does very little to increase the
   quality of documents that are already in a pretty good shape.  This
   experiment allows focusing the limited resources on those documents
   where the "return on investment" is the largest.  It also creates
   incentives for the authors to work on the language before the
   document is approved.

   Another potential complication is the difference between the XML2RFC
   output and the style currently used by the RFC editor.  Discussions
   about the exact formatting requirements have been going on since
   November 2005, and when used with the "rfcedstyle" option, version
   1.31pre4 produces output that is believed to match the current RFC
   editor style.  While it is possible that some differences remain, and
   that the preferred style changes over time, we believe the current
   formatting is more than acceptable, and fine-tuning it further, while
   possibly beneficial, will not produce a substantial added value for
   the IETF community.

4.3.  IESG Workload

   The experiment intentionally proposes a very simple process for
   determining which documents meet the language quality criterion, as
   explained in Section 2.

   We expect that the IESG members can make this decision without
   spending any more time than they already do.  We also do not expect
   the IESG to produce an explanation of why the document was or was not
   chosen, list any of the language problems identified in the document,
   or to negotiate about the decision with the document authors.



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


4.4.  Appeals

   One possible problem with the experiment is that [RFC2026] specifies
   a two-month period for appealing IESG decisions.  Some people have
   interpreted this to mean that no document can be published faster
   than this.

   However, appeals to the IESG are almost always filed within days of
   the decision.  Even in cases when writing the complete appeal text
   may take some time, a "notice of intention to appeal" is often given
   immediately.  The "fast track" process is also limited to documents
   that go through IETF Last Call, and people who appeal the IESG
   decision read and comment the documents already during the last call.

   Furthermore, the two-month period has not been observed rigidly
   recently.  While the average RFC queue delay ensures that plenty of
   time is left for appeals, in 2005 five RFCs were published less than
   two months from their approval.  (We would be interested in knowing
   how this was possible, so we could try to get our documents to this
   "fast track" -- the record processing time was only five days! :-).

   Moreover, in the case of standards track and BCP RFCs, the IESG can
   always reverse its decision after the RFC has been published by
   downgrading the document to "Historic".

   For this experiment, we suggest that documents known to be
   controversial should not be selected for the fast track process.
   Since more than 99% of documents are not appealed, this is unlikely
   to affect the number of documents in the experiment.  In addition, it
   is suggested that for the documents selected for the fast track, the
   approval notices include a request to make the intent to appeal known
   within two weeks.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA Actions.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any new security considerations.


7.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Bob Braden, Brian Carpenter, and
   Stephen Hayes for ideas and interesting discussions about this



Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


   problem space.

8.  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3933]  Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A Model for IETF Process
              Experiments", BCP 93, RFC 3933, November 2004.

   [TechPub]  Mankin, A. and S. Hayes, "Requirements for IETF Technical
              Publication Service", draft-mankin-pub-req-01 (work in
              progress), October 2005.






































Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Pasi Eronen
   Nokia Research Center
   P.O.  Box 407
   FIN-00045 Nokia Group
   Finland

   Email: pasi.eronen@nokia.com


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   FI-02420 Jorvas
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com


   Henrik Levkowetz
   Ericsson
   Torsgatan 71
   111 37 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Email: henrik@levkowetz.com

























Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Selective Copy-Editing Experiment      February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Eronen, et al.           Expires August 31, 2006               [Page 13]

