

  INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Eric A. Hall 
  Document: draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt                         March 2004 
  Expires: September, 2004                                                
  Category: Informational                                                 
      
      
                   Considerations for DNS Resource Records 
      
      
     Status of this Memo 
      
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
      
     Copyright Notice 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
      
      
     Abstract 
      
     This document discusses some common design considerations for DNS 
     resource records and data models. 
      
   
   
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
      
     Table of Contents 
      
     1.   Introduction..............................................2 
     2.   Prerequisites and Terminology.............................3 
     3.   Architectural Principles and Inherent Limitations.........3 
       3.1.  Resource Records.......................................3 
       3.2.  Hierarchical Partitioning..............................5 
       3.3.  Minimalist Messages....................................7 
       3.4.  Built-In Record Caching................................9 
       3.5.  Unreliable Hinting....................................10 
       3.6.  World-Readable Data...................................11 
       3.7.  Implementation Issues.................................11 
     4.   Design Conclusion........................................12 
     5.   Security Considerations..................................13 
     6.   IANA Considerations......................................13 
     7.   Normative References.....................................13 
     8.   Acknowledgments..........................................13 
     Author's Address..............................................14 
     Full Copyright Statement......................................14 
      
  1.      Introduction 
      
     In terms of deployment, the Domain Name System (DNS) [STD13] is an 
     extremely successful network service, having perhaps the widest 
     usage of all Internet services. Unfortunately, the omnipresence of 
     DNS makes it a frequent target for well-intentioned efforts to 
     extend the service into roles that it is technically unsuited to 
     provide, or which would impose excessive burdens on the Internet 
     community as a whole if they were widely adopted. 
      
     This document attempts to itemize some of these issues, so that 
     planners and developers can try to avoid these concerns during 
     their planning cycles. However, it should also be recognized that 
     there are several modern DNS usage models which violate more than 
     one of the considerations listed in this document, but which still 
     provide significant value for the Internet community. As such, 
     this document should not be considered as a governing device of 
     any kind, and should not be used to reject any and all proposals 
     for new usage models. Instead, this document is intended to be 
     used to facilitate honest discussion about the kinds of problems 
     that a particular proposal may be expected to encounter, or the 
     burdens that it may impose on the Internet community as a whole if 
     it were to be widely adopted. 
      
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 2] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
      
  2.      Prerequisites and Terminology 
      
     Readers of this document are expected to be familiar with STD 13 
     [STD13], STD 3 [STD3], and RFC 2181 [RFC2181]. 
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" 
     in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
      
  3.      Architectural Principles and Inherent Limitations 
      
     The current collection of DNS specifications define a lightweight 
     and anonymous "lookup-by-name" service, with compact datagrams 
     being relayed through a structured network of authoritative 
     servers and caches, each of which provide access to specific 
     database partitions and/or resource records. The Domain Name 
     System is able to fulfill its primary responsibility as a fast and 
     robust distributed naming service directly as a result of these 
     design principles. 
      
     However, DNS has several built-in critical limitations as a direct 
     result of the highly-optimized lookup model. For example, DNS does 
     not provide any functions to "search-by-value", nor does it 
     provide any sort of mechanisms for user authentication, access 
     control services, cache-validation, nor most of the other features 
     which are typically associated with general-purpose databases or 
     directories. Although DNS could be extended to provide some of 
     these usages, such an effort would require a significant amount of 
     engineering and deployment effort in order to preserve 
     compatibility with existing DNS systems. Furthermore, there is a 
     significant danger inherent in overloading DNS with excessive 
     features such that the service itself becomes incapable of 
     performing lightweight lookups quickly and efficiently, thereby 
     precluding its primary purpose. 
      
     Therefore, it is incumbent upon protocol developers and planners 
     to recognize and accommodate the issues which govern DNS in its 
     current form. This document describes the most common of those 
     issues, so that some of the most common problems can be avoided 
     early in the design cycle. 
      
  3.1.    Resource Records 
      
     Data stored in DNS uses a common resource record data-structure, 
     consisting of six fields ["domain name", "type", "class", "time-
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 3] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     to-live", "length" and "data" (the "data" field is further 
     structured according to the kind of data being provided by the 
     resource record itself)]. 
      
     The domain name, type and class fields collectively form a unique 
     identifier for each resource record, and allow clients to 
     specifically identity the kind of data they want to retrieve for a 
     specific named resource. Multiple resource records may share the 
     same domain name, type and/or class values, but those resource 
     records must have different data values to be considered unique. 
      
     At a minimum, all lookup queries must explicitly identify the 
     domain name of the resource record being requested. Queries may 
     request all known types and/or classes associated with the named 
     resource, but typically specify those fields as well. If a query 
     results in multiple matches, then all of the matching resource 
     records will be returned.  
      
     Furthermore, DNS is only capable of issuing lookup-by-name 
     queries, and does not provide any queries which would allow a 
     resolver to search for resource records which contain a particular 
     data value (although the original DNS specifications did provide a 
     mechanism for searching a specific server for resource records 
     with matching data-values, this feature was never widely deployed, 
     and the query-type has since been officially deprecated). 
     Meanwhile, DNS has never provided any means to search for all 
     resource records of a particular type or class, without the client 
     also specifying an exact domain name to match against, meaning 
     that it is also not possible to query for all resource records of 
     a specific type regardless of their name. 
      
     In theory, it would be possible to create a super-index of all 
     zones in the entire distributed database and issue these kinds of 
     searches against that index, although nobody has ever built such a 
     system. It is also possible to fake these kinds of searches on a 
     per-zone basis by transferring the entire zone contents down to 
     the client and then performing local searches against all of the 
     resource record data. However, neither of these scenarios 
     represent normal DNS lookup-by-name queries, and would not be 
     representative of typical DNS transactions and client processes. 
      
     In the absence of these mechanisms, designers must be aware that 
     they can only issue queries against the name of a resource record 
     unless they are willing to use something other than DNS. 
      
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 4] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     Since it is not possible for a query to specify anything other 
     than the domain name, type and class fields, it is also not 
     possible to explicitly request an exact instance from among a set, 
     unless only one instance of the requested resource record exists 
     at the specified domain name. However, it is not possible to 
     guarantee that a particular resource record will only exist in the 
     singular form at any given time. Although it is possible to demand 
     that administrators "MUST NOT" create more than one instance of a 
     particular resource record for any domain name, such demands are 
     usually at the mercy of the administrators of those systems, and 
     are generally unenforceable. Data models which depend on singular 
     instances of a particular record should be designed with the 
     recognition that multiple resource records may be returned anyway, 
     and should be prepared to deal with that scenario. 
      
     By the same token, it is also not possible to be sure that all of 
     the resource records from a set will always be returned. For 
     example, the original DNS specifications allowed each resource 
     record in a set to have different time-to-live values, and this 
     allowed (in theory) each resource record to be aged out of a cache 
     at different times. Furthermore, there have been some secondary 
     bugs in some implementations which have resulted in incomplete 
     answer sets being returned and subsequently cached by other nodes. 
     Although these problems have mostly been addressed over time, it 
     is still not possible to guarantee with absolute certainty that 
     all of the records in a set will always be returned. Data models 
     which depend on spreading component data over multiple resource 
     records in a set should be designed with this in mind. 
      
     On a related point, many application designers are tempted to 
     utilize the TXT resource record as a container for structured 
     data. This is generally a terrible idea. For one thing, allowing 
     one application to remodel the TXT record means allowing everyone 
     to do so, resulting in all of the TXT resource records being 
     returned whenever any of them are requested, with an increased 
     potential for message overflow (see the discussion in section 3.3 
     for the problems this can cause). Furthermore, this model 
     complicates message processing, in that the contents of the TXT 
     resource record have to be analyzed and string-matched. These 
     problems are avoided by the use of purposeful, task-specific 
     resource records. 
      
  3.2.    Hierarchical Partitioning 
      
     From a high-level perspective, the DNS database is distributed 
     across multiple partitions (called "zones"), each of which have 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 5] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     ownership for the domain names within that partition. Zones are 
     linked in a hierarchical tree, with the top-level zones having 
     zones directly beneath them, and with some of those zones having 
     subordinate zones, and so forth. Although the zones are arranged 
     in a hierarchy, each zone acts as an independent partition and is 
     usually only concerned with the records that it controls directly. 
      
     The hierarchical zone structure is traversed by resolvers whenever 
     a zone which is authoritative for a named resource record needs to 
     be located (this usually only happens when the answer has not 
     already been cached). In this regard, the domain name of a 
     resource record acts like a lookup key, with resolvers matching 
     the key value against the zone hierarchy until either an answer or 
     an error is returned. 
      
     Unfortunately, domain names are restricted to a maximum length of 
     255 characters. Since a domain name is the primary identifier for 
     a resource record, and since the domain name also identifies the 
     zone where a resource record is stored, the length restrictions of 
     a domain name can be a significant limitation in some cases. For 
     example, a domain name for a resource record in a zone that is 
     nested several layers deep in the global hierarchy could face 
     significantly tighter space constraints than domain names for 
     resource records in a top-level zone, simply because there will be 
     fewer octets left to work with in the lower-level zones. 
      
     This can be a significant concern with applications which require 
     the use of application-specific domain name sequences, especially 
     when those sequences are relatively long. In some cases, it may 
     simply be impossible to use those sequences in some zones, given 
     the space restrictions. As such, the use of application-specific 
     domain name sequences should generally be avoided. 
      
     The use of the per-zone matching system also introduces certain 
     complexities in feature-negotiation and error-recovery processes 
     which are generally required in datagram transaction models. In 
     particular, data-models which depend on issuing "fallback" queries 
     in those cases where an earlier query has failed can impose 
     significant burdens on the DNS infrastructure as a whole if the 
     fallback mechanisms are triggered too frequently or if they are 
     triggered at heavily-loaded servers. 
      
     These problems can be slightly lessened somewhat if the fallback 
     processing only occurs after the authoritative servers for the 
     partition have already been learned, since the fallback queries 
     will be sent directly to those servers, and will not impose 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 6] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     additional burdens on the servers responsible for the root and 
     top-level zones. However, the downside to this directed-fallback 
     approach is that fewer systems in the query path will have the 
     opportunity to cache the resulting answer data, which in turn will 
     guarantee that a larger number of queries will almost certainly be 
     needed in the common case. 
      
  3.3.    Minimalist Messages 
      
     The DNS protocol uses a highly-compact, binary message format 
     which is specifically suited for fast and lightweight lookup 
     transactions. There are very few spurious bits or fields in the 
     DNS message (there is no "version" field, for example), with the 
     ultimate objective being very small message sizes. 
      
     By default, DNS uses UDP to transfer messages, avoiding the 
     latency and processing costs that are typically associated with 
     TCP sessions. However, there are some situations in which UDP 
     cannot be used, and in those cases, DNS will typically use TCP in 
     order to ensure that lookups succeed. 
      
     Standard DNS messages sent over UDP have a maximum message size of 
     512 bytes. If a lookup results in a response message that exceeds 
     the maximum message or datagram sizes, the query process must be 
     restarted using TCP. Meanwhile, extended DNS (EDNS) [RFC2671] can 
     carry messages up to 65,535 bytes over UDP, although the actual 
     payload size is usually limited to 1280 bytes due to limitations 
     in physical media capacity and problems that arise from 
     fragmentation. If the size of the EDNS message exceeds the 
     capacity of the end-to-end link, TCP will again be needed. 
      
     However, DNS messages sent over TCP are themselves limited to a 
     maximum size of 65,535 bytes, and messages which are larger than 
     that size cannot be transferred over DNS at all. Furthermore, not 
     all DNS servers support the use of TCP, and in those cases, 
     messages which overflow the 512-byte limit for UDP will also be 
     inaccessible. In short, messages which are larger than 512 bytes 
     always cause performance problems and sometimes trigger 
     catastrophic failures, while messages which are larger than 65,535 
     bytes always trigger catastrophic failures. 
      
     In those cases where TCP works as expected, there can be several 
     penalties from its use. For example, TCP session management 
     typically consumes more resources than UDP datagrams, which can 
     significantly limit the number of queries that a server is able to 
     process at any given time. For a particularly busy server, 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 7] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     processing a significant number of TCP transactions can mean that 
     other transactions will have to be rejected. Meanwhile, the use of 
     TCP also requires more round-trips, which can sometimes cause 
     timers to expire while the query is still being processed, 
     resulting in multiple duplicate queries going to that server (each 
     of which will subsequently require TCP sessions), accelerating the 
     negative affects. 
      
     It's also important to recognize that TCP queries are often 
     exchanged between the local resolver and the target server 
     directly, and can bypass some parts of the caching infrastructure. 
     As a result, answers returned over the TCP connection might not be 
     cached by intermediary nodes, and the entire process would need to 
     be repeated for each instance of the same query. 
      
     For all of these reasons, planners and developers are strongly 
     encouraged to limit resource record data to sizes that will not 
     cause UDP messages to overflow. In those cases where this is 
     unavoidable, they should be prepared for a variety of problems, 
     including performance degradation and outright failure. 
      
     Note that the DNS message format uses a protocol-specific 
     compression technique which can be used to substitute label 
     sequences with offset pointers to previous occurrences of those 
     sequences, thereby saving some space in the message itself. 
     However, this mechanism only works in a few instances, and is not 
     as widely usable as many people hope. For example, older caches 
     are not aware of newer resource record data-structures, so the 
     compression mechanism cannot be used in the data fields of those 
     resource records, but instead can only be used with the owner 
     domain name of the resource record itself. This is not a problem 
     for resource records which were defined as part of [STD13], since 
     those resource records have well-known formats, but newer resource 
     records are unable to utilize the standard compression mechanism. 
      
     This is an especially important consideration to keep in mind when 
     considering large data-structures. While it is tempting to believe 
     that domain names can be compressed to save space in the message, 
     this simply is not true as often as people would like. 
      
     It is entirely feasible for newer resource records to define their 
     own (record-specific) compression algorithms, although such 
     schemes must be planned with legacy caches in mind -- those 
     devices will not be able to expand the contents of those records, 
     nor will they be able to apply any other kind of logic against 
     those records. 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 8] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
      
  3.4.    Built-In Record Caching 
      
     DNS resolvers and servers are allowed to cache resource records 
     that they have discovered as part of normal query processing. This 
     allows subsequent queries for that information to be answered 
     immediately from the cache, without requiring another batch of 
     transactions for the same information. In turn, this ensures that 
     lookups are answered in the shortest amount of time, that servers 
     are not excessively burdened by unnecessary queries, and that the 
     total number of transactions are kept to a minimum. 
      
     Since DNS is optimized for lookups, the use of caching is 
     generally considered a positive feature. However, caching can also 
     be somewhat hostile towards certain usage models, especially since 
     DNS does not provide any mechanisms for forcing a system to flush 
     its cache of previously discovered records. In particular, caches 
     prevent data from being validated against an authoritative source, 
     in that a resolver or application cannot "demand" that a query be 
     forwarded to an authoritative server (the client can do this on 
     its own accord, but cannot request a proxy to do this on behalf of 
     the client). While this is normally beneficial for lookup 
     activities, it can be a devastating feature for data models that 
     require data-integrity at all times. 
      
     Although DNS servers can dictate the maximum length of time that a 
     resource record is to be held in a cache, data models which 
     require the use of low time-to-live settings are generally frowned 
     upon by the DNS community, as these resource records place a 
     disproportionate burden on the infrastructure. Furthermore, some 
     DNS agents are known to apply their own minimum time-to-live 
     values, regardless of the settings associated with the original 
     data. As a result, DNS is generally considered to be inappropriate 
     for data models which require full-time and instantaneous data 
     integrity, and developers are generally encouraged to look towards 
     other services if this level of responsiveness is needed, 
     especially if the application is expected to be widely deployed. 
      
     Another issue related to caching limitations is the amount of 
     memory available to each particular cache. All systems have fixed 
     amounts of available memory, and when that memory is consumed, 
     some data will necessarily have to be flushed in order for any new 
     data to be stored. If the flushed data is subsequently needed 
     again, the query path will have to be reprocessed, and the cache 
     will have to flush some other data in order to make room for the 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004            [page 9] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     answers. In heavily loaded environments (such as a very busy ISP), 
     this can result in a constant churning of the memory pool. 
      
     This is obviously a good reason to limit the size of each resource 
     record's data-structures, but it is also a good reason for 
     limiting the total number of resource records in a set. Since each 
     entry will have to consume memory in a cache somewhere, large 
     resource record data blocks and large sets of resource records 
     will both contribute to the potential for cache churning. 
      
  3.5.    Unreliable Hinting 
      
     DNS responses provide for the inclusion of hinting data, by way of 
     the Additional-Data section of the response message. In the usual 
     case, this section of the response message will contain resource 
     records that are associated with the originally requested resource 
     records (such as listing the IP addresses associated with a name 
     server or mail server). However, due to certain design 
     considerations, this data is often incomplete, and is almost 
     always unreliable, and therefore must often be ignored. 
      
     Specifically, DNS messages contain a "truncation" flag which 
     indicates whether or not all of the answer data has been returned 
     in the message (if the flag is enabled, the recipient system will 
     need to retry the query via some other transport, as discussed in 
     section 3.3). However, this flag does not apply to the Additional-
     Data section of the response message, and in the absence of any 
     such flag (and there is none, so its absence is guaranteed), 
     recipient systems must always assume that the Additional-Data 
     section is incomplete. 
      
     Meanwhile, caches often store resource records gleaned from the 
     additional-data section, and then provide that data as answers to 
     subsequent queries. In order to prevent caches from capturing and 
     relaying incomplete resource record sets, authoritative servers 
     should only provide them when the full set will fit within the 
     Additional-Data section. Unfortunately, there are still several 
     systems in use which do not conform to this behavior, and it is 
     therefore possible that any given Additional-Data section will not 
     contain a complete set. 
      
     In theory, it is possible to examine the Authoritative Answer flag 
     of a response message to determine whether or not the full set of 
     resource records have been provided. Unfortunately, there are 
     implementations which are known to have inheritance bugs, where 
     resource records from the Additional-Data section are stored with 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004           [page 10] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     the Authoritative Answer flag, even though that flag is only 
     supposed to apply to the Answer section. 
      
     As a result of these considerations, applications are generally 
     encouraged to avoid the Additional-Data section entirely. 
      
     Furthermore, if an application does make use of any resource 
     records in this section, those applications are generally 
     encouraged to issue new queries for those resource records if the 
     data is absolutely critical, thus ensuring that the full answer 
     set is always retrieved. Unfortunately, even that cannot be 
     guaranteed, due to the prevalence of bugs. 
      
  3.6.    World-Readable Data 
      
     DNS is optimal for publishing anonymous and world-readable data, 
     given the implicit collusion between several of the design factors 
     in the DNS model. For example, the need for small DNS messages 
     generally precludes the use of data such as access-control lists, 
     while the use of in-line caching generally precludes any 
     presumption of privacy. 
      
     More specifically, DNS does not provide any mechanisms for 
     authenticating users during the lookup process, nor does it 
     provide any mechanisms for linking access controls to a resource 
     record across the global network of servers and caches. Without 
     these features, DNS is unsuitable for applications which require 
     authenticated access to private data. 
      
     Furthermore, although some products provide mechanisms for 
     restricting query-level access to ranges of IP addresses or other 
     filtered sources, it is important to recognize that once the 
     resource records get into a cache outside of the protected scope, 
     the information is only as secure as that system. In this regard, 
     a cache which resides outside of a firewall will be just as 
     informative as the DNS servers inside the firewall. 
      
     In the end, there is no such thing as "private" data with DNS. 
     Developers must treat all data as if it will eventually be made 
     public, and are strongly encouraged to use some other service if 
     higher levels of security are required. 
      
  3.7.    Implementation Issues 
      
     Most of the DNS resolvers which are provided with operating 
     systems and TCP/IP stacks are purposefully optimized for the most 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004           [page 11] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     common queries, usually only offering APIs for resource record 
     types such as IPv4 addresses and a couple of others, but with 
     little or no direct support for other resource record types. 
      
     Similarly, some resolvers do not provide the kind of granularity 
     that an application may require. For example, some resolvers have 
     been known to provide only one resource record from a set to the 
     application, and these resolvers can cause problems with 
     applications which need to see the full response. 
      
     Although there are usually several mechanisms that application 
     developers can pursue to overcome these kinds of limitations, many 
     developers are loathe to do so, especially when their applications 
     are ported across multiple operating systems. Unfortunately, this 
     reticence can represent a significant hurdle towards wide 
     deployment of even the best designed resource records and usage 
     models, and is frequently the single largest obstacle which must 
     be overcome by protocol developers and planners. By no means 
     should this be considered as a show-stopper, but it should be 
     recognized as a potentially significant hurdle, and that the 
     majority of the applications will likely be unable to immediately 
     adopt any sufficiently new technologies. 
      
  4.      Design Conclusion 
      
     Due to the architectural tradeoffs inherent in the DNS lookup 
     model, some usage models are better suited to DNS than others. In 
     particular, DNS is highly efficient at lookups of compact, public 
     and relatively stable data. Conversely, DNS is unsuitable for 
     value-based queries or searches, restricted-access data, highly-
     dynamic data, or large records and arrays. Applications which 
     require access to those kinds of data should investigate services 
     such as LDAP or HTTP as being more appropriate. 
      
     Generally speaking, planners and developers can usually define 
     their own resource record types as part of a standards-track 
     specification without interference from the DNS community, as long 
     as the functional scope is limited to defining data-structures for 
     those resource record types. However, there are some cases where 
     it may be useful or necessary for the DNS community to be involved 
     with the standardization of a particular resource record type. 
      
     In particular, if a resource record type requires a server to 
     perform some kind of extra processing other than piping data from 
     a database into a message, then the DNS community should be 
     consulted. Similarly, requiring that servers provide additional 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004           [page 12] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
     data outside the answer section of the response message should be 
     vetted with the community. Moreover, if a specification requires 
     special structuring of the message for the benefit of a single 
     service, then the DNS community should definitely be involved in 
     the discussion, since any changes to the highly-optimized message 
     format could be disastrous in non-obvious ways. 
      
     Requests to reserve portions of the namespace for the use of a 
     single network service should also be brought to the DNS community 
     for discussion. 
      
     Finally, if a particular usage goes against more than two of the 
     recommendations put forth in this document, then it would probably 
     be a good idea to consult with the DNS community over any 
     alternatives which may be available. 
      
     In all cases, IANA must be involved in delegating resource record 
     type codes and mnemonics. 
      
  5.      Security Considerations 
      
     This document does not create any security considerations. 
      
  6.      IANA Considerations 
      
     This document does not create any IANA considerations. 
      
  7.      Normative References 
      
          [RFC2181]     Elz, R., and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the 
                         DNS Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997. 
      
          [RFC2671]     Vixie, P., "Extension Mechanisms for DNS 
                         (EDNS0)", RFC 2671, August 1999. 
      
          [STD3]        Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts - 
                         Application and Support", STD 3, RFC 1123, 
                         October 1989. 
      
          [STD13]       Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and 
                         facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034 and "Domain 
                         names - implementation and specification", STD 
                         13, RFC 1035, November 1987. 
      
  8.      Acknowledgments 
      
     Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
     Internet Society. 
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004           [page 13] 
  Internet Draft        draft-hall-dns-data-04.txt           March 2004 
   
   
      
     Significant feedback on this document was provided by Edward Lewis 
     and Walt Howard. 
      
  Author's Address 
      
     Eric A. Hall 
     ehall@ehsco.com 
      
  Full Copyright Statement 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
      
     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished 
     to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
     explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
     copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
     restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice 
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative 
     works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
     way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the 
     Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed 
     for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the 
     procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
     process must be followed, or as required to translate it into 
     languages other than English. 
      
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not 
     be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
      
     This document and the information contained herein is provided on 
     an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
     ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
     IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
     THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
      
   
  Hall                 I-D Expires: September 2004           [page 14] 

