


Proto                                                       H. Levkowetz
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                                P. Roberts
Expires: August 12, 2007                                        Motorola
                                                                 A. Falk
                                                                     ISI
                                                        February 8, 2007


    Requirements on I-D Tracker Extensions for IAB and IRTF Document
                               Shepherds
                draft-ietf-proto-iab-irtf-tracker-ext-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 12, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes the states which need to be added to the I-D
   tracker to make it possible for IAB and IRTF document shepherds
   (whoever the IAB and IRTF designate, e.g. the IAB Chair, RG Chairs)
   to update the I-D tracker during document shepherding.  It is a



Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


   companion document of draft-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext which describes
   additional requirements for the chairs to use the I-D tracker for
   managing WG documents from their earliest stages.


1.  Introduction

   In order to make it possible for IAB and IRTF document shepherds to
   do the full duties of shepherding it is necessary for them to be able
   to enter document state changes and issue resolutions into the I-D
   tracker.  However, at the time of writing, only area directors have
   the necessary write access to the tracker.  The requirements for
   providing sufficient write access to document shepherds in general,
   and the new states needed for working group chairs acting as
   shepherds in particular are described in
   draft-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext].
   This document describes the additional tracker states which are
   specific to the IAB and the IRTF document flow.

1.1.  Terminology

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalised.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The requirements in this document are specified using a set of
   requirements.  These requirements are English phrases ending with an
   "(R-nnn)" indication, where "nnn" is a unique requirement number.


2.  New Document States

   In order to be able to provide appropriate document state indications
   for documents which are IAB documents or IRTF documents and have not
   yet been submitted for publication as RFC, an additional state
   variable (see Section 2.1), and an additional tagging field (see
   Section 2.2 for respective document type (IAB / IRTF) is needed in
   the tracker.  These are described in the following sections.

2.1.  IAB Document States

   A new state variable or field to hold IAB Document states will be
   added to the tracker.  This field will track the IAB state of the
   document, and will be updated by the IAB designated document shepherd
   for IAB documents.




Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


   Defined IAB States:

   *  Accepted IAB Document
      This document has been adopted by the IAB and is being actively
      developed.
      (R-101)

   *  Parked IAB Document
      This document has lost its author or editor, is waiting for
      another document to be written, or cannot currently be worked on
      by the IAB for some other reason.
      (R-102)

   *  Partner Feedback
      The IAB often produces documents that need socialising with
      outside organisations (such as the IEEE) or other internal
      organisations (such as the IESG or the IAOC).  This document has
      been sent out for feedback from one of these partner groups.
      (R-103)

   *  Internal Consensus
      This document is awaiting the IAB itself to agree that this
      document is done and ready for community review.
      (R-104)

   *  Community Review
      This document is under community review.
      (R-105)

   *  Sent to the RFC Editor
      The IAB processing of this document is complete and it has been
      sent to the RFC Editor for publication.  The document may be in
      the RFC Editor's queue, or it may have been published as an RFC;
      this state doesn't distinguish between different states occurring
      after the document has left the IAB.
      (R-106)

   *  Dead IAB Document
      This document was an active IAB document, but for one reason or
      another is no longer being pursued.  It is however possible that
      the document might be revived.
      (R-107)

   *  Not an IAB Document
      This document is not an IAB document.
      (R-108)





Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


2.2.  IAB State Annotation Tags

   The use of a separate tagging or annotation field makes it possible
   to capture a number of specific conditions for a draft, where these
   conditions can exist in parallel.  These conditions also does not
   really change the IAB state of the document, but are still useful to
   show for instance what action is needed next for the document.  The
   tracker should provide a means to set one or more of these annotation
   tags for a document, for instance by use of a multiple-choice
   selection box in a web interface (R-110).

   These annotation tags are similar to the existing sub-states of the
   IESG state, but may be a more appropriate mechanism to show
   additional information which is not directly related to the document
   state.

   Defined IAB state annotation tags (R-111):
   *  "Editor Needed"
   *  "Held for Dependency on other Document"
   *  "Awaiting Reviews"
   *  "Revised ID Needed"
   *  "Doc Shepherd Followup"
   *  "Other - see Comment Log"

   The annotation tag "Revised ID Needed" should be automatically
   cleared when a new revision of a document is made available (R-112).

2.3.  IRTF Document States

   The following states should be added to the tracker, for use for IRTF
   documents.

   Defined IRTF Document States:

   *  Candidate IRTF Document
      This document is under consideration for becoming a IRTF document.
      A document being in this state does not imply any consensus, and
      does not imply any precedence or selection.  It's simply a way to
      indicate that somebody has asked for a document to be considered
      for adoption.
      (R-201)

   *  Active IRTF Document
      This document has been adopted by a IRTF, and is being actively
      developed.
      (R-202)





Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


   *  Parked IRTF Document
      This document has lost its author or editor, is waiting for
      another document to be written, or cannot currently be worked on
      by the IRTF for some other reason.
      (R-203)

   *  In IRTF Last Call
      An IRTF last call has been issued for this document, and is in
      progress.  When the last call has completed, a document would
      normally enter either the "Active IRTF Document" or the "Waiting
      for Document Shepherd Write-up" state, depending on the nature of
      the IRTF Last Call comments received.  In both cases, an
      annotation of "Revised ID Needed" might also be appropriate, based
      on the comments received.
      (R-204)

   *  Waiting for Document Shepherd Write-up
      The IRTF last call has been completed, and the document is waiting
      for the Document Shepherd to complete his write-up.
      (R-211)

   *  Submitted IRTF Document
      The document has been submitted for publication (and not returned
      to the IRTF for further action).  The document may be in the RFC
      Editor's queue, or it may have been published as an RFC; this
      state doesn't distinguish between different states occurring after
      the document has left the IRTF.
      (R-205)

   *  Dead IRTF Document
      This document has been a IRTF document, but has been killed or
      abandoned.
      (R-207)

   *  Not a IRTF Document
      This document is not a IRTF document.  This means that the IESG
      state for the document is either "I-D Exists" or "AD is watching".
      The document may have various other states set, such as various
      IAB or IRTF document states; but if so it is not reflected in the
      IRTF document state which simply will indicate "Not a IRTF
      Document".
      (R-206)

2.4.  IRTF State Annotation Tags

   The use of a separate tagging or annotation field makes it possible
   to capture a number of specific conditions for a draft, where these
   conditions can exist in parallel.  These conditions also does not



Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


   really change the IRTF state of the document, but are still useful to
   show for instance what action is needed next for the document.  The
   tracker should provide a means to set one or more of these annotation
   tags for a document, for instance by use of a multiple-choice
   selection box in a web interface (R-208).

   These annotation tags are similar to the existing sub-states of the
   IESG state, but may be a more appropriate mechanism to show
   additional information which is not directly related to the document
   state.

   Defined IRTF state annotation tags (R-210):
   *  "Editor Needed"
   *  "Held for Dependency on other Document"
   *  "Awaiting Reviews"
   *  "Revised ID Needed"
   *  "Doc Shepherd Followup"
   *  "Other - see Comment Log"

   The annotation tag "Revised ID Needed" should be automatically
   cleared when a new revision of a document is made available (R-209).


3.  IANA considerations

   This document does not require any new number assignments from IANA,
   and does not define any new numbering spaces to be administered by
   IANA.

   RFC-Editor: Please remove this section before publication.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not propose any new internet mechanisms, and has
   no security implications for the internet.


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext]
              Levkowetz, H. and A. Mankin, "Requirements on I-D Tracker
              Extensions for Working Group Chairs",
              draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext-02 (work in
              progress), January 2007.



Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Henrik Levkowetz
   Ericsson
   Torsgatan 71
   Stockholm  S-113 37
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 708 32 16 08
   Email: henrik@levkowetz.com


   Phil Roberts
   Motorola
   1301 E Algonquin Rd
   Schaumberg, IL  60196
   USA

   Email: phil.roberts@motorola.com


   Aaron Falk
   USC Information Sciences Institute
   4676 Admiralty Way
   Marina Del Rey, CA  90292
   USA

   Phone: +1-310-448-9327
   Email: falk@isi.edu
   URI:   http://www.isi.edu/~falk





















Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements      February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Levkowetz, et al.        Expires August 12, 2007                [Page 8]

