



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Henry
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                                    Y. Lee
Expires: 9 September 2021                                        Comcast
                                                            8 March 2021


             Randomized and Changing MAC Address Framework
                    draft-henry-madinas-framework-00

Abstract

   To limit the association between a device traffic and its user,
   client vendors have started implementing MAC address rotation.  When
   such rotation happens, sessions may break, which may affect network
   efficiency and the user experience.  This document lists network
   services that may be affected by such rotation, and examines
   solutions to maintain user privacy while preserving user quality of
   experience and network operation efficiency.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 September 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.










Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  MAC Adress As An Identity: User vs Device . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  The Actors: Network Functional Entities and Human Entities  .   5
     3.1.  Network Functional Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Human-related Entities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  The Trust and the Environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  The Purpose of Identification and Associated Problems . .  10
     3.5.  Scenario Mapping Table  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.6.  Problem Statments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.7.  Existing Solutions Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Appendix A.  Additional Stuff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

1.  Introduction

   It has become easier for attackers to observe the activity of a
   personal device, particularly when traffic is sent over a wireless
   link.  Once the association between a device and its user is made,
   identifying the device and its activity is sufficient to deduce
   information about what the user is doing, without the user consent.

   To reduce the risks of correlation between a device activity and its
   owner, multiple vendors have started to implement Randomized and
   Changing Mac address (RCM).  With this scheme, and end-device
   implements a different RCM over time when exchanging traffic over a
   wireless network.  By randomizing the change, the association between
   a given traffic flow and a single device is made more difficult.

   However, such address change may affect the user experience and the
   efficiency of network operations.  For many decades, the unicity of
   the association between a device and a MAC address was assumed.  When
   this association is broken, sessions may also break, packets in



Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   translation may find themselves without clear source or destination,
   network services may be over-solicited by a small number of stations
   that appear as many clients.

   There is a need to assess how this association is made, enumerate
   services that may be affected by RCM, and evaluate possible solutions
   to maintain the quality of user experience and network efficiency
   while RCM happens and user privacy is reinforced.  This document
   presents such assessment and recommendations.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  MAC Adress As An Identity: User vs Device

   Any device member of an IEEE 802 network [IEEE.802-1D.1993] includes
   several operating layers.  Among them, the Media Access Control (MAC)
   layer defines rules to control how the device accesses the shared
   medium.  In a network where a machine can communicate with one or
   more other machines, one such rule is that each machine needs to be
   identified, either as the target destination of a message, or as the
   source of a message (and thus the target destination of the answer).
   Initially intended as a 48-bit (6 octets) value, later versions of
   the Standard [IEEE.802.15.4P_2014] also allowed this address to take
   an extended format of 64 bits (8 octets), thus enabling a larger
   number of MAC addresses to coexist as the 802 technologies became
   widely adopted.

   Regardless of the address length, different networks have different
   needs, and several bits of the first octet are reserved for specific
   purposes.  In particular, the first bit is used to identify the
   destination address either as an individual (bit set to 0) or a group
   address (bit set to 1).  The second bit, called the Universally or
   Locally Administered (U/L) Address Bit, indicates whether the address
   has been assigned by a local or universal administrator.  Universally
   administered addresses have this bit set to 0.  If this bit is set to
   1, the entire address (i.e., 48 bits) has been locally administered
   (802-1990 5.2.1).

   The intent of this provision is important for the present document.
   The 802 Standard recognized that some devices may never travel and
   thus, always attaching to the same network, would not need a globally
   unique MAC address.  To accommodate for this relaxed requirement, the
   second bit of the MAC address first octet the MAC address format was
   designed to express whether the address was intended to be globally



Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   unique, or if significance was only local.  The address allocation
   method was not defined in the Standard in this later case, but the
   mechanism was defined in the same clause that defined that an address
   should be unique so as to avoid collision.

   It is also important to note that the purpose of the Universal
   version of the address was also to avoid collisions and confusion, as
   any machine could connect to any network, and each machine needs to
   determine if it is the intended destination of a message or its
   response.  The same clause 5.2.1 reminds network designers and
   operators that all potential members of a network need to have a
   unique identifier (if they are going to coexist in the network).  The
   advantage of a universal address is that a node with such an address
   can be attached to any LAN in the world with an assurance that its
   address is unique.

   With the rapid development of wireless technologies and mobile
   devices, this scenario became very common.  With more than 70% of 802
   networks on the planet implementing radio technologies at the access,
   the MAC address of a wireless device can appear anywhere on the
   planet and collisions should still be avoided.  However, the same
   evolution brought the distinction between two types of devices that
   the 802 Standard generally referred to as 'nodes in a network'.
   Their definition is found in the 802E Recommended Practice (clause
   6.2).  One type is a shared service device, which functions are used
   by a number of people large enough that the device itself, its
   functions or its traffic cannot be associated with a single or small
   group of people.  Examples of such devices include switches in a
   dense network, 802.11 (Wi-Fi) access points in a crowded airport,
   task-specific (e.g. barcode scanners) devices, etc.  Another type is
   a personal device, which is a machine, a node, primarily used by a
   single person or small group of people, and so that any
   identification of the device or its traffic can also be associated to
   the identification of the primary user or their traffic.  Quite
   naturally, the unique identification of the device is trivial if the
   device expresses a universally unique MAC address.  Then, the
   detection of elements directly or indirectly identifying the user of
   the device (Personally Identifiable Information, or PII) is
   sufficient to tie the universal MAC address to a user.  Then, any
   detection of traffic that can be associated to the device becomes
   also associated with the known user of that device (Personally
   Correlated Information, or PCI).

   This possible identification or association presents a serious
   privacy issue, especially with wireless technologies.  For most of
   them, and in particular for 802.11, the source and destination MAC
   addresses are not encrypted even in networks that implement
   encryption (so that each machine can easily detect if it is the



Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   intended target of the message before attempting to decrypt its
   content, and also identify the transmitter, so as to use the right
   key when multiple unicast keys are in effect).

   This unique identification of the user associated to a node was
   clearly not the intent of the 802 MAC address.  A logical solution to
   remove this association is to use a locally administered address
   instead, and change the address in a fashion that prevents a temporal
   association between one MAC address and some PII to be maintained
   fruitfully.  However, other network devices on the same LAN
   implementing a MAC layer also expect the unicity of the MAC address.
   When a device changes its MAC address, other devices on the same LAN
   may fail to recognize that the same machine is attempting to
   communicate with them.  Additionally, multiple layers implemented at
   upper OSI layers have been designed with the assumption that each
   node on the LAN, using these services, would have a unique MAC
   address.  This assumption sometimes adds to the PII confusion, for
   example in the case of AAA services authenticating the user of a
   machine and associating the authenticated user to the device MAC
   address.  Other services solely focus on the machine (e.g.  DHCP),
   but still expect each device to use a single MAC address.  Changing
   the MAC address may disrupt these services.

3.  The Actors: Network Functional Entities and Human Entities

   The risk of service disruption is thus weighted against the privacy
   benefits.  However, the plurality of actors involved in the exchanges
   tends to blurry the boundaries of what privacy should be protected
   against.  It might therefore be useful to list the actors to the
   network exchanges.  Some actors are functional entities, some others
   are humans (or related) entities.

3.1.  Network Functional Entities

   Wireless access network infrastructure devices (e.g.  Wi-Fi access
   points or controllers): these devices participate in 802 LAN
   operations.  As such, they need to uniquely identify machines as a
   source or destination so as to successfully continue exchanging
   frames.  Part of the identification includes recording, and adapting
   to, devices communication capabilities (e.g. support for specific
   protocols).  As a device changes its connection (roams) from one
   access point to another, the access points can exchange contextual
   information (e.g. device MAC, keying material) allowing the device
   session to continue seamlessly.  These access points can also inform
   devices further in the wired network about the roam, to ensure that
   OSI model Layer 2 frames are redirected to the new device access
   point.




Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   Other network devices operating at the MAC layer: many wireless
   network access devices (e.g. 802.11 access points) are conceived as
   Layer 2 devices, and as such they bridge a frame from one medium
   (e.g. 802.11 or Wi-Fi) to another (e.g. 802.3 or Ethernet).  This
   means that a wireless device MAC address often exists on the wire
   beyond the wireless access device.  Devices connected to this wire
   also implement 802 technologies, and as such operate on the
   expectation that each device is associated to a unique MAC address
   for the duration of continuous exchanges.  For example, switches and
   bridges associate MAC addresses to individual ports (so as to know
   which port to send a frame intended for a particular MAC address).
   Similarly, authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA)
   services can validate the identity of a device and use the device MAC
   address as a first pointer to the device identity (before operating
   further verification). 802.1X-enabled devices may also selectively
   block the data portion of a port until a connecting device is
   authenticated.  These services then use the MAC address as a first
   pointer to the device identity to allow or block data traffic.  This
   list is not exhaustive.  Multiple services are defined for 802.3
   networks, and multiple services defined by the IEEE 802.1 working
   group are also applicable to 802.3 networks.  Wireless access points
   may also connect to other mediums than 802.3, which also implements
   mechanism under the umbrella of the general 802 Standard, and
   therefore expect the unique association of a MAC address to a device.

   Network devices operating at upper layers: some network devices
   provide functions and services above the MAC layer.  Some of them
   also operate a MAC layer function: for example, routers provide IP
   routing services, but rely on the device MAC address to create the
   appropriate frame structure.  Other devices and services operate at
   upper layers, but also rely on the 802 principle of unique MAC-to-
   device mapping.  For example, DHCPv4 services commonly provide a
   single IP address per MAC address (they do not assign more than one
   IPv4 address per MAC address, and assign a new IPv4 address to each
   new requesting MAC address).  ARP and reverse-ARP services commonly
   expect that, once an IP-to-MAC mapping has been established, this
   mapping is valid and unlikely to change for the cache lifetime.
   DHCPv6 services commonly do not assign the same IPv6 address to two
   different requesting MAC addresses.  Hybrid services, such as EoIP,
   also assume stability of the device-to-MAC-and-IP mapping for the
   duration of a given session.










Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


3.2.  Human-related Entities

   Over the air (OTA) observers: as the transmitting or receiving MAC
   address is usually not encrypted in wireless 802-technologies
   exchanges, and as any protocol-compatible device in range of the
   signal can read the frame header, OTA observers are able to read
   individual transmissions MAC addresses.  Some wireless technologies
   also support techniques to establish distances or positions, allowing
   the observer, in some cases, to uniquely associate the MAC address to
   a physical device and it associated location.  It can happen that an
   OTA observer has a legitimate reason to monitor a particular device,
   for example for IT support operations.  However, it is difficult to
   control if another actor also monitors the same station with the goal
   of obtaining PII or PCI.

   Wireless access network operators: some wireless access networks are
   only offered to users or devices matching specific requirements, such
   as device type (e.g.  IoT-only networks, factory operational
   networks, etc.)  Therefore, operators can attempt to identify the
   devices (or the users) connecting to the networks under their care.
   They can use the MAC address to represent an identified device.

   Network access providers: wireless access networks are often
   considered beyond the first 2 Layers of the OSI model.  For example,
   several regulatory or legislative bodies can group all OSI layers
   into their functional effect of allowing network communication
   between machines.  In this context, entities operating access
   networks can see their liability associated to the activity of
   devices communicating through the networks that these entities
   operate.  In other contexts, operators assign network resources based
   on contractual conditions (e.g. fee, bandwidth fair share, etc.)  In
   these scenarios, these operators may attempt to identify the devices
   and the users of their networks.  They can use the MAC address to
   represent an identified device.

   Over the wire internal (OTWi) observers: because the device wireless
   MAC address continues to be present over the wire if the
   infrastructure connection device (e.g. access point) functions as a
   Layer 2 bridge, observers may be positioned over the wire and read
   transmission MAC addresses.  Such capability supposes that the
   observer has access to the wired segment of the broadcast domain
   where the frames are exchanged.  In most networks, such capability
   requires physical access to an infrastructure wired device in the
   broadcast domain (e.g. switch closet), and is therefore not
   accessible to all.






Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   Over the wired external (OTWe) observers: beyond the broadcast
   domain, frames headers are removed by a routing device, and a new
   Layer 2 header is added before the frame is transmitted to the next
   segment.  The personal device MAC address is not visible anymore,
   unless a mechanism copies the MAC address into a field that can be
   read while the packet travels onto the next segment (e.g. pre-
   [RFC4941] and pre- [RFC7217] IPv6 addresses built from the MAC
   address).  Therefore, unless this last condition exists, OTWe
   observers are not able to see the device MAC address.

3.3.  The Trust and the Environments

   The surface of PII exposures that can drive MAC address randomization
   depends on the environment where the device operates.  Therefore, a
   device can express an identity (such as a MAC address) that can be
   stable over time if trust is established, or that can be temporal if
   an identity is required for a service in an environment where trust
   has not been established.  Trust is not a binary currency.  Thus it
   is useful to distinguish what trust a personal device may establish
   with the different entities at play in a L2 domain:

   *  1.  Full trust: there are environments where a personal device
      establishes a trust relationship and can share a stable device
      identity with the access network devices (access point and WLC),
      the services beyond the access point in the L2 broadcast domain
      (e.g.  DHCP, AAA).  The personal device (or its user) has
      confidence that its identity is not shared beyond the L2 broadcast
      domain boundary.

   *  2.  Selective trust: in other environments, the device may not be
      willing to share a stable identity with some elements of the Layer
      2 broadcast domain, but may be willing to share a stable identity
      with other elements.  For example, a device may want to change the
      MAC address it uses to communicate with the access point while
      maintaining the same IP address across the MAC address rotation
      (thus expressing a stable identity to the DHCP server).  That
      stable identity may or may not be the same for different services.

   *  3.  Zero trust: in other environments, the device may not be
      willing to share any stable identity with any entity reachable
      through the Layer 2 broadcast domain, and may express a temporal
      identity to each of them.  That temporal identity may or not be
      the same for different services.

   This trust relationship naturally depends on the relationship between
   the user of the personal device and the operator of the service.
   Thus, it is useful to observ the typical trust structure of common
   environments:



Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   *  A.  Residential settings under the control of the user: this is
      typical of a home with Wi-Fi and Internet connection.  In this
      environment, the MAC address activity may be detectable beyond the
      home walls.  However, if traffic is encrypted (e.g.  WPA3), some
      protection for OTA eavesdropping can be assumed.  The wire segment
      within the broadcast domain is under the control of the user, and
      is therefore usually not at risk of hosting an eavesdropper.  Full
      trust is typically established at this level.  The device trusts
      the access point and all L2 domain entities beyond the access
      point.  Traffic over the Internet does not expose the MAC address
      if it is not copied to another field before routing happens.

   *  B.  Managed residential settings: examples of this type of
      environment include shared living facilities and other collective
      environments where an operator manages the network for the
      residents.  The OTA exposure is similar to that of a home.  A
      number of devices larger than in a standard home may be present,
      and the operator may be requested to provide IT support to the
      residents.  Therefore, the operator may need to identify a device
      activity in real time, but may also need to analyze logs so as to
      understand a past reported issue.  For both activities, a device
      identification associated to the session is needed.  Full trust is
      often established in this environment, at the scale of a series of
      a few sessions.

   *  C.  Public guest networks: public hotspots, such as in shopping
      malls, hotels, stores, trains stations and airports are typical of
      this environment.  The guest network operator may be legally
      mandated to identify devices or users or may have the option to
      leave all devices and users untracked.  In this environment, trust
      is commonly not established with any element of the L2 broadcast
      domain (Zero trust model by default).

   *  D.  Enterprises (with BYOD): in this environment, users may be
      provided corporate devices or may bring their own devices.  The
      devices are not directly under the control of a corporate IT team.
      Trust may be established as the device joins the network.  Some
      enterprise models will mandate Full trust, others, considering the
      BYOD nature of the device, will allow selective trust.

   *  E.  Managed enterprises: in this environment, users are typically
      provided with corporate devices, and all connected devices are
      managed, for example through a Mobile Device Management (MDM)
      profile installed on the device.  Full trust is created as the MDM
      profile is installed.






Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


3.4.  The Purpose of Identification and Associated Problems

   Most network functional devices offering a service to a personal
   device use the device MAC address to maintain continuity of service.

   Wireless access points and controllers use the MAC address to
   validate the device connection context, including protocol
   capabilities, confirmation that authentication was completed, QoS or
   security profiles, encryption key material.  Some advanced access
   points and controllers also include upper layer functions which
   purpose is covered below.  A device changing its MAC address, without
   another recorded device identity, would cause the access point and
   the controller to lose these parameters.  As such, the L2
   infrastructure does not know that the device (with its new MAC
   address) is authorized to communicate through the network.  The
   encryption keying material is not identified anymore (causing the
   access point to fail decrypting the device traffic, and fail
   selecting the right key to send encrypted traffic to the device).  In
   short, the entire context needs to be rebuilt, and a new session
   restarted.  The time consumed by this procedure breaks any flow that
   needs continuity or short delay between packets on the device (e.g.
   real-time audio, video, AR/VR etc.)  The 802.11i Standard recognizes
   that a device may leave the network and come back after a short time
   window.  As such, the standard suggests that the infrastructure
   should keep the context for a device up to one hour after the device
   was last seen.  MAC address rotation in this context can cause
   resource exhaustion on the wireless infrastructure and the flush of
   contexts, including for devices that are simply in temporal sleep
   mode.

   Other devices in the Layer 2 broadcast domain also use the MAC
   address to know when and where to forward frames.  MAC rotation can
   cause these devices to exhaust their resources, holding in memory
   traffic for a device which port location can no longer be found.  As
   these infrastructure devices also implement a cache (to remember the
   port position of each known device), frequent MAC rotation can cause
   resources exhaustion and the flush of older MAC addresses, including
   for devices that did not rotate their MAC.  For the RCM device, these
   effects translate into session discontinuity and return traffic
   losses.











Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   In wireless contexts, 802.1X authenticators rely on the device and
   user identity validation provided by a AAA server to open their port
   to data transmission.  The MAC address is used to verify that the
   device is in the authorized list, and the associated key used to
   decrypt the device traffic.  A change in MAC address causes the port
   to be closed to the device data traffic until the AAA server confirms
   the validity of the new MAC address.  Therefore, MAC rotation can
   interrupt the device traffic, and cause a strain on the AAA server.

   DHCP servers, without a unique identification of the device, lose
   track of which IP address is validly assigned.  Unless the RCM device
   releases the IP address before the rotation occurs, DHCP servers are
   at risk of scope exhaustion, causing new devices (and RCM devices) to
   fail to obtain a new IP address.  Even if the RCM device releases the
   IP address before the rotation occurs, the DHCP server typically
   holds the released IP address for a certain duration, in case the
   leaving MAC would return.  As the DHCP server cannot know if the
   release is due to a temporal disconnection or a MAC rotation, the
   risk of scope address exhaustion exists even in cases where the IP
   address is released.

   Routers keep track of which MAC address is on which interface.  MAC
   rotation can cause MAC address cache exhaustion, but also the need
   for frequent ARP and inverse ARP exchanges.

   In residential settings (environments type A), policies can be in
   place to control the traffic of some devices (e.g. parental control).
   These policies are often based on the device MAC address.  Rotation
   removes the possibility for such control.

   In residential settings (environments type A) and in enterprises
   (environments types D and E), device recognition and ranging may be
   used for IoT-related functionalities (door unlock, preferred light
   and temperature configuration, etc.)  These functions often rely on
   the detection of the device wireless MAC address.  MAC address
   rotation breaks the services based o such model.

   In managed residential settings (environments types B) and in
   enterprises (environments types D and E), the network operator is
   often requested to provide IT support.  With MAC address rotation,
   real time support is only possible if the user is able to provide the
   current MAC address.  Service improvement support is not possible if
   the MAC address that the device had at the (past) time of the
   reported issue is not known at the time the issue is reported.







Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


3.5.  Scenario Mapping Table

   The previous section discusses different environements, different
   settings and the expectations of users and network operators.  The
   following table summarizes the expected degree of Trust, Privacy and
   Network Support

   +==================+========+=========+==========+=================+
   | Network Location | Trust  | Privacy | Network  | Network Support |
   |                  | Degree |   Need  | Services |   Expectation   |
   +==================+========+=========+==========+=================+
   |       Home       |  High  |   Low   |  Medium  |       Low       |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |  Campus (BYOD)   | Medium |  Medium | Complex  |      Medium     |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   | Enterprise (MDM) |  High  |   Low   | Complex  |       High      |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |   Hospitality    |  Low   |   High  |  Simple  |      Medium     |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+
   |   Public WiFi    |  Low   |   Low   |  Simple  |       Low       |
   |   Access Point   |        |         |          |                 |
   +------------------+--------+---------+----------+-----------------+

                     Table 1: Scenario Mapping Table

   For example: a Home network is considered to be trusted and safe.
   Users expect a simple procedure to connect to their home newtork.
   All devices in the home network trust each other.  Privacy within the
   L2 domain is not a major concern.  The Home network can also include
   many IoT devices, which need to be simple to onboard and manage.  The
   home user commonly expects the network operator to protect the home
   entwork from external threats (attacks from the Internet).  The home
   user also commonly expects simple policy features (e.g., Parental
   Control).  Most home users do not expect to need networking skills to
   manage their home network.

   On the other end of the spectrum, Public WiFi is often considered to
   be untrusted.  Privacy is the number one concern for the user.  Most
   users connect to Public WiFi Access Point only require simple
   Internet connectivity service, and expect only limited to no
   techniqcal support.

3.6.  Problem Statments

   The section describes the Problem Statements for MAC-Address
   Randomization <vspace>:





Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   PS1  Unless trust is established, the network must not make any
        assumption about client MAC address continuity.

   PS2  MAC address must happen while allowing for service continuity.
        If a service is interrupted during the RCM process, there must
        be a formal mechanism for the client and the service to exchange
        about the interruption.

   PS3  There must be a secure mechanism to inform the device about the
        type of network the device is connecting to, allowing the user
        to select the device identity (or identities) accordingly.

3.7.  Existing Solutions Directions

   Because the possible network disruptions related to RCM have been
   envisioned in the past, several directions have been suggested to
   alleviate these disruptions.  None of them are formal enough to form
   a complete solution set.  However, it may be useful to list them to
   provide a general suggested-solutions context.

   In environments of type 1 (settings of type a, b, d and/or e), the
   device or its user may have confidence that over the air
   eavesdropping does not present a threat.  In that case, usage of a
   fixed MAC address per SSID is a possibility.

   In other cases in the same environments, over the air eavesdropping
   may be a concern.  In that case, the device may be able to express,
   in a protected frame, a stable identity to the wireless
   infrastructure.  The format of the container of this identity,
   encapsulated into a Layer 2 element, is protocol-specific and can be
   defined by the associated protocol standard designers.  In that case,
   the device expresses a randomized and changing MAC address (RCM) over
   the air, but a stable identity to the wireless infrastructure.

   In networks implementing 802.1X/EAP, a AAA server may be informed
   that a device presenting a new MAC address expresses the same device
   identity as the same device with a previous MAC address.  That AAA
   server may then inform the access network, for example with a RADIUS
   [RFC5176] CoA message, of the unique identity of the device across
   RCMs.

   In the cases where the unicity of the station identity is expressed
   through a protected mean to the trusted access infrastructure, the
   infrastructure could also express a single MAC address for the device
   toward the wired part of the network.  In such setting, the device
   first connects to the wireless infrastructure and expresses a stable
   identity.  The wireless infrastructure, acting as a proxy, generates
   a locally-administered MAC address for the device.  That MAC address



Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   is used to represent the device toward services in the other elements
   of the wired network.  Next, when the device rotates its over-the-air
   MAC address and informs the wireless infrastructure of its stable
   identity, the wireless infrastructure identifies that the new MAC
   address matches the same device as the previous MAC address, and
   continues using the previously generated locally-administered MAC
   address to represent the device to wired infrastructure services.

   In environments of type 2, the device may share different identities
   with different services.  For example, the device may express an
   over-the-air RCM, a stable encapsulated identity to the wireless
   infrastructure, a device identity to a AAA server, and a different
   client identity to a DHCP server.  In a multi-link scenario, it may
   also happen that the device expresses more than one identity to the
   DHCP server, with connections going through the same wireless
   infrastructure.  Because the device may express a stable identity to
   one or more network services, because this identity may be shareable
   with the wireless infrastructure, the wireless infrastructure may use
   a single MAC to represent the device, using one of the stable
   identities expressed by that device.  Because different identities
   can be expressed, and because the role of the wireless infrastructure
   is not to monitor closely all activities from the device, the
   wireless infrastructure could use, as the device stable identity, the
   stable identity expressed to the wireless infrastructure, if it is
   available.  If such identity is not available, the infrastructure
   could use the stable identity expressed to the AAA server, if it is
   available and shared back with the wireless infrastructure.  If such
   identity is not available, the wireless infrastructure could use a
   stable identity expressed to the DHCP server, if such identity is
   available and visible to the wireless infrastructure.  These
   possibilities recognize the fact that the wireless infrastructure has
   visibility into all traversing non-protected traffic.  As such, the
   wireless infrastructure may be able to read identifiers sent in
   unprotected DHCP requests.  Additionally, the wireless infrastructure
   would also see, for example, a device with a new MAC address
   expressing the same DHCP identity, or requesting the same IP address,
   as another device previously connected through the same wireless
   system.  Therefore, the device may not be able to obfuscate its DHCP
   identity from the wireless infrastructure if DHCP exchanges are not
   encrypted.  Additionally, and because the wireless infrastructure may
   not be able to distinguish a device rotating its MAC and attempting
   to obtain the same DHCP address as with its previous MAC address,
   from a malicious device attempting to steal the DHCP identity from
   another device, mechanisms on the infrastructure may prevent such
   requests for already assigned resources from being forwarded
   successfully.





Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   In all environments where a device uses a rotating and changing
   locally-administered MAC address, rotation from one address to the
   next could be preceded by a release of network resources, such as
   open connections closure and DHCP address releases.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

   All drafts are required to have an IANA considerations section (see
   Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs
   [RFC5226] for a guide).  If the draft does not require IANA to do
   anything, the section contains an explicit statement that this is the
   case (as above).  If there are no requirements for IANA, the section
   will be removed during conversion into an RFC by the RFC Editor.

5.  Security Considerations

   All drafts are required to have a security considerations section.
   See RFC 3552 [RFC3552] for a guide.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3552>.

7.  Informative References

   [IEEE.802-1D.1993]
              Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              "Information technology - Telecommunications and
              information exchange between systems - Local area networks
              - Media access control (MAC) bridges", IEEE Standard
              802.1D, July 1993.










Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   [IEEE.802.15.4P_2014]
              IEEE, "IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area
              networks - Part 15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area
              Networks (LR-WPANs) - Amendment 7: Physical Layer for Rail
              Communications and Control (RCC)", IEEE 802.15.4p-2014,
              DOI 10.1109/ieeestd.2014.6809836, 2 May 2014,
              <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/
              opac?punumber=6809834>.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, DOI 10.17487/RFC4941, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4941>.

   [RFC5176]  Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., and B.
              Aboba, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 5176,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5176, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5176>.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5226, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5226>.

   [RFC7217]  Gont, F., "A Method for Generating Semantically Opaque
              Interface Identifiers with IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", RFC 7217,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7217, April 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7217>.

Appendix A.  Additional Stuff

   This becomes an Appendix.

Authors' Addresses

   Jerome Henry
   Cisco Systems
   United States of America

   Email: jerhenry@cisco.com









Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                RCM Framework                   March 2021


   Yiu L. Lee
   Comcast
   1800 Arch Street
   Philadelphia, PA 19103
   United States of America

   Email: yiu_lee@comcast.com












































Henry & Lee             Expires 9 September 2021               [Page 17]
