
                  MPLS Working Group                                                   
                  Internet Draft                                      S. Van den Bosch 
                                                                       D. Papadimitriou 
                  Document: draft-vandenbosch-mpls-fa-                         Alcatel 
                  considerations-00.txt 
                   Expires: August 2002                                   February 2002 
                   
                   
                           Further considerations for Forwarding Adjacency LSPs 
                   
                   
               Status of this Memo 
                   
                  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
                  with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1]. 
                   
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
                  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
                  Drafts. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
                  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
                  at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
                  reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
                  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
                  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                   
                   
               Abstract 
                   
                  Forwarding adjacencies (FA) as described in [2] are a useful tool 
                  for improving the scalability of Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Traffic 
                  Engineering (TE). Through the aggregation of TE LSPs this concept 
                  enables the creation of a TE-LSP Hierarchy. Forwarding adjacency 
                  LSPs (FA-LSP or simply FA) may be advertised as TE link into the 
                  same instance of ISIS/OSPF as the one that was used to create the 
                  LSP, allowing other LSRs to use FAs as TE-links for their path 
                  computation. As such, forwarding adjacency LSP have characteristics 
                  of both links and LSPs. 
                   
                  This document list a number of topics for further study regarding 
                  forwarding adjacencies in an attempt to identify what future work 
                  may result in the MPLS WG (or other) from the link/LSP duality. 
                   
               Conventions used in this document 
                   
                  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
                  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
                  this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3]. 
                   
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          1 
                                 Further considerations for FA-LSPs     February 2002 
                   
               Table of Contents 
                   
                  Status of this Memo................................................1 
                  Abstract...........................................................1 
                  Conventions used in this document..................................1 
                  1. Introduction...................................................2 
                  2. Topics for further study.......................................2 
                  3. A Step Further.................................................4 
                  Security Considerations............................................4 
                  References.........................................................5 
                  Acknowledgments....................................................5 
                  Author's Addresses.................................................5 
                  Full Copyright Statement...........................................5 

               1. Introduction 
                   
                  In its successful attempt to extend MPLS for non-packet oriented TE-
                  attributes within the scope of an integrated model encompassing 
                  several layers, which are controlled using the same routing and 
                  signaling protocol instances, GMPLS has been rapidly confronted to 
                  mapping of the overlaid transport layers within the control plane. 
                   
                  As such, and from the control plane viewpoint a transport plane 
                  layer is mapped to an LSP region (see [2]). Following this approach, 
                  a TE-link (at the control plane) maps exactly the definition the one 
                  proposed in the canonical layered model where a link is a link 
                  bundle (using the IETF terminology). Today, the FA concept enables 
                  the definition of hierarchical TE-Links, enabling in turn to 
                  decrease the number of control plane instances to control N 
                  transport layers. While this is in perfect alignment for non-packet 
                  LSP regions and boundaries, the same concept(s) can be re-used in 
                  the MPLS LSP context but with a major difference. The mapping goes 
                  in the opposite direction from the control to the 
                  IP/MPLS forwarding plane since FA-LSP in the packet domain are 
                  purely abstract concept that would if well tailored, provide 
                  additional scalability within a routing plane instance (in 
                  particular, an area). 
                   
                  In this context, the present document tries to identify and briefly 
                  address some of the issues for FA-LSP in a packet-switching (PSC) 
                  context that could require further effort from the Sub-IP Area 
                  community. 
                   
               2. Topics for further study 
                   
                  This section list some topics, this might be extended in future 
                  release of this document. 
                   
               2.1.    Establishment and teardown of FA for PSC interfaces 
                   
                  A LSR can have multiple interface Switching Capabilities (SC). This 
                  aspect is of particular importance with packet switch capable (PSC) 
                  interfaces. These effectively constitute a logical hierarchy that 
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          2 
                                 Further considerations for FA-LSPs     February 2002 
                   
                  can be exploited through label stacking in order to provide scalable 
                  TE in large single area networks.  
                   
                  However, combining such an approach,  with constraint-based TE-
                  routing would imply the need for dynamic modification of an 
                  interface's switching capability in order to promote/demote it in 
                  the logical hierarchy (corresponding to the creation/deletion of a 
                  layer in the hierarchy). The other way is to advertise multiple PSC 
                  capabilities, and so let the network dynamically build-up this 
                  hierarchy. In such an eventuality, the arising complexity comes up 
                  from the ôdynamic modificationö that would arise from 
                  such policy since each Switching Type decision is taken 
                  independently by each ingress LSR (when initiating the packet LSP 
                  Path/Label Request message). 
                   
               2.2.    Dynamic recomputation of paths for FA-LSPs 
                   
                  The path information regarding the FA-LSP is made available to other 
                  nodes by means of the PATH TLV. This information may be used by 
                  other nodes for their own path computations. They could for instance 
                  take it into account when computing a backup path. Then if the FA-
                  LSP changes path, primary and backup path of the client LSPs may no 
                  longer be disjoint.  
                   
                  Therefore, it may be necessary to foresee the possibility to 
                  restrict the re-routability of the FA-LSP and advertise this in the 
                  PATH TLV. In this way, ingress LSR that use this information would 
                  know whether it is subject to any change at a lower LSP region or 
                  not.  
                   
               2.3.    Protection of FA-LSPs 
                   
                  Four packet interface switching capabilities (PSC-1 to PSC-4) are 
                  defined (see [2]. When FA-LSPs are protected this means that SRLG 
                  information needs to propagate to the upper LSP regions for 
                  consistency. It is not obvious  how the SRLG information and 
                  disjointness of FA-LSPs can be treated in an efficient way with a 
                  label stack of potentially depth four (PSC1-4). 
                   
               2.4.    Interworking with fast reroute techniques 
                   
                  An FA-LSP is at the same time a path to the server layer and a link 
                  to the client layer. In this context, link protection techniques 
                  such as the ones proposed for fast local restoration may be 
                  applicable. More specifically, one could for instance envisage the 
                  establishment of FA-LSPs for the intra-area sections of a multi-area 
                  LSP. In that case, fast local reroute techniques applied at the FA-
                  LSP level could provide inter-area protection of multi-area LSPs. In 
                  addition, this would require a fast failure detection and 
                  notification mechanism for the FA-LSP. 
                   
               2.5.    Traffic engineering attributes of FA-LSPs 
                   
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          3 
                                 Further considerations for FA-LSPs     February 2002 
                   
                  It is not clear how the TE attributes (defined as Sub-TLVs of the 
                  Opaque LSA TE-Link TLV), such as link colour and metric, of a FA-LSP 
                  should be set. The current specification (MPLS-HIER), for instance, 
                  proposes to treat FA-LSP as uncoloured links. This may create 
                  ambiguity with local policy decisions. It may also hinder the 
                  efficient establishment of LSPs with resource requirements over FA-
                  LSPs. 
                   
               3. A Step Further 
                   
                  As a matter of fact, the FA concept is more than mature to achieve a 
                  first set of features, we propose here to enlarge the scope to 
                  achieve better scalability in (G)MPLS-TE networks keeping in mind 
                  the trade-off between functionality and complexity. 
                   
               Security Considerations 
                   
                  The approach outlined in this document poses no new security 
                  problems. 
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          4 
                                 Further considerations for FA-LSPs     February 2002 
                   
                   
               References
                   
                  1  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
                     9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
                   
                  2  K. Kompella, Y. Rekhter, "LSP Hierarchy with Generalized MPLS 
                     TE", work in progress, draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-04.txt 
                   
                  3  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
                     Levels," BCP 14, RFC2119. 
                   
                   
                   
               Acknowledgments 
                   
                   
                   
               Author's Addresses 
                   
                  Sven Van den Bosch 
                  Alcatel 
                  Francis Wellesplein 1        Phone: 32-3-240-8103 
                  B-2018 Antwerpen             Email: sven.van_den_bosch@alcatel.be 
                  Belgium 
                   
                  Dimitri Papadimitriou 
                  Alcatel 
                  Francis Wellesplein 1        Phone: 32-3-240-8491 
                  B-2018 Antwerpen             Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be 
                  Belgium 
                   
               Full Copyright Statement 
                
                  "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
                  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
                  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
                  or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
                  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
                  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
                  are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
                  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
                  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
                  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
                  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
                  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
                  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
                  English. 
                   
                  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
                  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This 
                  document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
                  IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
                  FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          5 
                                 Further considerations for FA-LSPs     February 2002 
                   
                  NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
                  WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
                  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
                    
                  Van den Bosch et al. Informational - Expires August 2002          6 